Konkan Railway Corporation Limited vs Chenab Bridge Project Undertaking on 17 August, 2023

Konkan Railway Corporation Limited vs Chenab Bridge Project
Undertaking on 17 August, 2023

Author: Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha

Bench: Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha, Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud

REPORTABLE
2023INSC742
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2903 OF 2023
(Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 5640 of 2023)

KONKAN RAILWAY CORPORATION LIMITED                                   ...APPELLANT(S)

VERSUS

CHENAB BRIDGE PROJECT UNDERTAKING                                  …RESPONDENT(S)

JUDGMENT

PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA, J.

1. This appeal arises out of the decision of the Division Bench of the High Court of Bombay under
Section 37 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996,1 by which the concurrent findings of the
Arbitral Tribunal and that of the Single Judge of the High Court under Section 34 of the Act
rejecting all claims were set aside and certain claims were allowed. This appeal by Konkan Railway
Corporation Limited challenges the legality of the order passed by the Division Bench of the High
Court while exercising jurisdiction under Section 37 of the Act.

Hereinafter ‘the Act’.

2. The short facts relevant for the purpose of this appeal are as follows: The Respondent’s tender for
c o n s t r u c t i o n   o f   a   b r i d g e   a t   K M   5 0 / 8 0 0 ,   o n   t h e   K a t r a -   L a o l e   s e c t i o n   o f
Udhampur-Srinagar-Baramulla rail link, said to be the highest railway bridge in the world, was
accepted by the Appellant, leading to the execution of the contract on 24.11.2004.

3. While the contract was in execution, disputes arose between the parties and through an
agreement dated 28.02.2012, a Standing Arbitral Tribunal was constituted for resolution of

1

Konkan Railway Corporation Limited vs Chenab Bridge Project Undertaking on 17 August, 2023

disputes. The respondent raised 35 claims which were clubbed and classified as twelve disputes. The
present proceedings arise out of the decision of the Arbitral Tribunal deciding three disputes, being
Dispute I (relating to Claim 9), Dispute III (relating to Claims 12, 22 and 28), and Dispute IV
(relating to Claims 13, 23 and 29).

4. The Arbitral Tribunal by its award dated 15.11.2014 considered the three disputes and rejected all
the claims. The Respondent challenged the award under Section 34 of the Act. The Single Judge of
the High Court confirmed the Award and proceeded to dismiss the challenge under Section 34 of the
Act. The decision of the Single Judge of the High Court was appealed by the Respondent under
Section 37 of the Act, and the Division Bench of the High Court, by the order impugned herein,
partly allowed the appeal in the following manner. The Division Bench, while dismissing the appeal
with respect to Dispute I, allowed the appeal with respect to the remaining two disputes (Disputes
III and IV), and thereby set aside the concurrent findings as regards these disputes. As there is no
controversy with respect to Dispute I, we are called upon to examine the legality of the order with
respect to Disputes III and IV.

5. The facts relevant for Dispute III are as follows: The contract in favour of the Respondent was
entered into on 24.11.2004. At that time the Notification of the Government of Jammu and Kashmir
dated 19.12.2003 exempted Entry Tax on earth-moving instruments. However, during the execution
of the contract, on 25.01.2008, the Government of Jammu and Kashmir withdrew the exemption
notification. Consequently, the Respondent raised claims for reimbursement of Rs. 1,32,29,771/-
incurred on account of payment of Entry Tax.

6. In so far as Dispute IV is concerned, it relates to reimbursement of Toll Tax on machinery and
materials. As per the extant policy in Jammu and Kashmir, the Toll Tax as applicable on the date of
the submission of tender, that is 31.05.2004, was Rs. 400/- per MT. However, through four
subsequent notifications issued under Jammu and Kashmir Levy of Toll Tax Act, 1998, the taxes
were progressively increased to Rs. 650/- per MT. Consequently, the Respondent raised a claim of
Rs. 5,23,279/-, incurred on account of increase in toll tax during the subsistence of the contract.

7. Claims under Dispute III as well as Dispute IV were to be considered in terms of the relevant
clauses of the contract, which are Clauses 5.1.2, 7.1.1, 7.1.2, and 11.7. These clauses are extracted
hereinbelow for ready reference. Relevant part of Clause 5 of Chapter 5, titled ‘Sales Tax, Turn Over
Tax/Local Tax, Duties etc’, is as under:

“Clause 5.1 Sales Tax/Turn Over Tax/Local Tax, Duties Etc. ...

Clause 5.1.2 Sales Tax including turn over tax on works contract, octroi, royalty, toll
tax, Duties/Levies as well as services and any other tax levied by central govt., state
govt. or local bodies, as applicable 15 days prior to the date of opening of tender shall
be considered to be included in the percentage rates quoted by tenderer/s in the
Schedule of Items, Rates & Quantities. In case of any increase/decrease in the taxes
during the period from 15 days prior to the date of opening of tender to the
completion of the work, the net increase/decrease for the balance portion of the work

2

Konkan Railway Corporation Limited vs Chenab Bridge Project Undertaking on 17 August, 2023

shall be borne/recovered by the Corporation. The prevailing rate of Works Contract
Tax (WCT) in J & K states to be deducted at source is 4.2% for the registered firms
with state taxation department from firms not having the registration, the rate is
8.2%. Clause 5.1.3 Corporation shall deduct the sales tax/Turn Over Tax or any other
tax from the Contractor’s bill at the rate as applicable as per rules framed by
concerned Govt./Local bodies from time to time and remit it to concerned
department and shall issue a certificate regarding Tax/levies so deducted on demand
by the contractor.” 7.1. Clauses 7.1.1 and 7.1.2 from Chapter 7, titled ‘Price Variation’,
are as under:

“Clause 7.1.1 The rates quoted by tenderer and accepted by the Corporation shall hold
good till the completion of the work and no additional, individual claim shall be
admissible on account of fluctuation in market rates, increase in taxes/any other
levies/tolls etc. except the payment/recovery for overall market situation shall be
made as per price variation clause given below.

Clause 7.1.2 No cognizance shall be given for any sort of fluctuations in taxes and
other market conditions etc. for any individual item for the purpose of making
adjustments in payments. The contract shall, however, be governed by the general
price variation clause as under.” 7.2. Clause 11.7, in Chapter 11, titled ‘Schedule of
Items, Rates & Quantities -

Bill of Quantities’, is as follows:

“Clause 11.7 The rates and prices tendered in the priced Bill of Quantities, shall except
in so far as it is otherwise provided under the contract, include all construction plant,
labour, supervision, materials, all temporary works, false works, all leads and lifts,
erection, specified finishes, maintenance, establishment and overhead charges,
insurance, profits, foreign taxation and levies, taxes, royalties and duties together
with all general risks, liabilities and obligations set out or implied in the contract and
including remedy of any defects during the Defects Liability Period.”

8. The Decision of the Arbitral Tribunal: The Arbitral Tribunal interpreted the contract and
construed Clause 5.1.2 of the contract as limited to taxes that could be raised by the
Respondent-Contractor directly on the Appellant, as opposed to taxes that formed part of the
materials quoted in the ‘Schedule of Items of Rates - Bill of Quantities’. For this, the Arbitral
Tribunal also relied on Clause 11.7 of the Contract. The Arbitral Tribunal was of the view that Entry
Taxes on earth-moving equipment formed part of the cost of the works quoted in the Bill of
Quantities. For this reason, the Arbitral Tribunal came to the conclusion that the increased liability
on account of imposition of Entry Tax could not be reimbursed under Clause 5.1.2, as recoupment
for the same could only be governed by the Price Variation clauses (clause 7.1.1 and 7.1.2 in Chapter
7).

3

Konkan Railway Corporation Limited vs Chenab Bridge Project Undertaking on 17 August, 2023

8.1 Interpreting the Price Variation clauses, the Arbitral Tribunal noted that the contract only
provided for generic price variation based on a standardised formula. It also found that Clause 7.1.2
specifically barred cognizance of “any sort of fluctuations in taxes and other market conditions for
any individual item for the purpose of making adjustments in payments”. Accordingly, the Arbitral
Tribunal held that the claim for recouping increased tax liability for individual or specific items, in
this case, the imposition of entry tax, could not be reimbursed under Clauses 7.1.1 and 7.1.2.

8.2 The Tribunal reasoned that the contractor was aware of these conditions at the time when the
prices were quoted, and therefore, the claim could not succeed under Price Variation clauses.

8.3 As regards the claim for Toll Tax which formed part of Dispute IV, the Tribunal adopted the
same interpretation of the contractual clauses and rejected the claim.

9. Decision of the High Court under Section 34 of the Act: The Respondent’s challenge to the
Arbitral Award under Section 34 of the Act was considered and dismissed by the Single Judge of the
High Court by its order dated 17.01.2019. The High Court concluded that there were two possible
views with respect to the construction of relevant clauses of the contract. However, as the Arbitral
Tribunal adopted one interpretation and since it was a reasonable interpretation, the Single Judge
of the High Court held that there was no justification for exercising jurisdiction under Section 34 of
the Act to interfere with the findings of the Arbitral Tribunal.

10. Decision of the Division Bench under Section 37 of the Act: The Division Bench of the High
Court, while considering the appeal under Section 37 of the Act, proceeded to reinterpret the
contractual clauses and arrived at a distinct conclusion. The Division Bench rejected the Arbitral
Tribunal’s and the Single Judge’s interpretation of Clause 5.1.2 of the contract and came to the
conclusion that the said clause will also include indirect taxes such as service tax, GST, Works
Contract Tax, etc. While doing so, the Division Bench applied the principle of ejusdem generis to
include even Entry Tax in Clause 5.1.2. The Division Bench of the High Court reversed the
conclusion of the Arbitral Tribunal and the Single Judge of the High Court on the ground that they
had simply assumed that the tax liability of items forming part of the Bill of Quantities was ‘inbuilt’
in the quoted costs and that no evidence was supplied to substantiate the same. The Division Bench
also noted that reimbursement on account of increase in ‘toll taxes’ was specifically provided for in
Clause 5.1.2 of the contract, and hence, claim for the same could not be rejected. In view of its
conclusion, the Division Bench did not find it necessary to refer to Clauses 7.1.1 and 7.1.2 relating to
price variation clauses, as the claims were justified under Clause 5.1.2 itself. Finally, relying on
Radha Sundar Dutta v. Mohd Jahadur Rahim & Ors,2 the High Court came to the conclusion that it
is a “well-settled principle that if there are two constructions possible of a contract, then the one that
gives effect and voice to all clauses will be preferred over the other that renders one of them otiose or
nugatory”. Adopting this approach, the Division Bench of the High Court proceeded to hold that the
Arbitral Tribunal failed to interpret the contractual clauses harmoniously and holistically. It finally
concluded that the approach adopted by the Arbitral Tribunal would amount to perversity, and
therefore, found it necessary to set aside the Award, and allow claims covered under Disputes III
and IV.

4

Konkan Railway Corporation Limited vs Chenab Bridge Project Undertaking on 17 August, 2023

11. This judgment of the Division Bench of the Hight Court led to the present civil appeal before us.

12. Submissions on behalf of the Appellant: Mr Shyam Divan, Senior Advocate, along with Mr
Amlaan Kumar, Mr Musharaf Shaikh, Ms Rukhmini Bobde, Ms Soumya Priyadarshinee, Mr Ankit
Ambasta, Mr Amit Kumar Shrivastava, Advocates, and Mr Vishal Prasad, AOR appeared on behalf
of the Appellants. They submitted that the Division Bench of the High Court exceeded its limited
jurisdiction under Section 37 of the Act by reinterpreting the contract and substituting its view for
the Arbitral Tribunal’s, assuming the role of a court of appeal. They relied on UHL Power Company
Limited v. State of Himachal AIR 1959 SC 24.

Pradesh3 and South East Asia Marine Engineering and Constructions Limited v. Oil India Limited4
for this purpose.

12.1 Next, they submitted that the parties agreed to a lump-sum contract price payable to the
Respondent-Contractor. The Contractor split the agreed prices into several components and
indicated the division in the ‘Schedule of Items and Rates

- Bill of Quantities’, which inhered the cost and effort involved in execution of the items mentioned
therein. There is no indication that the amount incurred in the execution of the entries therein
would be separately reimbursed. They added that Clause 11.7 of the contract expressly indicates that
the prices mentioned in the Bill of Quantities are inclusive of all costs that are liable to be incurred
in the execution of the contract.

12.2 Further, they also submitted that the Arbitral Tribunal holistically interpreted Clauses 5.1.2,
7.1.1 and 7.1.2 of the contract to opine that individual tax claims would not be reimbursed by the
Appellant-Corporation. The Arbitral Tribunal held that Clause 5.1.2 operates in a separate field, i.e.,
it operates in the field of taxes directly payable by the Corporation to the Contractor. They further
added that the mention of toll tax and octroi in Clause 5.1.2 is only incidental, and does not render
the recovery of taxes by the Contractor implicit. On the other hand, the fluctuations in price of
entries in the Bill of Quantities (or for mobilisation of construction material and machinery) was
recoverable only as per (2022) 4 SCC 116.

(2020) 5 SCC 164.

the scheme of Price Variation in Clauses 7.1.1 and 7.1.2, which expressly exclude cognizance of
fluctuations in price of individual items.

13. Submissions on behalf of the Respondents: Mr Darius Khambata, Senior Advocate, along with
Mr Aveak Ganguly, Mr Manu Seshadri, Ms Pallavi Anand, Mr Abhijit Lal, Ms Soumya, Advocates
and Mr Mithu Jain, AOR appeared on behalf of the Contractor-Respondent. They submitted that the
High Court rightly interfered with the findings of the Arbitral Tribunal as it had rewritten the
contract. They submitted that every canon of contractual interpretation provides for harmonious
construction of seemingly contradictory clauses, and constructing contracts such that no clause is
rendered otiose.

5

Konkan Railway Corporation Limited vs Chenab Bridge Project Undertaking on 17 August, 2023

13.1 They submitted that undoubtedly, Clauses 5.1.2 and 7.1.1 operate in separate fields, i.e., Clause
5.1.2 of the Special Conditions of Contract is a special clause that deals with taxes and provides for
reimbursement on account of increase of taxes by the Corporation. Clauses 7.1.1 and 7.1.2, on the
other hand, prohibit additional and individual claims for price variation, apart from the ones
already mentioned in Clause 5.1.2. By limiting Clause 5.1.2 to the taxes that can be billed by the
Contractor on the Corporation, the Arbitral Tribunal impermissibly rewrote the terms of the
contract. Instead of harmonising the provisions of the contract, it inserted new terms and
contradictions to it. 13.2 The respondents submitted that the Division Bench of the High Court was
well within its jurisdiction under Section 37 of the Act to partially set aside the Award. To
substantiate their submissions, they relied on Adani Power (Mudra) Limited v. Gujarat Electricity
Regulatory Commission and Ors.,5 Radha Sundar Dutta v. Mohd Jahadur Rahim & Ors. (supra),
Satyanarayana Construction Company v. Union of India and Ors.,6 and Delhi Development
Authority v. R.S. Sharma and Company, New Delhi.7

14. Analysis: At the outset, we may state that the jurisdiction of the Court under Section 37 of the
Act, as clarified by this Court in MMTC Ltd. v. Vedanta Ltd., is akin to the jurisdiction of the court
under Section 34 of the Act.8 Scope of interference by a court in an appeal under Section 37 of the
Act, in examining an order, setting aside or refusing to set aside an award, is restricted and subject
to the same grounds as the challenge under Section 34 of the Act.

15. Therefore, the scope of jurisdiction under Section 34 and Section 37 of the Act is not akin to
normal appellate jurisdiction.9 It is well-settled that courts ought not to interfere with the arbitral
award in a casual and cavalier manner. The mere possibility of an alternative view on facts or
interpretation of the contract does not entitle courts to reverse the findings of the Arbitral
Tribunal.10 In Dyna (2019) 19 SCC 9.

(2011) 15 SCC 101.

(2008) 13 SCC 80.

(2019) 4 SCC 163: “para 14. As far as interference with an order made under Section 34, as per
Section 37, is concerned, it cannot be disputed that such interference under Section 37 cannot travel
beyond the restrictions laid down under Section 34. In other words, the court cannot undertake an
independent assessment of the merits of the award, and must only ascertain that the exercise of
power by the court under Section 34 has not exceeded the scope of the provision.” UHL Power
Company Ltd. v. State of Himachal Pradesh (2022) 2 SCC (Civ) 401, para 15. See also: Dyna
Technologies Pvt Ltd v. Crompton Greaves Limited (2019) 20 SCC 1, para 24, 25. ibid; Ssangyong
Engineering. & Construction Company Ltd. v. National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) (2019)
15 SCC 131; Parsa Kente Collieries Ltd. v. Rajasthan Rajya Vidyut Utpadan Nigam Ltd., (2019) 7 SCC
236, para 11.1.

Technologies Private Limited v. Crompton Greaves Limited (2019) 20 SCC 1, this Court held:

6

Konkan Railway Corporation Limited vs Chenab Bridge Project Undertaking on 17 August, 2023

“24. There is no dispute that Section 34 of the Arbitration Act limits a challenge to an
award only on the grounds provided therein or as interpreted by various courts. We
need to be cognizant of the fact that arbitral awards should not be interfered with in a
casual and cavalier manner, unless the court comes to a conclusion that the
perversity of the award goes to the root of the matter without there being a possibility
of alternative interpretation which may sustain the arbitral award. Section 34 is
different in its approach and cannot be equated with a normal appellate jurisdiction.
The mandate under Section 34 is to respect the finality of the arbitral award and the
party autonomy to get their dispute adjudicated by an alternative forum as provided
under the law. If the courts were to interfere with the arbitral award in the usual
course on factual aspects, then the commercial wisdom behind opting for alternate
dispute resolution would stand frustrated.

25. Moreover, umpteen number of judgments of this Court have categorically held
that the courts should not interfere with an award merely because an alternative view
on facts and interpretation of contract exists. The courts need to be cautious and
should defer to the view taken by the Arbitral Tribunal even if the reasoning provided
in the award is implied unless such award portrays perversity unpardonable under
Section 34 of the Arbitration Act.”

16. In the present case, the Arbitral Tribunal interpreted the contractual clauses and rejected the
Respondent’s claims pertaining to Disputes I, III and IV. The findings were affirmed by the Single
Judge of the High Court in a challenge under Section 34 of the Act, who concluded that the
interpretation of the Arbitral Tribunal was clearly a possible view, that was reasonable and
fair-minded in approach.

17. It is important to extract the relevant portion of the Award, where the Tribunal considered and
interpreted the contractual clauses pertaining to Disputes III and IV:

“40. A careful reading of the relevant provisions of the contract shows that claimant
will not be entitled to reimbursement of Entry Tax paid by it. Clause 5.1.2 of Special
Conditions provides that sales tax or turnover tax on works contract or other tax on
the amount billed to respondent, levied or increased during the execution of the
work; shall be borne by the respondent. For example, if the price of goods sold is Rs.
2000/- and at the time of contract, the goods were not subject to Sales Tax, but
subsequently during the execution of the work, the State subjected such sale of goods
to Sales Tax, at the rate of 5%, the contractor will be entitled to receive under clause
5.1.2, the Sales Tax at 5% on the price of Rs. 2000/-. Similarly, if Works Contract Tax
is increased from the rate of 4.2% prevailing at the time of making the contract, the
contractor will be entitled to the higher rate, by claiming the difference. Therefore,
what clause 5.1.2 deals with is taxes “chargeable” by the contractor on the bills raised
on the respondent. It does not deal with or provide for reimbursement of increase in
taxes which may indirectly be a component of the price or rate quoted and which is
be governed only by the price variation clause. This is obviously because when a

7

Konkan Railway Corporation Limited vs Chenab Bridge Project Undertaking on 17 August, 2023

contractor quotes a rate for an item of work, such rate will have various components
like material cost, labour cost, fuel cost, overheads and profits. The contractor does
not indicate the break-up of the various components that make up the quoted price.
Obviously the rates so quoted, if it involves use of a material, will include the cost of
t h e   m a t e r i a l   p l u s   a n y   t a x   p a i d   t h e r e o n ;   a n d   i f   i t   i n v o l v e s   u s e   o f   s o m e
machinery/equipment, it will include the hire charges in respect of the
machinery/equipment and any taxes thereon. It is clear from the contract that in
regard to such components of a rate, claimant is not entitled to seek reimbursement
of any increase in price or taxes and all that it will be entitled to, will be an increase
that is permitted in accordance with the formula in the price variation clause. The
price variation clause only provides for price variation in a general manner in
accordance with a standardized price variation formula, and not reimbursement of
the actual increases. That is why clause 11.7 of BoQ provides that the rates/prices
shall include all taxes and clauses 7.1.1 and 7.1.2 clearly provide that rates quoted by
the tenderer and accepted by the KRCL, shall hold good till the completion of the
work and no additional individual claim shall be admissible on account of increases
in tax or other levies except for the provision made by way of price variation clause.

...

43. ... As noticed above, the contract does not contemplate reimbursement of indirect
cost, taxes incurred by the claimant for executing the work. The contract
contemplates the contractor quoting a price for executing a work by taking all
circumstances into account and all increase that may take place. The contractor knew
when it quoted, that it is entitled to only the price quoted and only variation in price
as permitted by the price variation clause. The contract does not provide for payment
or reimbursement of each and every increase in the price of material or tax thereon,
which may go into the execution of a work.” (emphasis supplied)

18. The Single Judge of the High Court affirmed the findings of the Arbitral Tribunal. The reason for
upholding the decision of the Tribunal is not that the Single Judge exercising jurisdiction under
Section 34 of the Act is in complete agreement with the interpretation of the contractual clauses by
the Arbitral Tribunal. The Learned Judge exercising jurisdiction under Section 34 of the Act kept in
mind the scope of challenge to an Arbitral Award as elucidated by a number of decisions of this
Court. Section 34 jurisdiction will not be exercised merely because an alternative view on facts and
interpretation of contract exists. In its own words, the conclusion of the Single Judge Bench of the
High Court is as follows:

“10. … The ambiguity does not come from clause 5.1.1, but from the fact that there are
other clauses in the contract, such as clauses 7.1.1 and 7.1.2. One way to look at the
co-existence of these clauses is to treat clauses 7.1.1 and 7.1.2 merely as an exclusion
for working out price variation, since it is specifically provided for in clause 5.1.2.
Equally, there is another way of looking at these three clauses, and that is : clauses
7.1.1 and 7.1.2 make it clear that no increase in tax in the case of any component

8

Konkan Railway Corporation Limited vs Chenab Bridge Project Undertaking on 17 August, 2023

forming part of BoQ rates, which was considered by the contractor for quoting his
rates for any particular item, should be allowed to the contractor; it is only when
particular taxes were actually to be paid on the deliveries of the contractor, these
would be included for reimbursement by the employer under clause 5.1.2. The
arbitrator adopted the latter view. It cannot be said either that it is an unreasonable
view or a view which is either impossible or which no fair and judiciously minded
person would have taken. The award on this dispute, thus, does not merit any
interference under Section 34 of the Act, having regard to the law stated by the
Supreme Court in the case of Associate Builders (supra).”

19. In appeal under Section 37 of the Act, the Division Bench of the High Court took a different
position. It opined that the construction of the clauses by the Arbitral Tribunal was not even a
possible view, and observed as follows:

“30. ... What is more appropriate is the well-settled principle that if there are two
constructions possible of a contract, then the one that gives effect and voice to all
clauses will be preferred over the other that renders one of them otiose or nugatory
[Radha Sundar Dutta v Mohd Jahadur Rahim & Ors, AIR 1959 SC 24]. There is some
law to suggest that if an Award does not construe the contract as a whole then it is not
a possible view and it is perverse [South East Asia Marine Engineering and
Constructions Ltd v Oil India Ltd, (2020) 5 SCC 164; Patel Engineering Ltd v North
Eastern Electric Power Corporation Ltd, (2020) 7 SCC 167]. As regards the dispute
for reimbursement on account of toll tax effected by the Government of Jammu and
Kashmir through various Notifications, Chenab Bridge’s case stands on an even
stronger footing. This is because toll tax is specifically mentioned in Clause 5.1.2 and
the arbitral view amounts to an entire deletion of those two words. This is clearly
impermissible.”

20. The principle of interpretation of contracts adopted by the Division Bench of the High Court that
when two constructions are possible, then courts must prefer the one which gives effect and voice to
all clauses, does not have absolute application. The said interpretation is subject to the jurisdiction
which a court is called upon to exercise. While exercising jurisdiction under Section 37 of the Act,
the Court is concerned about the jurisdiction that the Section 34 Court exercised while considering
the challenge to the Arbitral Award. The jurisdiction under Section 34 of the Act is exercised only to
see if the Arbitral Tribunal’s view is perverse or manifestly arbitrary. Accordingly, the question of
reinterpreting the contract on an alternative view does not arise. If this is the principle applicable to
exercise of jurisdiction under Section 34 of the Act, a Division Bench exercising jurisdiction under
Section 37 of the Act cannot reverse an Award, much less the decision of a Single Judge, on the
ground that they have not given effect and voice to all clauses of the contract. This is where the
Division Bench of the High Court committed an error, in re-interpreting a contractual clause while
exercising jurisdiction under Section 37 of the Act. In any event, the decision in Radha Sundar Dutta
(supra), relied on by the High Court was decided in 1959, and it pertains to proceedings arising
under the Village Chaukidari Act, 1870 and Bengal Patni Taluks Regulation of 1819. Reliance on this
judgment particularly for interfering with the concurrent interpretations of the contractual clause by

9

Konkan Railway Corporation Limited vs Chenab Bridge Project Undertaking on 17 August, 2023

the Arbitral Tribunal and Single Judge under Section 34 of the Act is not justified.

21. As far as the decisions in South East Asia Marine Engineering and Constructions Limited (supra)
and Patel Engineering Limited v. North Eastern Electric Power Corporation Limited11 are
concerned, in both the cases, this Court affirmed the interference by a court exercising jurisdiction
under Section 37 of the Act, with the concurrent findings of the Arbitral Tribunal as well as the court
under Section 34 of the Act, for good and valid reasons. In South East Asia Marine Engineering and
Constructions Limited (supra), the Section 37 Court interfered with the Award as the Arbitral
Tribunal allowed the claim for price escalation for High-Speed Diesel under the ‘Change in Law’
clause, by construing the circular increasing the HSD price as having “force of law”. The ‘Change in
Law’ clause therein provided for reimbursement of any additional (2020) 7 SCC 167.

costs on account of “change in or enactment of any law or interpretation of existing law”. The High
Court, exercising jurisdiction under Section 37 of the Act, and this Court, found that the Arbitral
Tribunal incorrectly construed the ‘Change in Law’ clause as akin to a force majeure clause and
allowed the claims. This was held to not be a possible interpretation of the contract and hence, the
Award was set aside. Similarly, in Patel Engineering Ltd.(supra), the Arbitral Award was found to be
based on irrelevant facts and the outcome was found to result in unjust enrichment, the latter being
in violation of public policy of India under Section 34(2) of the Act. Therefore, in both these cases,
this Court was convinced that the view of the Arbitral Tribunal was not even a possible view, and
hence, perverse in nature.

22. In the present case, we have examined the appreciation of evidence by the Arbitral Tribunal as
well as the Single Judge of the High Court. We are convinced that their appreciation of the facts and
interpretation of the contract is reasonable, and comprises a possible view. Keeping in mind the
mandate of Section 5 of the Act 1996,12 we note the observation of this Court in Vidya Drolia and
Ors. v. Durga Trading Corporation13:

“Arbitration is a private dispute resolution mechanism whereby two or more parties
agree to resolve their current or future disputes by an Arbitral Tribunal, as an
alternative to adjudication by the courts or a public Arbitration and Conciliation Act,
1996, section 5:

“5. Extent of judicial intervention.—Notwithstanding anything contained in any other
law for the time being in force, in matters governed by this Part, no judicial authority
shall intervene except where so provided in this Part.” (2021) 2 SCC 1, para 18.

forum established by law. Parties by mutual agreement forgo their right in law to have their disputes
adjudicated in the courts/public forum. Arbitration agreement gives contractual authority to the
Arbitral Tribunal to adjudicate the disputes and bind the parties.”

23. The conclusion of the Division Bench of the High Court that the Award is liable to be set aside on
the ground of perversity is incorrect, as it overlooks the principle laid down in Associate Builders v.
Delhi Development Authority,14 where this Court held:

10

Konkan Railway Corporation Limited vs Chenab Bridge Project Undertaking on 17 August, 2023

“32. A good working test of perversity is contained in two judgments. In Excise and
Taxation Officer-cum- Assessing Authority v. Gopi Nath & Sons [1992 Supp (2) SCC
312] , it was held: (SCC p. 317, para 7) “7. … It is, no doubt, true that if a finding of
fact is arrived at by ignoring or excluding relevant material or by taking into
consideration irrelevant material or if the finding so outrageously defies logic as to
suffer from the vice of irrationality incurring the blame of being perverse, then, the
finding is rendered infirm in law.” In Kuldeep Singh v. Commr. of Police [(1999) 2
SCC 10 : 1999 SCC (L&S) 429] , it was held: (SCC p. 14, para 10) “10. A broad
distinction has, therefore, to be maintained between the decisions which are perverse
and those which are not. If a decision is arrived at on no evidence or evidence which
is thoroughly unreliable and no reasonable person would act upon it, the order would
be perverse. But if there is some evidence on record which is acceptable and which
could be relied upon, howsoever compendious it may be, the conclusions would not
be treated as perverse and the findings would not be interfered with.

(2015) 3 SCC 49.

33. It must clearly be understood that when a court is applying the “public policy” test to an
arbitration award, it does not act as a court of appeal and consequently errors of fact cannot be
corrected. A possible view by the arbitrator on facts has necessarily to pass muster as the arbitrator
is the ultimate master of the quantity and quality of evidence to be relied upon when he delivers his
arbitral award. Thus an award based on little evidence or on evidence which does not measure up in
quality to a trained legal mind would not be held to be invalid on this score.” (emphasis supplied)

24. Having considered the matter in detail, we are of the opinion that the Division Bench of the High
Court committed an error in setting aside the concurrent findings of the Arbitral Tribunal and the
Single Judge of the High Court. The Award of the Arbitral Tribunal and the decision of the Single
Judge of the High Court under Section 34 of the Act cannot be termed as perverse or patently illegal
as concluded by the Division Bench of the High Court. The decision of the Arbitral Tribunal is a
plausible view, and the Single Judge refrained from interfering with it under Section 34 of the Act.
We are of the opinion that the Division Bench should not have interfered with these orders.

25. For the reasons stated above, we allow Civil Appeal No. 2903 of 2023 and set aside the judgment
of the Division Bench of the High Court of Judicature at Bombay in Appeal No. 458 of 2019 dated
23.09.2022, and restore the judgment and order of the Single Judge in Arbitration Petition No. 546
of 2015 dated 17.01.2019. No order as to costs.

……..……………………………….CJI.

[Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud] ……………….………………………….J. [Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha]
……………….………………………….J. [J.B. Pardiwala] New Delhi;

August 17, 2023

11