Mathew Alexander vs Mohammed Shafi on 13 July, 2023

Mathew Alexander vs Mohammed Shafi on 13 July, 2023

Author: B.V. Nagarathna

Bench: Prashant Kumar Mishra, B.V. Nagarathna

1

2023 INSC 621                                                                REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

Criminal Appeal No. 1931 of 2023
(Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No.8211 of 2022)

Mathew Alexander                                                Appellant(s)
Vs.
Mohammed Shafi and Anr.                                       Respondent(s)

JUDGMENT

NAGARATHNA J.

Leave granted.

2. The Appellant herein is aggrieved by the quashing of the opinion formed as per final report in
pursuant to the further investigation in Crime No.1/2015 registered at Chathannoor Police Station,
by the High Court in its order dated 31.03.2022.

3. Briefly stated the facts are that an FIR bearing No.01/2015 was registered by the complainant
against the Appellant’s son before the Chathannoor Police Station invoking Sections 279 and 304A
of the IPC. The FIR stated that on 01.01.2015, at around 2.15 am, Appellant’s son, Nixon Abey
Matthew, aged 20 years, was driving a Maruti Alto car bearing No. KL 2 AC 1370 through the
Kollam-Thiruvananthapuram RADHA SHARMA Date: 2023.07.13 17:38:13 IST Reason:

National Highway from East to West direction on the left side of the road, along with
his friends. When the car reached Seemati, Chathannoor, a gas tanker lorry bearing
registration No. KL 39 C 4577, driven by Ramar in an utmost rash and negligent
manner, hit the Maruti Alto car and in the said accident, Appellant’s son and five
others travelling in the car died. Claim petitions have been filed by Respondent No.1
herein and other legal representatives of the deceased passengers in the car before
the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal, Kollam seeking compensation for the death of
their kin on whom they were dependent. Respondent No.1 herein also has filed a

1

Mathew Alexander vs Mohammed Shafi on 13 July, 2023

claim petition in which the deceased son of the Appellant was named as Respondent
No.4 and the driver of the tanker lorry, Ramar, is named as Respondent No.2. The
said claim petition is also pending.

4. A final report was filed by the Assistant Commissioner of Police in the case arising out of FIR
No.1/2015. It was also mentioned in the chargesheet that the charges against the Appellant’s son
had abated as he died in the accident. However, on the basis of the complaint made by the Appellant
herein regarding irregularities in the conduct of the investigation, the District Police Chief, Kollam,
directed the Assistant Commissioner of Police, Chathannoor to undertake a thorough investigation
in the matter and further investigation commenced in the matter by the order of the JMFC, Paravur,
Kollam under Section 173(8) of the CrPC and the final report was to be filed in accordance with law.
It is also necessary to mention that the claim petition filed by the Appellant herein is against the
owner and driver of the tanker lorry which is said to have collided with the Alto car driven by his
son, as also against the insurer of the tanker lorry alleging negligence on the part of the driver of the
tanker lorry. This claim petition is also pending.

5. The Assistant Commissioner of Police took over further investigation of the case and submitted a
final report before the JMFC, Paravur, Kollam, stating that the incident was an unavoidable
accident; that the incident had occurred because the Appellant’s son’s Alto car was trying to
overtake a pick-up van and the driver of the van did not give way, and as a result, the car hit the van
and thereafter collided with the tanker lorry. The final report dated 29.11.2019 is stated to be
contrary to the earlier report dated 27.01.2016. It was stated in the final report that the incident was
an unavoidable accident, not attributable to negligence on the part of the Appellant’s son.

6. Being aggrieved by the said final report, Respondent No.1 herein filed a petition under Section
482 of the CrPC before the Kerala High Court praying that the investigation report dated 29.11.2019
be quashed. The said petition itself was filed two years from the date of the final report. The High
Court, by the impugned judgment dated 31.03.2022, has allowed the petition filed by Respondent
No.1 and quashed the final report dated 29.11.2019 wherein it has been observed that the incident
was an unavoidable accident, not attributable to negligence on the part of Appellant’s son. Being
aggrieved by the quashing of the said report, the present appeal has been preferred.

7. We have heard learned counsel for the Appellant and learned counsel for the impleading
applicants and perused the material on record. Respondent No.1 is served and has not appeared.

It is noted that the quashing of the said report would have a bearing in the criminal proceeding but
having regard to the fact that the Appellant’s son also died in the accident, as against him, the
criminal proceeding would abate.

However, learned counsel for the Appellant submitted that Respondent No.1 unnecessarily filed a
petition under Section 482 CrPC for quashing the final report dated 29.11.2019 after a period of two
years. In this regard, our attention was drawn to the fact that the earlier final report was filed by the
Assistant Commissioner of Police, Kollam District Crime Branch dated 27.01.2016 for the offences
under Section 279 and 304A of the IPC as against the Appellant’s son, although the FIR was filed

2

Mathew Alexander vs Mohammed Shafi on 13 July, 2023

against Ramar also, the driver of tanker lorry. In the chargesheet, the investigating officer has stated
that the chargesheet had abated as against the son of the Appellant herein. The Appellant herein had
in fact made a representation for a thorough further investigation in the matter pursuant to which,
further investigation was commenced in CC No. 215 of 2016 in Crime No.1 of 2015 of Chathannoor
Police Station vide order dated 19.12.2018 of the JFCM under Section 173(8) of the CrPC. On further
investigation taken up by the Assistant Commissioner of Police, a final report was submitted on
29.11.2019. It was two years thereafter that the first Respondent herein filed Criminal MC No.4870
of 2021 under Section 482 of the CrPC seeking quashing of the further investigation’s final report
before the High Court without making the Appellant or other affected party, a Respondent.

8. We find that the High Court, in the impugned order in paragraphs 8 to 13 and 18, has made
observations which are in the nature of findings while considering the correctness or otherwise of
the final report impugned before the High Court. Further, the observations of the High Court to the
effect that the car driven by the Appellant’s son, Nixon Abey Mathew, was being driven rashly; that
the car had gone astray to the wrong side; that the possibility that the driver of the car had driven
the car after consuming alcohol cannot be ruled out; that rashness and negligence on the part of the
driver of the car is patent and that this is a clear case in which the principle of res ispa loquitor
applies, are in the nature of findings which were wholly unnecessary to be made while considering
the correctness or otherwise of the final report submitted on further investigation of the case.

It is on the basis of the aforesaid observations which are in the nature of findings that the High
Court has quashed the report made pursuant to further investigation by opining, “The incident is
attributable to the rash and negligent driving of the Alto car”. The opinions expressed which are in
the nature of findings while considering the correctness or otherwise of the final report submitted
on a further investigation of the case and thereby quashing the same is, in our view, not a correct
and proper approach adopted by the High Court. Hence, the impugned order of the High Court is
liable to be set aside on this short ground alone.

9. Insofar as the claim petition filed by the Appellant herein is concerned, alleged negligence on the
part of the driver of the tanker lorry and pickup van in causing the accident has to be proved. That is
a matter which has to be considered on the basis of preponderance of the possibilities and not on the
basis of proof beyond reasonable doubt. It is left to the parties in the claim petitions filed by the
Appellant herein or other claimants to let in their respective evidence and the burden is on them to
prove negligence on the part of the driver of the Alto car, the tanker lorry or pickup van, as the case
may be, in causing the accident. In such an event, the claim petition would be considered on its own
merits. It is needless to observe that if the proof of negligence on the part of the drivers of the three
vehicles is not established then, in that event, the claim petition will be disposed of accordingly.

In this context, we could refer to judgments of this Court in the case of N.K.V. Bros. (P) Ltd. vs. M.
Karumai Anmal reported in AIR 1980 SC 1354, wherein the plea that the criminal case had ended in
acquittal and that, therefore, the civil suit must follow suit, was rejected. It was observed that
culpable rashness under Section 304-A of IPC is more drastic than negligence under the law of torts
to create liability. Similarly, in (2009) 13 SCC 530, in the case of Bimla Devi vs. Himachal Road
Transport Corporation (“Bimla Devi”), it was observed that in a claim petition filed under Section

3

Mathew Alexander vs Mohammed Shafi on 13 July, 2023

166 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, the Tribunal has to determine the amount of fair compensation
to be granted in the event an accident has taken place by reason of negligence of a driver of a motor
vehicle. A holistic view of the evidence has to be taken into consideration by the Tribunal and strict
proof of an accident caused by a particular vehicle in a particular manner need not be established by
the claimants. The claimants have to establish their case on the touchstone of preponderance of
probabilities. The standard of proof beyond reasonable doubt cannot be applied while considering
the petition seeking compensation on account of death or injury in a road traffic accident. To the
same effect is the observation made by this Court in Dulcina Fernandes vs. Joaquim Xavier Cruz,
(2013) 10 SCC 646 which has referred to the aforesaid judgment in Bimla Devi.

10. In that view of the matter, it is for the Appellant herein to establish negligence on the part of the
driver of the tanker lorry in the petition filed by him seeking compensation on account of death of
his son in the said accident. Thus, the opinion in the final report would not have a bearing on the
claim petition for the aforesaid reasons. This is because the Appellant herein is seeking
compensation for the death of his son in the accident which occurred on account of the negligence
on the part of the driver of the tanker lorry, causing the accident on the said date. It is further
observed that in the claim petitions filed by the dependents, in respect of the other passengers in the
car who died in the accident, they have to similarly establish the negligence in accordance with law.

11. In view of the above discussion, the impugned order of the High Court dated 31.03.2022 is set
aside and the appeal is allowed.

Parties to bear their respective costs.

……………………………………J. (B.V. NAGARATHNA) ……………………………………J. (PRASHANT
KUMAR MISHRA) NEW DELHI;

JULY 13, 2023.

4