Mathura Vrindavan Development ... vs Rajesh Sharma on 28 April, 2023

Mathura Vrindavan Development ... vs Rajesh Sharma on 28
April, 2023

Author: M.R. Shah

Bench: C.T. Ravikumar, M.R. Shah

REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5645 OF 2015

Mathura Vrindavan Development Authority & Another
…Appellants

Versus

Rajesh Sharma and Others           …Respondents

WITH
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1976 OF 2023
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1979 OF 2023
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1984 OF 2023
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5647 OF 2015
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5646 OF 2015
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6536 OF 2015
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 658 OF 2016
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4438 OF 2014
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4198 OF 2014
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4489 OF 2014
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3636 OF 2018
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1977 OF 2023
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1988 OF 2023
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1983 OF 2023
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
CIVIL APPEAL NOS.5912-5915 OF 2014
Neetu Sachdeva
Date: 2023.04.28
16:27:29 IST
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4492 OF 2014
Reason:

1

Mathura Vrindavan Development ... vs Rajesh Sharma on 28 April, 2023

Civil Appeal No. 5645/2015 Etc.                     Page 1 of 26
(cid:12)            CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5910 OF 2014
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2041 OF 2023
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6247 OF 2014
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6249 OF 2014
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6250 OF 2014
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6248 OF 2014
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3176 OF 2015
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3242 OF 2015
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6537 OF 2015
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6540 OF 2015
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6541 OF 2015
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6538 OF 2015
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6539 OF 2015
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1982 OF 2023
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1978 OF 2023
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 1980-1981 OF 2023
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5918 OF 2014
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5919 OF 2014

JUDGMENT

M.R. SHAH, J.

1. As common question of law and facts arise in this group of appeals, all these appeals are decided
and disposed of together, by this common judgment and order.

2. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment(s) and order(s) passed by the
High Court of Judicature at Allahabad passed in the respective writ petitions, by which the High
Court has quashed and set aside the various demand notices raised by the respective Development
Authorities and the State of UP, the Development Authorities and the State of U.P. have preferred
the present appeals.

2.1 Some of the appeals have been preferred by the original writ petitioners challenging the interim
orders passed by the High Court in the respective writ petitions refusing to stay the demand notices,
however, subject to the outcome of the proceedings pending before this Court which are being
disposed of by this common judgment and order and directing the respective Development
Authorities that in case the decision in the present proceedings is against the Development
Authorities/State of U.P., they shall refund the amount of various fees collected with 6% interest per
annum.

2.2 By the impugned judgment(s) and order(s), the High Court has set aside the various demand
notices except the levy of development fees/charges. However, so far as Civil Appeal No. 4489 of
2014 (State of U.P. v. Rekha Rani & Others) is concerned, the High Court has even set aside the
levy/demand of development charges/fees also.

2

Mathura Vrindavan Development ... vs Rajesh Sharma on 28 April, 2023

3. The dispute before the High Court by way of various writ petitions was with respect to challenge
to the various demand notices by way of external/internal development charges, inspection
fee/supervision fee while granting of sanction layout plan, development charges, sub-division
charges, stacking charges and impact fee etc. Except in one case, namely, Rekha Rani (supra), in all
other cases, the Allahabad High Court as such has upheld the levy of development charges/fees.
However, the other levies/demands are concerned, i.e., other than development fees/charges, more
particularly the sub- division charges etc., the High Court has set aside the said levy and/or demand
notices on the ground that U.P. Urban Planning and Development Act, 1973 (hereinafter referred to
as the ‘Act, 1973’) does not permit the levy of other charges other than provided under Section
15(2-A) of the Act, 1973. The High Court has also observed and held that such levy on the basis of
the orders issued by the State Government, issued in exercise of powers under Section 41 of the Act,
1973, is illegal and bad in law. The levy of other charges, other than development fees/charges is
held to be bad in law and in violation of Article 265 of the Constitution of India. 3.1 Quashing and
setting aside the levy/demand notices with respect to external/internal development charges,
inspection fee/supervision fee while granting of sanction layout plan, sub-division charges, stacking
charges and impact fee etc. is the subject matter of present appeals. The State of U.P. has also
preferred appeal being Civil Appeal No. 4489/2014 [Rekha Rani (supra)] challenging the impugned
judgment and order passed by the High Court by which the High Court has set aside the
levy/demand with respect to development charges/fees also.

4. Shri Rana Mukherjee, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the State of U.P. has
vehemently submitted that the State of U.P. in exercise of powers under Section 41 of the Act, 1973
issued orders permitting the Development Authorities in the State to recover the charges /fees with
respect to external/internal development charges, inspection fee/supervision fee while granting of
sanction layout plan, development charges, sub-division charges, stacking charges and impact fee
etc. It is submitted that the said orders came to be issued in exercise of powers under Section 41 of
the Act, 1973, which as such were in the larger public interest and for development of the area
including the development plan/scheme and for development of other areas included within the
limits of Development Authorities.

4.1 It is further submitted by Shri Rana Mukherjee, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of
the State of U.P. that as such the levy towards the development charges/fees has been upheld by this
Court in the case of State of U.P. & Others v. Malti Kaul (Smt.) & Another, reported in (1996) 10 SCC
425. It is submitted that therefore the High Court in the case of Rekha Rani (supra) (Civil Appeal
No. 4489/2014) ought not to have and could not have set aside the levy of development charges/fees
which as such came to be affirmed by this Court.

4.2 Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respective Development Authorities, while adopting
the submissions made by Shri Rana Mukherjee, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the
State of U.P., have further submitted that in fact they collected the respective charges, other than
development charges/fees, under the orders issued by the State Government. 4.3 Learned counsel
appearing on behalf of the respective original writ petitioners , as such, are not in a position to
dispute that so far as the levy of development charges/fees is concerned, the same is held to be legal
in view of the decision of this Court in the case of Malti Kaul (supra).

3

Mathura Vrindavan Development ... vs Rajesh Sharma on 28 April, 2023

4.4 It is submitted that so far as the other charges are concerned, the same are rightly held to be
illegal and/or not in accordance with law, in view of Section 15(2-A) of the Act, 1973. It is submitted
that only those charges which are enumerated/mentioned in Section 15(2-A) of the Act, 1973 can be
recovered/levied. It is submitted that as per Article 265 of the Constitution of India, there cannot be
any levy/charges except in accordance with law. Meaning thereby, unless the law permits, there
cannot be any levy of tax/charges.

4.5 Insofar as reliance placed upon Section 41 of the Act, 1973 on behalf of the State as well as
Development Authorities is concerned, it is submitted that in exercise of powers under Section 41 of
the Act, 1973, there cannot be any levy and/or no charge/fee can be recovered, if otherwise the same
is not permissible under the Act. It is submitted that the powers under Section 41 of the Act, 1973, as
such, are supervisory in nature and the directions can be issued by the State Government upon the
concerned Development Authorities to carry out the functions under the Act. It is submitted that
Section 41 does not permit the State to issue orders for levy of charges other than mentioned in
Section 15(2-A) of the Act, 1973.

4.6 In one of the cases, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the original writ petitioner has
vehemently submitted that as such though the property in question may be within the limits of the
Development Authorities, however, with respect to the land which is not covered by the
development plan, there cannot be any levy of even development charges/fees.

5. We have heard learned counsel for the respective parties at length.

At the outset, it is required to be noted that before the High Court the dispute was with respect to
various demand notices by way of external/internal development charges, inspection
fee/supervision fee while granting of sanction layout plan, development charges, sub-division
charges, stacking charges and impact fee etc.

6. Insofar as the levy of development fees/charges is concerned, the issue is now not res integra, in
view of the direct decision of this Court in the case of Malti Kaul (supra). After taking into
consideration the entire scheme and the relevant provisions of the Act, 1973, more particularly
Sections 14, 15(2-A), 41 & 59 of the Act, 1973, this Court has upheld the levy of development
charges/fees. Therefore, the issue with respect to levy of development charges/fees is concerned, the
same is concluded by this Court in the case of Malti Kaul (supra). Under the circumstances, as such
the High Court has rightly upheld the levy of development fees/charges except in the case of Rekha
Rani (supra). The decision of the High Court in the case of Rekha Rani (supra) quashing and setting
aside the levy of development charges/fees thus is unsustainable and the same deserves to be
quashed and set aside and the levy of development charges/fees, which otherwise is permissible
under section 15(2-A) of the Act, 1973 is to be upheld.

7. Insofar as the submission on behalf of one of the counsel that as the area in one of the cases is not
included within the development plan, but the same is within the area of Development Authorities
and therefore there shall not be any levy of development charges/fees is concerned, the same has no
substance. It is required to be noted that the levy of development fee/charges is for the area where

4

Mathura Vrindavan Development ... vs Rajesh Sharma on 28 April, 2023

development has already taken place and/or which is yet to be developed. The said aspect has
already been considered by this Court in the case of Malti Kaul (supra). In paragraph 5 of the said
decision, it is observed and held as under:

“5. Section 4 contemplates that the State Government may, by notification in the
Gazette, constitute, for the purpose of the Act, an authority called “Development
Authority” for any development area. ‘Development’ has been defined in Section 2(e)
with its grammatical variations, to mean the carrying out of building, engineering,
mining or other operations in, on, over or under land, or the making of any material
change in any building or land, and includes redevelopment. “Development area” has
been defined in Section 2(f) to mean any area declared to be development area under
Section 3. It has been empowered, where the Government in exercise of the power
under Section 3 has declared that any area within the State requires to be developed
according to the plan, to declare such area to be a development area. Section 7
envisages the objects of the authority and gives power to the developing authority to
acquire, hold, manage or dispose of a land and any other property, to carry out
building, engineering, mining and other operations, to execute works in connection
with the supply of water and electricity, to dispose of sewage and to provide and
maintain other services and amenities and generally to do anything necessary or
expedient for purposes of such development and for purposes incidental thereto.

‘Amenity’ has been so defined in Section 2(a) as to include road, water supply, street
lighting, drainage, sewerage, public works and such other convenience as the State
Government may, by notification in the Gazette specify to be an amenity for the
purposes of the Act. The expression “engineering operations” has been defined under
Section 2(h) and includes the formation or laying out means of access to a road or the
laying out of means of water supply. “Means of access” has been defined under
Section 2(i) and includes any means of access, whether private or public, for vehicles
or for foot passengers and includes a road.”

8. Insofar as the levy of other charges by way of inspection fee/supervision fee while granting of
sanction layout plan, sub-division charges, stacking charges and impact fee etc., except levy of
development charges/fees, is concerned, while considering the legality of the levy of such charges,
the relevant provisions of the Act, 1973 are required to be considered, which are as under:

“S. 2. Definitions - In this Act unless the context otherwise requires—

(e) ‘development’ with its grammatical variations, means the carrying out of building,
engineering, mining or other operations in, on, over or under land, or the making of
any material change in any building or land, and includes re-development:

(f) ‘Development Area’ means any area declared, development area under Section 3:

5

Mathura Vrindavan Development ... vs Rajesh Sharma on 28 April, 2023

(g) ‘the Development Authority’ or ‘the Authority’, in relation to any development
area, means the Development Authority constituted under Section 4 for that area:

(ggg) ‘development fee’ means the fee levied upon a person or body under Section 15
for construction of road, drain, sewer line, electric supply and water supply lines in
the development area by the Development Authority):]

(h) ‘engineering operation’ includes the formation or laying out means of access to a
road or the laying out of means of water supply:

(hh) ‘Land use conversion charge’ means the charge levied on a person or body under
section 38-A for the change of land use in the Master Plan or Zonal Plan;]

(ii) ‘mutation charges’ means the charges, levied under Section 15 upon the person
seeking mutation in his name of a property allotted by the Authority to another
person:] (kk) ‘Stacking fees’ means the fees levied under Section 15 upon the person
or body who keeps building materials on the land of the Authority or on a public
street or public places:] (ll) ‘water fees’ means the fees levied under Section 15 upon a
person or body for using water supplied by the Authority for building operation or
construction of buildings.] xxx xxx xxx S. 14. Development of the land in the
developed area -

(1) After the declaration of any area as development area under Section 3, no development of land
shall be undertaken or carried out or continued in that area by any person or body (including a
department of Government)- unless permission for such development has been obtained in writing
from the [Vice-Chairman) in accordance with the provision of this Act. (2) After the coming into
operation of any of the plans in any development area no development shall be undertaken or
carried out or continued in that area unless such development is also in accordance, with such plans.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained In Sub-sections (1) and (2), the following provisions shall
apply in relation to development of land by any department of any State Government or the Central
Government or any local authority—

(a) When any such department or local authority intends to carry out any development of land it
shall inform the (Vice Chairman) in writing of its intention to do so giving full, particulars thereof,
including any plans and documents, at least 30 days before undertaking such development;

(b) In the case of a department of any State Government or the Central Government, if the
(Vice-Chairman) has no objections, it should inform such department of the same within three
weeks from the date of receipt by it under Clause (a) of the department's intention, and if the Vice-
Chairman does ‘not make any objection within the said period, the department shall be free to carry
out the proposed development;

(c) Where the (Vice-Chairman) raises any objection to the proposed development on the ground that
the development is not conformity with any Master Plan or Zonal Development Plan prepared or

6

Mathura Vrindavan Development ... vs Rajesh Sharma on 28 April, 2023

intended to be prepared by it, or on any other ground, such department or the local authority, as the
case be, shall—

(i) either make necessary modifications in the proposal development to meet the objections raised
by the [Vice- Chairman] or

(ii) submit the proposals for development together with the objections raised by the
[Vice-Chairman] to the State Government for decision under Clause (d)

(d) The State Government, on receipt of proposals for development together with the objections of
the (Vice- Chairman) may either approve the proposals with or without modifications or direct the
department or the local authority, as the case may be, to make such modification as proposed by the
Government and the decision of the State Government shall be final:

the development of any land begun by any such department or subject to the
provisions of Section 59 by any such local authority before the declaration referred to
in Sub-section (1) may be completed by that department or local authority with
compliance with the requirement of Sub-sections (1) and (2).

S. 15. Application for permission—(1) Every person or body (other than any
department of Government or any local authority) desiring to obtain the permission
referred to in Section 14 shall make an application in writing to the [Vice-Chairman]
in such form and containing such particulars in respect of the development to which
the Application relates as may be prescribed by [bye-laws].

(2) Every application under Sub-section (1) shall be accompanied by such fee as may
be prescribed by rules.

[(2-A) The Authority shall be entitled to levy development fees, mutation charges, stacking fees and
water fees in such manner and at such rates as may be prescribed.] Provided that the amount of
stacking fees levied in respect of an area which is not being developed or has not been developed, by
the Authority, shall be transferred to the local authority within whose local limits such area is
situated.] xxx xxx xxx S. 41. Control by State Government - (1) The [Authority, the Chairman or the
Vice-Chairman] shall carry out such directions as may be issued to it from time to time by the State
Government for the efficient administration of this Act.

(2) If in, or in connection with, the exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions by the
[Authority, the Chairman or the Vice-Chairman) under this Act any dispute arises between the
authority, the Chairman or the Vice-Chairman) and the State Government the decision of the State
Government on such dispute shall be final. (3) The State Government may, at any time, either on its
own motion or on application made to it in this behalf, call for the records of any case disposed of or
order passed by the [Authority or the Chairman) for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the legality
or propriety of any order passed or direction issued and may pass such order or issue such direction
in relation thereto as it may think fit:

7

Mathura Vrindavan Development ... vs Rajesh Sharma on 28 April, 2023

Provided that the State Government shall not pass an order prejudicial to any person
without affording such person a reasonable opportunity of being heard. [(4) Every
order of the State Government made in exercise of the powers conferred by this Act
shall be final and shall not be called in question in any court.] xxx xxx xxx S. 59.
Repeal etc. and Savings - (1)(a) The operation of Clause (c) of Section 5, Sections 54,
55 and 56, Clause (xxxiii) of Section 114, Sub-section (3) of Section 117, Clause (c) of
Sub-section (1) of Section 119, Section 191, Sections 316, 317, 318, 319, 320, 321, 322,
323, 324, 325, 326, 327, 328, 329 and 333, Clauses (a) and (b) of Sub-section (1) of
Section 334, Sections 335, 336, Chapter XIV of the Uttar Pradesh [U.P. Municipal
Corporation Act, 1959] Sections 178, 179, 180, 180-A, 181, 182, 183, 184, 185, 186,
203, 204, 205, 206, 207, 208, 209, 210 and 222 of the [U.P. Municipalities Act, 1916]
(or the said sections as extended under Section 338 thereof or under Section 38 of
the [United Provinces Town Areas Act, 1914], or as the, case may be, of Sections 162
to 171 of the [U.P. Kshetra Panchayat Zila Panchayat Adhiniyam, 1961] and of the
Uttar Pradesh (Regulation of Building Operations) Act, 1958 and the Uttar Pradesh
Avas-Evam Vikas Parishad Adhinlyam, 1965, [except in relation to those housing or
Improvement schemes which have either been notified under Section 32 of Uttar
Pradesh Avas Evam Vikas Parishad Adhiniyam, 1965 before the declaration of the
area comprised therein as development area or which having been notified under
Section 28 of the said Adhiniyam before the said declarations are bye-thereafter
approved by the State Government for continuance under the said Adhiniyam or
which are initiated after such declaration with the approval of the State Government,
hereinafter in this section referred to as Special Avas Parishad Schemes] shall in
respect of a development area remain suspended and Sub-section (3) of Section 139
of the Uttar Pradesh [Municipal Corporation Act, 1959) shall have effect as if the
requirement as to constitution of a Development Fund were suspended with effect
from the date of constitution of the Authority for that area and until the dissolution of
such Authority and the provisions of [Sections 6 and 24 of the United Provinces
General Clauses Act, 1904) shall apply, in relation to such suspension as if the
suspension amounted to repeal of the said enactment by this Act, and in particular,
all proceedings relating to acquisition of land and interest in land for Improvement
schemes under the said enactment pending immediately before such suspension
before any court, tribunal or authority may be continued and concluded in
accordance with the provisions of the said enactment (which shall mutatis mutandis
apply) as if those provisions were not suspended and the powers, for doing anything
which could but for such suspension of the Uttar Pradesh (Regulation of Building not
Operations) Act, 1958, be done by the Prescribed Authority and controlling authority
and which can, after such suspension be done by virtue of the application of Section 6
of the Uttar Pradesh General Clause Act, 1904, shall vest in the Vice-Chairman and
the Chairman respectively).

(b) The operation of the provisions suspended by virtue of Clause (a) shall revive upon the
dissolution of the Authority under Section 58, the provisions of [Sections 6 and 24 of the United
Provinces General Clauses Act, 1904] shall apply in relation to the cesser of application of the

8

Mathura Vrindavan Development ... vs Rajesh Sharma on 28 April, 2023

corresponding provisions of this Act as if such cesser amounted to a repeal of these provisions of
this Act by an Uttar Pradesh Act.

(c) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of Clauses (a) and (b), and bye-laws,
directions or regulations under the [U.P. Municipalities Act, 1916] or the Uttar Pradesh (Regulation
of Building Operations) Act, 1958 or the [U.P. Municipal Corporation Act, 1959) as the case may be,
and in force on the date immediately before the date of commencement of this Act, shall, insofar as
they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, continue in force, until altered, repealed or
amended by any competent authority under this Act).

(6) Notwithstanding the provisions of Sub-sections (1) and (2)

(a) anything done or any action taken (including any notification issued or order or scheme made or
permission granted) under any of the enactments referred to in Sub-sections (1) and shall, so far as
it is not inconsistent with the provisions of the Act continue in force and be deemed to have been
done or take under the provisions of this Act unless and until it is superseded by anything done or
any action taken under the provisions this Act;

Therefore, as per Section 15(2-A) of the Act, 1973, the Development Authority can levy only those
charges, namely, development fees, mutation charges, stacking fees and water fees. The Act, 1973
does not permit levy of other charges other than provided under Section 15(2- A) of the Act, 1973.

9. Insofar as the reliance placed upon Section 41 of the Act, 1973 by the State as well as the
Development Authorities is concerned, at the outset, it is required to be noted that the power
exercisable under Section 41 by the State, as such, are supervisory in nature and under the said
provision, the State Government can issue various directions to the Development Authorities for
implementation of the provisions of the said Act. In para 9 in the case of Malti Kaul (supra), it is
observed and held as under:

“9. Section 41 envisages control by the State Government in implementation of the
provisions of the Act. Under sub-section (1) thereof, the authority, the Chairman or
the Vice-Chairman shall carry out such directions as may be issued to it/him from
time to time by the State Government for the efficient administration of this Act.
Section 56 gives power to make regulations under the Act. Sub-section (1) thereof
provides that any authority may, with the previous approval of the State Government,
make regulations, not inconsistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder, for
the administration of the affairs of the authority. Therefore, the general power is
available under Section 56 for the authority to make regulations for the
administration of the affairs of the authority. In particular sub-section (2) thereof
provides that despite the generality of the power given in sub-section (1) specific
power has been given by way of regulations as enumerated thereunder. Clause (i)
which is a residuary clause provides for any other matter which has to be or may be
prescribed by the regulations.”

9

Mathura Vrindavan Development ... vs Rajesh Sharma on 28 April, 2023

10. An identical question came to be considered by this Court in the case of K.K. Bhalla v. State of
M.P., reported in (2006) 3 SCC 581. While dealing with the powers of the State Government under
the Madhya Pradesh Act, which is pari materia to Section 41 of the Act, 1973, in paragraph 62, it is
observed and held as under:

“62. Furthermore, in terms of Section 73 of the 1973 Act, the power of the State
Government to issue direction to the officers appointed under Section 3 and the
authorities constituted under the Act is confined only to matters of policy and not any
other. Such matters of policy yet again must be in relation to discharge of duties by
the officers of the authority and not in derogation thereof.”

11. In the case of Poonam Verma v. Delhi Development Authority, (2007) 13 SCC 154, while dealing
with the pari materia provision under the Delhi Development Authority Act (Section 41 of the DDA
Act), this Court has observed and held in para 13 as under:

“13. Having failed to establish any legal right in themselves as also purported
deficiency in services on the part of the respondent before competent legal forums,
they took recourse to remedies on administrative side which stricto sensu were not
available. It has not been shown as to on what premise the Central Government can
interfere with the day-to-day affairs of the respondent. Section 41 of the Act, only
envisages that the respondent would carry out such directions that may be issued by
the Central Government from time to time for the efficient administration of the Act.
The same does not take within its fold an order which can be passed by the Central
Government in the matter of allotment of flats by the Authority. Section 41 speaks
about policy decision. Any direction issued must have a nexus with the efficient
administration of the Act. It has nothing to do with carrying out of the plans of the
authority in respect of a particular scheme.”

12. Under the circumstances, in exercise of powers under Section 41 of the Act, 1973, the State could
not have issued the orders permitting/allowing the Development Authorities to levy the
charges/fees other than provided under Section 15(2-A) of the Act, 1973. At this stage, it is required
to be noted that the levy of fees/charges provided under Section 15(2-A), all of them have been
specifically defined under Section 2 of the Act, 1973. Therefore, the intention of the Act is to levy
only those charges/fees provided/mentioned under Section 15(2-A) of the Act, 1973, otherwise the
other charges also would have been defined under the Act, 1973. Levy of such other charges can be
said to be hit by Article 265 of the Constitution of India. As per Article 265 of the Constitution of
India, there shall not be any levy of tax/fees/charges except in accordance with law and/or as
provided under the statute. Under the circumstances and in view of the above, the High Court has
rightly set aside the various demand notices by way of levy of inspection fee/supervision fee while
granting of sanction lay out plan, sub-division charges, impact fee etc.

13. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the levy of development charges/fees by
the various Development Authorities of the State of U.P. is hereby confirmed. The decision of the
High Court in the case of Rekha Rani (supra) (Civil Appeal No. 4489/2014) quashing and setting

10

Mathura Vrindavan Development ... vs Rajesh Sharma on 28 April, 2023

aside the levy of development charges/fees is hereby quashed and set aside to that extent. The
impugned judgments and orders passed by the High Court quashing and setting aside the demand
notices/levy of other charges/fees, namely, inspection fee/supervision fee while granting of sanction
layout plan, sub-division charges, impact fee etc. (other than development charges/fees) are hereby
confirmed.

14. It is observed and directed that any amount already paid by the respective original writ
petitioners other than the development charges/fees and the charges provided under Section
15(2-A), now be refunded to the respective original writ petitioners with 6% interest per annum,
within a period of twelve months from today, of course after adjusting development charges/fees. It
is made clear that we have not expressed anything on the levy of betterment charges, which, as such,
is otherwise permissible under section 35 of the Act, 1973. It is also made clear that the order of
refund shall be applicable only with respect to those original writ petitioners/persons who have
challenged the demand notices and who were before the High Court. It is also observed and it is
made clear that if any individual/original writ petitioner has any other grievances, it will be open for
them to approach the High Court by way of independent proceedings.

15. The present appeals stand disposed of in terms of the above. In the facts and circumstances of
the case, there shall be no order as to costs.

………………………………J.
[M.R. SHAH]

NEW DELHI;               ……………………………….J.
APRIL 28, 2023.          [C.T. RAVIKUMAR]

11