Md. Asfak Alam vs The State Of Jharkhand on 31 July, 2023

Md. Asfak Alam vs The State Of Jharkhand on 31 July, 2023

Author: S. Ravindra Bhat

Bench: Aravind Kumar, S. Ravindra Bhat

1

2023 INSC 660

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). 2207 OF 2023
[ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRL.) No. 3433 OF 2023]

MD. ASFAK ALAM                                                           …APPELLANT(S)

VERSUS

THE STATE OF JHARKHAND & ANR.                                           …RESPONDENT(S)

JUDGMENT

S. RAVINDRA BHAT, J.

1. On the previous date of hearing, i.e., on 26.07.2023, this Court heard the counsel for the parties to
the Special Leave Petition. But having regard to the peculiar nature of the impugned order, kept this
matter back for orders to be pronounced today.

2. Special leave granted. The appellant is aggrieved by the denial of anticipatory bail and a further
direction to surrender before the Court and seek regular bail.

3. The necessary facts are that the appellant and the second respondent (hereafter referred to as
“husband and wife”, respectively) were married on 5.11.2020. The appellant alleges that the
respondent-wife was not happy and her father used to interfere and pressurize him and his family.
This led to complaints lodged against the wife’s family for threatening the appellant’s family. It is

1

Md. Asfak Alam vs The State Of Jharkhand on 31 July, 2023

alleged that on 02.04.2022, without complying with the directions of Five Judge Bench in Lalita
Kumari vs. Govt. of UP &Ors.,1 the concerned Police Station2, registered the First Information
Report (FIR) against the appellant and his brother and others, complaining of commission of
offences under Section 498A, 323/504/506 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC) and Section 3 & 4
of the Dowry Prohibition Act.

4. The appellant apprehended arrest and applied for anticipatory bail under Section 438 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) before the Sessions Judge, Gumla, Jharkhand; that application
was dismissed on 28.06.2022. The appellant then approached the Jharkhand High Court seeking
anticipatory bail on 05.07.2022. All this while, the appellant cooperated with the investigation, and
after its completion, a charge-sheet was filed before the Sessions Judge.

5. Cognizance was taken on 01.10.2022 by the Sessions Court. The Sessions Court noted in this
order that on 08.08.2022, the High Court had protected the appellant with the interim order
directing that he may not be arrested. When the application was heard by the High Court next on
18.01.2023, without adverting, the pending anticipatory bail was rejected, and the High Court went
on to direct the appellant to surrender before the competent Court and seek regular bail. The
relevant extracts of the High Court impugned order3 read as follows:

“Considering the facts and circumstances of the case and rival contentions of the
learned counsel, I found that there are serious allegations against the petitioner that
the informant is also being subjected to cruelty by lodging criminal cases against the
family members just after institution of this case.

1 [2013] 14 SCR 713.

2 Gumla Mahila P.S. in Case No. 07/2022.

Considering the rival submission of learned counsels and materials available against petitioner as
well as gravity of allegations, I am not inclined to grant privilege of anticipatory bail to the
petitioner, which stands rejected.

Petitioner is directed to surrender before the court below and pray for regular bail, the learned court
below shall consider the same on its own merits, without being prejudiced by this order.”

6. The appellant contends that importance has been placed by the Constitution on the value of
personal liberty, the necessity for arrest before filing of the charge sheet occurs when the accused’s
custodial investigation or interrogation is essential or in certain cases involving serious offences
where the accused’s possibility of influencing witnesses cannot be ruled out. Learned counsel
contends that an arrest can be made does not mandate that it ought to be made in every case and
emphasised that the distinction between the existence of the power (to arrest) and the justification
of exercising it must always be kept in mind. It is thus argued that the procedural requirements of
Section 41A of the CrPC must always be followed in this regard.

2

Md. Asfak Alam vs The State Of Jharkhand on 31 July, 2023

7. Learned counsel relied upon the decisions of this Court in Arnesh Kumar v. State of Bihar and
Another 4, Satender Kumar Antil v. Central Bureau of Investigation and Another5 and Siddharth v.
State of Uttar Pradesh and Another6 to underline the submissions and also highlighted that it is
only if the Investigating Officer believes that the accused may abscond or disobey summons then
only, he or she needs to be taken into custody.

8. Learned counsel on behalf of the State submitted that the mere fact that a charge sheet is filed
would not per se entitle an accused to the grant of anticipatory bail, which always remains
discretionary. The Court always weighs the possibility of an accused [depending on his past conduct]
of influencing witnesses or otherwise tampering with evidence. It was highlighted that the 4 [2014]
8 SCR 128.

5 [2022] 10 SCR 351.

6 (2022) 1 SCC 676.

respondent, who is a complainant in this case, had alleged harassment on a regular basis by the
appellant and his relatives at the matrimonial home just about one and a half months after their
marriage and that she had even been threatened with loss of life. It was highlighted that according to
the complainant, the threat extended to the one that she would be injected in such a manner that
medical evidence would disclose that she had died of a heart attack.

Analysis

9. This court has emphasised the values of personal liberty in the context of applying discretion to
grant bail. It has been ruled, in a long line of cases that ordinarily bail ought to be granted and that
in serious cases – which are specified in the provisions of the CrPC (Section 437) which involve
allegations relating to offences carrying long sentences or other special offences, the court should be
circumspect and careful in exercising discretion. The paramount considerations in cases where bail
or anticipatory bail is claimed are the nature and gravity of the offence, the propensity or ability of
the accused to influence evidence during investigation or interfere with the trial process by
threatening or otherwise trying to influence the witnesses; the likelihood of the accused to flee from
justice and other such considerations. During the trial, the court is always in control of the
proceedings, and it is open for it to impose any condition which it deems necessary to ensure the
accused’s presence and participation in the trial. The court must, in every case, be guided by these
overarching principles.

10. In the five judge Bench decision of Sushila Aggarwal v. State (NCT of Delhi)7, this court had
occasion to review past decisions, including considering the judgment in Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia v
State of Punjab8 and decide whether imposition of conditions limiting the order of pre-arrest bail,
particularly when 7 2020 (2) SCR 1 8 1980] 3 SCR 383 charge-sheet is filed, is warranted. The court
held, inter alia, in its judgment (M.R. Shah, J) that:

3

Md. Asfak Alam vs The State Of Jharkhand on 31 July, 2023

“7.6. Thus, considering the observations made by the Constitution Bench of this
Court in Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia [Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia v. State of Punjab, (1980) 2
SCC 565 : 1980 SCC (Cri) 465] , the court may, if there are reasons for doing so, limit
the operation of the order to a short period only after filing of an FIR in respect of the
matter covered by order and the applicant may in such case be directed to obtain an
order of bail under Sections 437 or 439 of the Code within a reasonable short period
after the filing of the FIR. The Constitution Bench has further observed that the same
need not be followed as an invariable rule. It is further observed and held that normal
rule should be not to limit the operation of the order in relation to a period of time.
We are of the opinion that the conditions can be imposed by the court concerned
while granting pre-arrest bail order including limiting the operation of the order in
relation to a period of time if the circumstances so warrant, more particularly the
stage at which the “anticipatory bail” application is moved, namely, whether the same
is at the stage before the FIR is filed or at the stage when the FIR is filed and the
investigation is in progress or at the stage when the investigation is complete and the
charge-sheet is filed. However, as observed hereinabove, the normal rule should be
not to limit the order in relation to a period of time.” The concurring view expressed
(by the author of this judgment) was:

“85.3. Section 438 CrPC does not compel or oblige courts to impose conditions
limiting relief in terms of time, or upon filing of FIR, or recording of statement of any
witness, by the police, during investigation or inquiry, etc. While weighing and
considering an application (for grant of anticipatory bail) the court has to consider
the nature of the offence, the role of the person, the likelihood of his influencing the
course of investigation, or tampering with evidence (including intimidating
witnesses), likelihood of fleeing justice (such as leaving the country), etc. The courts
would be justified — and ought to impose conditions spelt out in Section 437(3) CrPC
[by virtue of Section 438(2)]. The necessity to impose other restrictive conditions,
would have to be weighed on a case- by-case basis, and depending upon the materials
produced by the State or the investigating agency. Such special or other restrictive
conditions may be imposed if the case or cases warrant, but should not be imposed in
a routine manner, in all cases. Likewise, conditions which limit the grant of
anticipatory bail may be granted, if they are required in the facts of any case or cases;
however, such limiting conditions may not be invariably imposed.

********************************* 85.4. Courts ought to be generally guided by the
considerations such as nature and gravity of the offences, the role attributed to the
applicant, and the facts of the case, while assessing whether to grant anticipatory bail,
or refusing it. Whether to grant or not is a matter of discretion;

equally whether, and if so, what kind of special conditions are to be imposed (or not imposed) are
dependent on facts of the case, and subject to the discretion of the court.

4

Md. Asfak Alam vs The State Of Jharkhand on 31 July, 2023

85.5. Anticipatory bail granted can, depending on the conduct and behaviour of the accused,
continue after filing of the charge-sheet till end of trial. Also orders of anticipatory bail should not be
“blanket” in the sense that it should not enable the accused to commit further offences and claim
relief. It should be confined to the offence or incident, for which apprehension of arrest is sought, in
relation to a specific incident. It cannot operate in respect of a future incident that involves
commission of an offence.

*********************************

87. The history of our Republic — and indeed, the Freedom Movement has shown how the
likelihood of arbitrary arrest and indefinite detention and the lack of safeguards played an
important role in rallying the people to demand Independence. Witness the Rowlatt Act, the
nationwide protests against it, the Jallianwala Bagh Massacre and several other incidents, where the
general public were exercising their right to protest but were brutally suppressed and eventually
jailed for long. The spectre of arbitrary and heavy-handed arrests : too often, to harass and
humiliate citizens, and oftentimes, at the interest of powerful individuals (and not to further any
meaningful investigation into offences) led to the enactment of Section 438. Despite several Law
Commission Reports and recommendations of several committees and commissions, arbitrary and
groundless arrests continue as a pervasive phenomenon. Parliament has not thought it appropriate
to curtail the power or discretion of the courts, in granting pre-arrest or anticipatory bail, especially
regarding the duration, or till charge-sheet is filed, or in serious crimes. Therefore, it would not be in
the larger interests of society if the Court, by judicial interpretation, limits the exercise of that power
: the danger of such an exercise would be that in fractions, little by little, the discretion, advisedly
kept wide, would shrink to a very narrow and unrecognisably tiny portion, thus frustrating the
objective behind the provision, which has stood the test of time, these 46 years.”

11. The decisions cited by counsel are useful and valuable guides with respect to the powers of the
police, the discretion and the duties of the court in several kinds of cases, including those relating to
the matrimonial offences such as 498A of IPC, and other cases. In Arnesh Kumar (supra), it was
held that:

“9. From a plain reading of the aforesaid provision, it is evident that a person accused
of an offence punishable with imprisonment for a term which may be less than seven
years or which may extend to seven years with or without fine, cannot be arrested by
the police officer only on his satisfaction that such person had committed the offence
punishable as aforesaid. A police officer before arrest, in such cases has to be further
satisfied that such arrest is necessary to prevent such person from committing any
further offence; or for proper investigation of the case; or to prevent the accused from
causing the evidence of the offence to disappear; or tampering with such evidence in
any manner; or to prevent such person from making any inducement, threat or
promise to a witness so as to dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the court or
the police officer; or unless such accused person is arrested, his presence in the court
whenever required cannot be ensured. These are the conclusions, which one may
reach based on facts. The law mandates the police officer to state the facts and record

5

Md. Asfak Alam vs The State Of Jharkhand on 31 July, 2023

the reasons in writing which led him to come to a conclusion covered by any of the
provisions aforesaid, while making such arrest. The law further requires the police
officers to record the reasons in writing for not making the arrest. In pith and core,
the police officer before arrest must put a question to himself, why arrest? Is it really
required? What purpose it will serve? What object it will achieve? It is only after
these questions are addressed and one or the other conditions as enumerated above
is satisfied, the power of arrest needs to be exercised. In fine, before arrest first the
police officers should have reason to believe on the basis of information and material
that the accused has committed the offence. Apart from this, the police officer has to
be satisfied further that the arrest is necessary for one or the more purposes
envisaged by sub-clauses (a) to (e) of clause (1) of Section 41 CrPC.” The court also
issued valuable directions to be followed by the police authorities and the courts, in
all cases where the question of grant of bail arises. Further, the court had underlined
the centrality to personal liberty in its decision in Siddharth (supra):

“10. We may note that personal liberty is an important aspect of our constitutional
mandate. The occasion to arrest an accused during investigation arises when
custodial investigation becomes necessary or it is a heinous crime or where there is a
possibility of influencing the witnesses or accused may abscond. Merely because an
arrest can be made because it is lawful does not mandate that arrest must be made. A
distinction must be made between the existence of the power to arrest and the
justification for exercise of it. If arrest is made routine, it can cause incalculable harm
to the reputation arid self-esteem of a person. If the investigating officer has no
reason to believe that the accused will abscond or disobey summons and has, in fact,
throughout cooperated with the investigation we fail to appreciate why there should
be a compulsion on the officer to arrest the accused.”

12. In the present case, this Court is of the opinion that there are no startling features or elements
that stand out or any exceptional fact disentitling the appellant to the grant of anticipatory bail.
What is important is not that the matrimonial relationship soured almost before the couple could
even settle down but whether allegations levelled against the appellant are true or partly true at this
stage, which at best would be matters of conjecture, at least for this Court. However, what is a
matter of record is that the time when the anticipatory bail was pending can be divided into two
parts - firstly, when there was no protection afforded to him through any interim order (between
April 2022 and 08.08.2022). Secondly, it was on 08.08.2022 that the High Court granted an order
effectively directing the police not to arrest him during the pendency of his application under
Section 438 of the CrPC. Significantly, the investigation was completed, and chargesheet was filed
after 08.08.2022, and in fact cognizance was taken on 01.10.2022 by the Sessions Judge. These
factors were of importance, and though the High Court has noticed the factors but interpreted them
in an entirely different light. What appears from the record is that the appellant cooperated with the
investigation both before 08.08.2022, when no protection was granted to him and after
08.08.2022, when he enjoyed protection till the filing of the chargesheet and the cognizance thereof
on 01.10.2022. Thus, once the chargesheet was filed and there was no impediment, at least on the
part of the accused, the court having regard to the nature of the offences, the allegations and the

6

Md. Asfak Alam vs The State Of Jharkhand on 31 July, 2023

maximum sentence of the offences they were likely to carry, ought to have granted the bail as a
matter of course. However, the court did not do so but mechanically rejected and, virtually, to rub
salt in the wound directed the appellant to surrender and seek regular bail before the Trial Court.
Therefore, in the opinion of this court, the High Court fell into error in adopting such a casual
approach. The impugned order of rejecting the bail and directing the appellant, to surrender and
later seek bail, therefore, cannot stand, and is hereby set aside. Before parting, the court would
direct all the courts ceased of proceedings to strictly follow the law laid down in Arnesh Kumar
(supra) and reiterate the directions contained thereunder, as well as other directions:

“I. 11. Our endeavour in this judgment is to ensure that police officers do not arrest
the accused unnecessarily and Magistrate do not authorize detention casually and
mechanically. In order to, ensure what we have observed above, we give the following
directions:

11.1. All the State Governments to instruct its police officers not to automatically
arrest when a case under Section 498-A IPC is registered but to satisfy themselves
about the necessity for arrest under the parameters laid down above flowing from
Section 41 CrPC;

11.2. All police officers be provided with a check list containing specified sub-clauses
under Section 41(1)(b)(ii);

11.3. The police officer- shall forward the check list duly filled and furnish the reasons
and materials which necessitated the arrest, while forwarding/producing the accused
before the Magistrate for further detention;

11.4. The Magistrate while authorizing detention of the accused shall peruse the
report furnished by the police officer in terms aforesaid and only after recording its
satisfaction, the Magistrate will authorize detention;

11.5. The decision not to arrest an accused, be forwarded to the Magistrate within two
weeks from the date of the institution of the case with a copy to the Magistrate which
may be extended by the Superintendent of Police of the district for the reasons to be
recorded in writing;

11.6. Notice of appearance in terms of Section 41-A CrPC be served on the accused
within two weeks from the date of institution of the case, which may be extended by
the Superintendent of Police of the district for the reasons to be recorded in writing;

11.7. Failure to comply with the directions aforesaid shall apart from rendering the
police officers concerned liable for departmental action, they shall also be liable to be
punished for contempt of court to be instituted before the High Court having
territorial jurisdiction.

7

Md. Asfak Alam vs The State Of Jharkhand on 31 July, 2023

11.8. Authorizing detention without recording reasons as aforesaid by the Judicial
Magistrate concerned shall be liable for departmental action by the appropriate High
Court.

12. We hasten to add that the directions aforesaid shall not only apply to the case
under Section 498-A IPC or Section 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, the case in hand,
but also such cases where offence is punishable with imprisonment for a terms which
may be less than seven years or which may extend to seven years, whether with or
without fine.” II. The High Court shall frame the above directions in the form of
notifications and guidelines to be followed by the Sessions courts and all other and
criminal courts dealing with various offences.

III. Likewise, the Director General of Police in all States shall ensure that strict instructions in terms
of above directions are issued. Both the High Courts and the DGP’s of all States shall ensure that
such guidelines and Directives/Departmental Circulars are issued for guidance of all lower courts
and police authorities in each State within eight weeks from today.

IV. Affidavits of compliance shall be filed before this court within ten weeks by all the states and
High Courts, though their Registrars.

13. The appeal is accordingly allowed in the above terms. The appellant is directed to be enlarged on
bail subject to such terms and conditions that the Trial Court may impose. The High Courts and the
Police Authorities in all States are required to comply with the above directions in the manner spelt
out in the para above, within the time frame mentioned.

...…....................................J. [S. RAVINDRA BHAT] …......................................J. [ARAVIND KUMAR]
NEW DELHI;

JULY 31, 2023

8