Meenu Prakash Bhantu vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 16 March, 2023

Meenu Prakash Bhantu vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 16
March, 2023

Author: Rajesh Bindal

Bench: Abhay S. Oka, Rajesh Bindal

[Non-Reportable]

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 738 OF 2023
(@ SLP(CRL.) NO.9665 OF 2017)

MEENU PRAKASH BHANTU                          …Appellant

Versus

STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH & ANR.                …Respondents

JUDGMENT

Rajesh Bindal, J.

1. The Order dated 12th October, 2017 passed by the High Court for Judicature at Allahabad is under
challenge before this Court. Vide the aforesaid order, the Criminal Miscellaneous Application filed
by the appellant under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short “CrPC”) for
quashing of the orders dated 4 th July, 2017 passed by the Sessions Judge, Aligarh in Criminal
Revision Reason: No.306 of 2017 and the order dated 29th August, 2017 passed by the Additional
Chief Judicial Magistrate, Aligarh, was disposed of by the impugned order.

2. While examining the issue in detail, a brief narration of the facts of the case would be relevant:

The Respondent No.2/complainant lodged FIR bearing Case Crime No.170/2014
dated 20 th June, 2014 at Police Station Gonda, District Aligah, Uttar Pradesh. It was
with the allegation that (cid:131)55,20,000/- (Rupees fifty five lakhs twenty thousand only)
were embezzled from his account. A perusal of the contents of the FIR shows that no
one was named as an accused therein. He merely stated therein that there were
certain unauthorized withdrawals from his bank account. He had never requested for
issuance of a new cheque book, however, still a new cheque book was issued. It was

1

Meenu Prakash Bhantu vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 16 March, 2023

sent by registered post to the complainant but was not delivered to him. Some
unauthorized person collected the same. Though earlier the complainant was
receiving SMS from the bank for all the transactions but suddenly it got stopped. He
came to know about the cheating when on 19th June, 2014 he got entries done in his
pass book. After investigation, charge sheet was filed against Jagpal Singh, s/o
Ghasiram, Clerk (Assistant) SBI Branch, Gonda district, Aligarh and Ajeet Kumar
Sharma s/o Bhupendra Sharma, SBI Branch Gonda. During the course of trial, the
appellant got his statement recorded. He reiterated the stand taken by him in
complaint filed to the police on the basis of which FIR was registered. He stated that
the cheating has been done in connivance with the employees of the bank and the
Post Office. He admitted in his cross-examination that the amount of (cid:131) 55,20,000/-
(Rupees fifty five lakhs twenty thousand only) which was withdrawn from his bank
account has been returned to him by the bank.

3. On the basis of the statement made by the complainant which was in line with the complaint filed
to the police, an application was filed under Section 319 Cr.PC by the prosecution for summoning
the present appellant, Accountant S.D.Sharma and Bank Manager M.L.Verma, State Bank of India
and the then Post Master of Post Office, Gonda. The same was rejected by the Additional Chief
Judicial Magistrate vide order dated 6th May, 2017 finding that sufficient material was not available
to summon the accused. The order was challenged by the prosecution by filing revision. The learned
Sessions Judge vide order dated 4th July, 2017 allowed the Revision Petition and remitted the
matter to the Trial Court for disposal afresh after affording opportunity of hearing to the parties.
Thereafter, vide order dated 29th August, 2017 the learned Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate,
Aligarh allowed the application and directed for summoning of the present appellant, Accountant
S.D. Sharma and Bank Manager M.L. Verma and the then Post Master of Gonda Post Office.

4. In the aforesaid order, no reasons were assigned except stating that for the reasons stating by the
Sessions Judge in his order by which the matter was remitted back for consideration afresh, the
application is allowed and the present appellant, Accountant S.D.Sharma, Bank Manager
M.L.Verma and the then Post Master of Gonda Post Office were directed to be summoned. The
appellant being aggrieved by the aforesaid order approached the High Court at Allahabad. The High
Court vide the impugned order dismissed the Criminal Miscellaneous Application filed under
Section 482 CrPC only with general observations and without noticing the facts of the case. The
impugned order merely mentioned that no illegality or impropriety was found in the order which
could persuade the High Court to interfere. The order reflects non-application of judicial mind. The
order is under challenge before this Court.

5. Learned counsel appearing for the appellant submitted that the appellant was merely working as a
Miscellaneous Clerk in State Bank of India, Gonda Branch, District Aligarh, Uttar Pradesh. If there
was any fraudulent withdrawal from the account of the complainant, the appellant cannot be held
responsible for the same. The only allegation against the appellant is that once he had supplied
printout of the statement of account of the complainant which according to him was not legible or
there was some mis-printing. The appellant cannot be held responsible for treating his part of the
crime. The High Court had failed to appreciate the contentions and it merely passed a general order

2

Meenu Prakash Bhantu vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 16 March, 2023

without discussing the facts of the case. The order passed by the Additional Chief Judicial
Magistrate which again was totally non-speaking. He merely referred to the order passed by the
Sessions Judge challenging an earlier order passed by the Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate dated
6th May, 2017. The Sessions Judge had accepted the Revision Petition with certain observations and
remitted the matter back to the Trial Court for passing fresh orders and the matter was required to
be considered on its own merits by the Trial Court.

6. In support of the arguments, reliance was placed upon the Constitution Bench judgment in the
case of Hardeep Singh and Ors. Vs. State of Punjab & Ors. , (2014) 3 SCC 92.

7. On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents submitted that it is a case in which there
was fraudulent withdrawal of (cid:131)55,20,000/- (Rupees fifty five lakhs twenty thousand only). The role
of the appellant is clearly established. When the complainant received a message regarding dispatch
of a cheque book of his account, he immediately approached the bank as he had never requested for
issuance of a cheque book. However, no satisfactory reply was given by the bank. When the
complainant requested for a copy of the statement of his account with the bank, statement supplied
was either illegible or there was mis-printing and as a result of which the complainant could not
make out as to what transactions had been done from his account. The appellant being the person
responsible for supplying copies of the account, he is equally responsible in playing fraud.

8. Heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the relevant material placed on record.

9. The parameters on which additional accused could be summoned in an application filed under
Section 319 CrPC are well settled in the case of Hardeep Singh and Ors.’s case (supra) which are as
under:

“105. Power u/s 319 CrPC is a discretionary and an extraordinary power. It is to be
exercised sparingly and only in those cases where the circumstances of the case so
warrant. It is not to be exercised because the magistrate or the sessions judge is of the
opinion that some other person may also be guilty of committing that offence. Only
where strong and cogent evidence occurs against a person from the evidence laid
before the court that such power should be exercised and not in a casual and cavalier
manner.

106. Thus we hold that though only a prima facie case is to be established from the
evidence laid before the court, not necessarily tested on the anvil of cross-

examination,         it        requires        much        strong
evidence      that        near         probability     of     his

complicity. The test that has to be applied is one which is more than prima facie case
as exercised at the time of framing of charge, but short of satisfaction to an extent
that the evidence, if goes unrebutted, would lead to conviction. In the absence of such
satisfaction, the court should refrain from exercising power u/S 319 CrPC.”
(emphasis supplied)

3

Meenu Prakash Bhantu vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 16 March, 2023

10. In Sagar vs. State of U.P. & Anr. (2022) 6 SCC 389, it is stated as under:

“9. The Constitution Bench has given a caution that power under Section 319 of the
Code is a discretionary and extraordinary power which should be exercised sparingly
and only in those cases where the circumstances of the case so warrant and the
crucial test as notice above has to be applied is one which is more that prima facie
case as exercised at the time of framing of charge, but short of satisfaction to an
extent that the evidence, if goes unrebutted, would lead to conviction….”

11. If the case in hand is examined on the parameters laid down in the aforesaid
judgments, in our opinion, no case is made out against the appellant at this stage for
his summoning as an additional accused merely because he once had supplied a copy
of the statement of account to the complainant which was either dim or mis-printed.
Based on this material, opinion cannot be formed that he was in connivance with the
accused who allegedly indulged in cheating the complainant by fraudulent
withdrawal from his account. He is not authorized either to approve withdrawal or to
deal with the account of the complainant.

12. For the reasons stated aforesaid, the present appeal is allowed. The impugned
order dated 12 th October, 2017 passed by the High Court is set aside and the
application filed by the prosecution for summoning the present appellant as an
additional accused is dismissed.

….………………J. [Abhay S. Oka] ….………………J. [Rajesh Bindal] New Delhi March 16, 2023

4