Nand Lal vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 14 March, 2023

Nand Lal vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 14 March, 2023

Author: B.R. Gavai

Bench: Sanjay Karol, Vikram Nath, B.R. Gavai

REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1421 OF 2015

NAND LAL AND OTHERS                         ...APPELLANT(S)
VERSUS
THE STATE OF CHHATTISGARH                ...RESPONDENT(S)

WITH

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1470 OF 2017

CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS.          OF 2023
(Arising out of SLP(Criminal) Nos. 6134-6135 of 2019)

JUDGMENT

B.R. GAVAI, J.

1. Leave granted in SLP(Criminal) Nos. 6134-6135 of 2019.

2. These appeals assail the judgment and order dated 11th November 2014 passed by the Division
Bench of the High Court of Chhattisgarh at Bilaspur, thereby dismissing the appeals filed by the
appellants herein and confirming the judgment and order dated 24th May 2008 passed by the
Second Additional Sessions Judge, Baloda Bazar, District Raipur, Chhattisgarh (hereinafter referred
to as “the trial court”), convicting the appellants along with other accused for the offences
punishable under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short, “IPC”) along with other
offences and sentencing them to undergo life imprisonment.

3. The prosecution story, in brief, as could be gathered from the material placed on record, is thus:

On the night of 3rd November 2006, at around 07.30 PM, Naresh Kumar, accused
No. 11 had assaulted Atmaram (PW-1). After the said assault, Atmaram (PW-1) went
to the Police Station, Suhela for lodging a report. Thereafter, Naresh Kumar, accused
No.11 along with other accused, who were armed with deadly weapons, formed an
unlawful assembly, entered the house of deceased Kartikram and assaulted him as
well as Mangtin Bai (PW-2) and Khomlal (PW-9). As a result of the said assault,

1

Nand Lal vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 14 March, 2023

Kartikram died on the spot. Thereafter, Mangtin Bai (PW-2), Khomlal (PW-9) and
Purnima Bai (PW-13), wife, son and daughter-in-law of deceased Kartikram
respectively, along with neighbours Baliram Sahu (PW-3) and Jeevan Lal Sahu
(PW-6) went in a tractor to Baloda Bazar to see a doctor, who refused to treat them
unless a report was lodged at the police station.

Thereafter, a jeep was hired and they went to the Police Station, Suhela. On the basis
of the oral report (Ex. P-9), a merg report (Ex. P-10) came to be registered.
Subsequently, the First Information Report (for short, “FIR”) came to be registered.

4. On the basis of the said FIR, Inspector Kamal Singh (PW-14), Investigating Officer (IO)
conducted the investigation. After conclusion of the investigation, a charge- sheet came to be filed
against 12 accused persons before the Judicial Magistrate First Class, Baloda Bazar. Since the case
was exclusively triable by the Sessions Judge, the same was committed to the Sessions Court.

5. The learned Trial Judge, vide judgment and order dated 24th May 2008, convicted all the accused
persons as aforesaid. The Division Bench of the High Court, vide judgment and order dated 11th
November 2014, dismissed the appeals filed by the accused persons. Challenging the same, four
appeals were filed before this Court, being Criminal Appeal No. 1421 of 2015 by Nand Lal, Bhagwat
and Ramdular, accused No. 8 to 10 respectively; Criminal Appeal No. 1422 of 2015 by Paltan
Jangde, accused No. 12; Criminal Appeal No. 1470 of 2017 by Charandas Jangde, Chhannu Jangde
and Charnu Jangde, accused Nos. 5 to 7 respectively; and appeals arising out of SLP (Criminal) Nos.
6134-6135 of 2019, which were filed by Tulsi Jangde, Suresh Jangde, Dinesh Jangde, Rupesh Jangde
and Naresh Kumar, accused Nos. 1 to 4 and 11 respectively.

6. During the pendency of the appeals, Paltan Jangde, accused No.12 has died and as such, the said
appeal, being Criminal Appeal No. 1422 of 2015, has abated, vide this Court’s order dated 13th
January 2023. Tulsi Jangde, Suresh Jangde, Dinesh Jangde, Rupesh Jangde, Channu Jangde and
Charnu Jangde, appellants in appeals arising out of SLP(Criminal) Nos.6134-6135 of 2019, and
Charandas Jangde, appellant in Criminal Appeal No. 1470 of 2017, have already been released on
completion of their sentence. As such, we are concerned with the appellants in Criminal Appeal No.
1421 of 2015 and Naresh Kumar, one of the appellants in appeals arising out of SLP(Criminal)
Nos.6134- 6135 of 2019.

7. We have heard Shri Vikas Upadhyay, learned counsel appearing on behalf of accused Nos. 8 to 10,
Shri Renjith B. Marar, learned amicus curiae and Shri Sumeer Sodhi, learned counsel appearing on
behalf of the respondent-State.

8. Shri Upadhyay submits that the names of accused Nos. 8 to 10, i.e., Nand Lal, Bhagwat and
Ramdular, have not been mentioned in any of the contemporaneous documents like the merg
panchnama, inquest panchnama and spot panchnama. He submits that, whereas the names of all
other accused have been specifically mentioned in the aforesaid documents, there is no mention of
the names of accused Nos. 8 to 10 in these documents. It is for the first time that the names of these
three accused appear in the FIR. The learned counsel submits that though the incident had occurred

2

Nand Lal vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 14 March, 2023

at 08.30 PM on 3rd November 2006, the FIR was alleged to have been lodged at 03.10 AM on 4th
November 2006, which creates a doubt that the FIR is a fabricated document and the original FIR
has been suppressed by the prosecution. He further submits that the inordinate delay in registering
the FIR has also not been explained by the prosecution. The learned counsel submits that all the
three witnesses i.e., Mangtin Bai (PW-2), Khomlal (PW-9) and Purnima Bai (PW-13) are interested
witnesses. It is further submitted that the evidence of these three witnesses is also inconsistent. The
learned Counsel, therefore, submits that the conviction was purely on the basis of such interested
witnesses, whose testimony is not cogent and trustworthy, and is not sustainable unless there is
some corroboration of their testimony.

9. Shri Upadhyay submits that, in any case, all the three eye witnesses, i.e., Mangtin Bai (PW-2),
Khomlal (PW-9) and Purnima Bai (PW-13) have made only omnibus allegations against the
appellants herein and no specific overt act attributable to the present appellants is mentioned. The
learned counsel further submits that the incident happened at night and it is also admitted that
there was a power cut. As such, the testimonies of all the three witnesses that they had seen the
incident in the moonlight and in the light of a lamp cannot be said to be trustworthy. It is further
submitted that, since PW-9 himself had admitted that he had hidden himself in a grain-store
(kothi), it is improbable that he has witnessed the incident.

10. Shri Marar submits that as a matter of fact, Naresh Kumar, accused No. 11 has received grievous
injuries. It is submitted that PW-14, IO has admitted that Naresh Kumar, accused No. 11 had
injuries on his head, ankle of left leg and the middle finger of his right hand. He submitted that even
the Trial Court has found that accused No.11 Naresh Kumar had received grievous injuries and that
he had gone to Police Station, Suhela to lodge the report. He lodged the report at the said Police
Station and, thereafter, he was sent to Bhatapara Hospital for treatment. It is submitted that the
prosecution has not explained the injuries received by accused No. 11 Naresh Kumar. It is submitted
that, in any case, the prosecution has suppressed the information received from accused No. 11
Naresh Kumar. It is further submitted that it is improbable that accused No. 11 Naresh Kumar, after
receiving such grievous injuries, could have taken part in the assault against the deceased and PWs
2, 9 and 13.

11. Shri Sodhi, on the contrary, submits that all the three eye witnesses have clearly implicated all
the appellants. It is submitted that PWs 2 and 9 have specifically implicated the present appellants.
It is submitted that all the three witnesses are rustic villagers. Therefore, merely because there are
some discrepancies in their evidence cannot be a ground to reject their testimonies. He further
submits that merely because the witnesses are interested witnesses cannot be a ground to discard
their testimonies, if their evidence is found to be trustworthy, reliable and cogent. Shri Sodhi
submits that, in any case, the witnesses are injured witnesses and as such, their presence at the spot
cannot be disputed. It is further submitted that merely because there is some delay in lodging the
FIR, it cannot be a ground to discard the prosecution case, which has been proved beyond
reasonable doubt.

12. Shri Sodhi, relying on various judgments of this Court, submits that for a conviction under
Section 302 of the IPC with the aid of Section 149 of the IPC, what is relevant is whether the accused

3

Nand Lal vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 14 March, 2023

was a member of unlawful assembly, and not whether he actually took active part in the crime or
not. He further submits that mere non-explanation of injuries on the person of the accused would
not be fatal to the prosecution case.

13. With the assistance of learned counsel for the parties, we have examined the material placed on
record.

14. From the medical evidence, it cannot be disputed that the death of deceased Kartikram is
homicidal. The injuries on PWs 2 and 9 are also not seriously disputed by the appellants.

15. From the evidence of prosecution witnesses, it can be seen that the incident has taken place in
two parts. The first part is with regard to the assault on Atmaram (PW-1) by accused No. 11 Naresh
Kumar, whereas the second part is with regard to the assault by the accused persons on the deceased
and PWs 2, 9 and 13. Atmaram (PW-1), in his evidence, states that on 3rd November 2006, when he
was at his house, accused No. 11 Naresh Kumar came to his home and started abusing him. PW-1
stated that accused No. 11 Naresh Kumar was under the influence of liquor. Accused No. 11 Naresh
Kumar told PW-1 that he had gone to his house to make a complaint and he had extorted an amount
of Rs.5,000/- from him after plying him with alcohol. Thereafter, accused No. 11 Naresh Kumar
started assaulting PW-1 with the lathi in his hand. Then, PW-1 states that accused No. 11 Naresh
Kumar left his place with a threat that he would return along with other members of his family. It is
further stated by Atmaram (PW-1) that, thereafter, he went to lodge a report to Suhela Police Station
along with his wife, son and daughter.

16. Atmaram (PW-1) further stated that when he returned from the Police Station, his son came and
told him that PW- 1’s father was murdered and PW-1 again went to the Police Station to lodge the
report. As such, it is clear that PW-1 is not an eye witness to the second incident.

17. Mangtin Bai (PW-2) is the wife of the deceased Kartikram. She, in her evidence, stated that all
the accused persons had entered her house and started abusing them. Her husband was in the TV
room. All the accused persons started assaulting her husband in the said TV room. Thereafter, they
came to the second room where nobody was there. Her son had hidden himself in a dhan kothi. The
accused persons went there and started assaulting her son. Thereafter, she went to inform her
neighbour, Jeevan Lal Sahu (PW-6). She, along with PWs 9 and 13, then went by a tractor to Baloda
Bazar. They could not get treatment there since no report had been lodged with the police. They took
a jeep from there and went to Suhela Police Station. From there, they were taken to Bhatapara
Hospital for treatment.

18. In the cross-examination of Mangtin Bai (PW-2), on being asked as to whether she knows the
relatives of the accused persons present in the court, she stated that she knows them but she cannot
name them.

19. Khomlal (PW-9) is the injured son of the deceased Kartikram. His evidence is also of similar
nature. He, too, testifies about the earlier incident pertaining to Atmaram (PW-1). He states that
after Atmaram (PW-1) went to the Police Station at around 08.30 PM, all the accused persons came

4

Nand Lal vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 14 March, 2023

to his house. He states that all the accused persons entered the room of his father and started
assaulting his father. He, therefore, went to hide himself in the dhan kothi. The accused persons
came there and assaulted him and thus, he received severe injuries. Thereafter, they went to Baloda
Bazar for treatment. However, the doctor refused to treat them. As such, they went to Suhela Police
Station and lodged the report. In his cross-examination, he admits that in the merg report lodged by
him, there is no mention of Nand Lal, Bhagwant and Ramdular, i.e., accused Nos. 8 to 10
respectively. Though he states that he had informed the police of all the details, it is only the police
who can say why the names of the aforesaid three appellants are not there.

20. Purnima (PW-13), wife of Khomal (PW-9), also states that Atmaram (PW-1) was going to the
Police Station to lodge a report at around 7:00 PM. She states that, between 8:00 PM to 8:30 PM,
the accused persons, viz. Charandad Jangde, Tulsi Jangde, Charnu Jangde, Bhagwat and others,
came to their house, where they first assaulted her mother-in-law, Mangtin Bai (PW-2), with a stick.
Thereafter she repeats the same version as given by Mangtin Bai (PW-2) and Khomlal (PW-9).

21. In his statement recorded under Section 313 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 (for short,
“Cr. P.C.”), accused No. 11 Naresh Kumar specifically stated that he had received grievous injuries
after he was assaulted by Atmaram (PW-1) and, thereafter, he went to the Police Station with
accused No. 7 Charnu Jangde, accused No. 12 Paltan Jangde, Ashwini and Vinod, from where he
was sent to Bhatapara Hospital for treatment.

22. It will be pertinent to refer to the medical examination of accused No. 11 Naresh Kumar
conducted by Dr. Anita Verma (PW-10). The injuries sustained by him are thus:

• “Lacerated wound of 6x1x0.5 cm on the left parietal region of scalp.

• Multiple contusions on the back, left shoulder, left arm, varying in size from 5 to 20
cm in length and 2 to 4 cm in breath.

• Abrasion of 3x0.5 cm on left leg.

• Swelling, tenderness and deformity on prox.

Phalanx of right middle finger.

• Abrasion of 2x0.2cm on the forehead.

• Abrasion of 1 x0.2 cm on the left side of forehead.

• Abrasion of 2x0.5 cm on the right ankle. • Fracture of left parietal bone, • Fracture
in left shoulder.

• Fracture of proximal phalanx of middle ring finger.

5

Nand Lal vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 14 March, 2023

• Fracture of shaft of fibula at junction upper 1/3rd & middle 1/3rd.”

23. PW-14, IO admits that in the merg intimation report, the names of Nand Lal, Bhagwat and
Ramdular, i.e., accused Nos. 8 to 10 respectively are not mentioned. He further admits that in the
spot panchnama also, their names are not mentioned. He admits in his cross-examination that in
Ex. D-9, the incident with accused No. 11 Naresh Kumar is mentioned to have happened at 08.30
PM on 3rd November 2006. He further admits that accused No. 11 Naresh Kumar had grievous
injuries on his head, ankle of left leg and the middle finger of the right hand. He further admits that
Naresh Kumar was taken from Police Station to the doctor for examination at 11.45 PM.

24. It can thus be seen from the evidence of PW-14, IO that the police had information about the
incident at least prior to 11.45 PM on 3rd November 2006. No doubt that mere delay in registering
FIR would not be fatal to the prosecution case. The effect of delay in lodging the FIR would differ in
the facts and circumstances of each case. In the present case, admittedly, accused No. 11 Naresh
Kumar had received grievous injuries which have not been explained by the prosecution. A specific
defence has been taken by accused No. 11 Naresh Kumar that when he was coming after consuming
liquor, he was assaulted by Atmaram (PW-1). Thereafter, he went to the Police Station along with
accused No. 7 Charnu Jangde, accused No. 12 Paltan Jangde, Ashwini and Vinod, whereafter he was
referred for medical treatment. Looking at the injuries of accused No. 11 Naresh Kumar, it appears
difficult that he could have taken part in the second part of the incident. The prosecution has
suppressed the first report lodged by Atmaram (PW-1) as well as by accused No. 11 Naresh Kumar. If
Naresh Kumar was examined at 11.45 PM, the police must have had some information about the
incident at least by 11.00 PM. As such, there is a delay of at least four hours in lodging the FIR.

25. Believing the contents of the FIR that the incident has taken place at around 08.30 PM and that
the injured persons had reached Baloda Bazar at around 10-11 PM where they were informed that
they could not be treated unless a report was lodged, a further delay of around four to five hours in
lodging the FIR has not been explained. The distance between Baloda Bazar and Suhela Police
Station is approximately 15 Kms. It has come on record that there is an all-weather road connecting
the two places. As such, at the most, it would take around 30-40 minutes to reach Suhela Police
Station from Baloda Bazar. This delay of four hours in lodging the FIR is not at all explained.

26. We will first consider the issue with regard to non- explanation of injuries sustained by accused
No. 11 Naresh Kumar. In the case of Lakshmi Singh and Others v. State of Bihar1, which case also
arose out of a conviction under Section 302 read with Section 149 of the IPC, this Court had an
occasion to consider the issue of non-explanation of (1976) 4 SCC 394 injuries sustained by the
accused. This Court, after referring to the earlier judgments on the issue, observed thus:

“12. …….It seems to us that in a murder case, the non-explanation of the injuries
sustained by the accused at about the time of the occurrence or in the course of
altercation is a very important circumstance from which the court can draw the
following inferences:

6

Nand Lal vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 14 March, 2023

“(1) that the prosecution has suppressed the genesis and the origin of the occurrence
and has thus not presented the true version;

(2) that the witnesses who have denied the presence of the injuries on the person of
the accused are lying on a most material point and therefore their evidence is
unreliable;

(3) that in case there is a defence version which explains the injuries on the person of
the accused it is rendered probable so as to throw doubt on the prosecution case.”
The omission on the part of the prosecution to explain the injuries on the person of
the accused assumes much greater importance where the evidence consists of
interested or inimical witnesses or where the defence gives a version which competes
in probability with that of the prosecution one. In the instant case, when it is held, as
it must be, that the appellant Dasrath Singh received serious injuries which have not
been explained by the prosecution, then it will be difficult for the court to rely on the
evidence of PWs 1 to 4 and 6, more particularly, when some of these witnesses have
lied by stating that they did not see any injuries on the person of the accused. Thus
neither the Sessions Judge nor the High Court appears to have given due
consideration to this important lacuna or infirmity appearing in the prosecution case.
We must hasten to add that as held by this Court in State of Gujarat v. Bai Fatima
[(1975) 2 SCC 7 :

1975 SCC (Cri) 384] there may be cases where the non-explanation of the injuries by
the prosecution may not affect the prosecution case. This principle would obviously
apply to cases where the injuries sustained by the accused are minor and superficial
or where the evidence is so clear and cogent, so independent and disinterested, so
probable, consistent and creditworthy, that it far outweighs the effect of the omission
on the part of the prosecution to explain the injuries. The present, however, is
certainly not such a case, and the High Court was, therefore, in error in brushing
aside this serious infirmity in the prosecution case on unconvincing premises.”

27. A similar view with regard to non-explanation of injuries has been taken by this Court in the
cases of State of Rajasthan v. Madho and Another2, State of M.P. v. Mishrilal (Dead) and Others3
and Nagarathinam and Others v. State (Represented by Inspector of Police)4.

28. Undisputedly, in the present case, the injuries sustained by accused No. 11 Naresh Kumar cannot
be considered to be minor or superficial. The witnesses are also interested witnesses, inasmuch as
they are close relatives of 1991 Supp (2) SCC 396 (2003) 9 SCC 426 (2006) 9 SCC 57 the deceased.
That there was previous enmity between the two families, on account of election of Sarpanch, has
come on record. As observed by this Court in the case of Ramashish Ray v. Jagdish Singh5, previous
enmity is a double-edged sword. On one hand, it can provide motive and on the other hand, the
possibility of false implication cannot be ruled out.

7

Nand Lal vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 14 March, 2023

29. We have already seen herein above the injuries sustained by accused No. 11 Naresh Kumar.
Much prior to lodging of the FIR at 03.15 AM on 4th November 2006 by Khomlal, the Police had
taken accused No. 11 Naresh Kumar for medical examination. The memo forwarding accused No. 11
Naresh Kumar for medical examination to Medical Officer mentions that accused No. 11 had
informed the police that at around 08.30 PM, he was assaulted by Atmaram (PW-1). Undisputedly,
the prosecution has suppressed information with regard to the said incident. The prosecution has
also suppressed the FIR lodged by Atmaram (PW-1). It is thus clear that the prosecution has
attempted to suppress the real genesis of the incident. Taking into consideration this aspect of the
matter, coupled with the non-explanation of the (2005) 10 SCC 498 injuries sustained by accused
No. 11 Naresh Kumar, we are of the considered view that accused No. 11 Naresh Kumar is entitled to
benefit of doubt.

30. That leaves us with the appeal of the other 3 accused, namely accused No. 8 Nandlal, accused
No. 9 Bhagwat and accused No. 10 Ramdular. For considering their case we will have to take into
consideration the delay in lodging the FIR. No doubt that in each and every case, delay in lodging
the FIR would not be fatal to the prosecution case. It will depend upon facts and circumstances of
each case. In the present case, as already discussed hereinabove, assuming that the incident had
taken place at 08.30 PM and the injured persons were at Baloda Bazar between 10-11 PM, and
taking into consideration that the distance between Baloda Bazar to Suhela Police Station is 15
Kms., a delay of four hours in lodging the FIR would cast a serious doubt on the genuineness of the
prosecution case. It becomes more glaring since accused No. 11 Naresh Kumar had, in any case,
informed the police about the incident prior to 11.45 PM. The suppression of the FIR lodged by him
with respect to the attack on him by Atmaram (PW-1), so also the suppression of the FIR lodged by
Atmaram (PW-1) against accused No. 11 Naresh Kumar, adds to the doubt.

31. We may gainfully refer to the following observations of this Court in the case of Ramesh Baburao
Devaskar and Others v. State of Maharashtra6:

“19. In a case of this nature, enmity between two groups is accepted. In a situation of
this nature, whether the first information report was ante- timed or not also requires
serious consideration. First information report, in a case of this nature, provides for a
valuable piece of evidence although it may not be a substantial evidence. The reason
for insisting on lodging of first information report without undue delay is to obtain
the earlier information in regard to the circumstances in which the crime had been
committed, the name of the accused, the parts played by them, the weapons which
had been used as also the names of eyewitnesses. Where the parties are at
loggerheads and there had been instances which resulted in death of one or the other,
lodging of a first information report is always considered to be vital.” As held by this
Court, the FIR is a valuable piece of evidence, although it may not be substantial
evidence. The immediate lodging of an FIR removes suspicion with regard to over
implication of number of persons, particularly when (2007) 13 SCC 501 the case
involved a fight between two groups. When the parties are at loggerheads, the
immediate lodging of the FIR provides credence to the prosecution case.

8

Nand Lal vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 14 March, 2023

32. Undisputedly, the present case rests on the evidence of interested witnesses. No doubt that two
of them are injured witnesses. This Court, in the case of Vadivelu Thevar v. The State of Madras7,
has observed thus:

“11. ……Hence, in our opinion, it is a sound and well-established rule of law that the
court is concerned with the quality and not with the quantity of the evidence
necessary for proving or disproving a fact. Generally speaking, oral testimony in this
context may be classified into three categories, namely:

(1) Wholly reliable.

(2) Wholly unreliable.

(3) Neither wholly reliable nor wholly unreliable.

12. In the first category of proof, the court should have no difficulty in coming to its conclusion
either way — it may convict or may acquit on the testimony of a single witness, if it is found to be
above reproach or suspicion of interestedness, incompetence or subornation. In the second
category, the court equally has no difficulty in coming to its conclusion. It is in the third category of
cases, that the court has to be circumspect and has to look for corroboration in material particulars
by reliable testimony, direct or circumstantial……” [1957] SCR 981

33. It could thus be seen that in the category of “wholly reliable” witness, there is no difficulty for the
prosecution to press for conviction on the basis of the testimony of such a witness. In case of “wholly
unreliable” witness, again, there is no difficulty, inasmuch as no conviction could be made on the
basis of oral testimony provided by a “wholly unreliable” witness. The real difficulty comes in case of
the third category of evidence which is partly reliable and partly unreliable. In such cases, the court
is required to be circumspect and separate the chaff from the grain, and seek further corroboration
from reliable testimony, direct or circumstantial.

34. Undisputedly, in the present case, PWs 2 and 9 are injured witnesses. As such, their presence
cannot be disputed. However, as already observed hereinabove, in case of proven previous enmity, a
possibility of false implication cannot be ruled out. In the present case, it would be seen that the
entire family of accused No. 12 Paltan Jangde has been roped in. Though PW-2 has identified and
named the accused in her cross-examination, she has stated that, though she recognized the
relatives of the accused persons, she does not remember their names. As such, the possibility of
implicating the entire family of Paltan cannot be ruled out.

35. As already discussed hereinabove, the names of Nand Lal, Bhagwat and Ramdular are not
mentioned in the merg report, which was lodged prior to the lodging of FIR, so also their names are
not found in the inquest panchnama and spot panchnama. Taking into consideration the delay in
lodging the FIR, with the circumstance of their names not being mentioned in the contemporaneous
documents, the possibility of the said accused being falsely implicated cannot be ruled out. In our
view, the conviction of these accused purely on the basis of oral testimony of the interested

9

witnesses, without sufficient corroboration, would not be sustainable.

Nand Lal vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 14 March, 2023

36. The prosecution has examined Baliram Sahu (PW-3), Inder Sahu (PW-5), Jeewan Lal (PW-6)
and Budheram (PW-8), none of whom have supported the prosecution case. According to PWs 2, 9
and 13, it was the witness Baliram Sahu (PW-3) who had arranged for the tractor to take the injured
persons to Baloda Bazar. However, he has stated that though Mangtin Bai (PW-2) came to his place
to inform him about the incident, she had not informed him as to which of the accused had
assaulted the deceased and the injured persons. In our view, therefore, the said appellants would
also be entitled to benefit of doubt.

37. We are, therefore, of the considered view that the appellants Nand Lal, Bhagwat, Ramdular and
Naresh Kumar are entitled to benefit of doubt.

38. In the result, we pass the following order:

(i)     The appeals are allowed;

(ii)    The judgment and order dated 11th November 2014

passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of Chhattisgarh at Bilaspur, and the judgment and
order dated 24th May 2008 passed by the trial court are quashed and set aside; and

(iii) The appellants are acquitted of the charges charged with and are directed to be set at liberty
forthwith, if not required in any other case.

39. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.

40. Before we part with the judgment, we must place on record our appreciation for the valuable
assistance rendered by Shri Vikas Upadhyay, learned counsel appearing on behalf of accused Nos. 8
to 10 and Shri Sumeer Sodhi, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent-State. A special
mention needs to be made of the painstaking efforts taken by Shri Renjith B. Marar, learned
counsel, who was appointed through the Supreme Court Legal Services Authority as an amicus
curiae for accused No. 11.

…..….......................J. [B.R. GAVAI] …….........................J. [VIKRAM NATH] …….........................J.
[SANJAY KAROL] NEW DELHI;

MARCH 14, 2023.

10