Office Of The Odisha Lokayukta vs Pradeep Kumar Panigrahi on 23 February, 2023

Office Of The Odisha Lokayukta vs Pradeep Kumar Panigrahi on
23 February, 2023

Author: Ajay Rastogi

Bench: Bela M. Trivedi, Ajay Rastogi

REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S).               OF 2023
(Arising out of SLP(Civil) No(s). 6261−6262 of 2021)

OFFICE OF THE ODISHA
LOKAYUKTA                                              ….APPELLANT(S)

VERSUS

DR. PRADEEP KUMAR PANIGRAHI
AND OTHERS                                             ….RESPONDENT(S)

JUDGMENT

Rastogi, J.

1. Leave granted.

2. The instant appeals are directed against the judgment dated 3rd February, 2021 passed by the
Division Bench of the High Court of Orissa at Cuttack setting aside Order dated 11 th December,
2020 passed by the Odisha Lokayukta initiating to conduct a preliminary inquiry in exercise of
power conferred under Section 20(1) of the Odisha Lokayukta Act, 2014(hereinafter being referred
to as the “Act 2014”) on a complaint dated 9 th December, 2020 received from Mr.Ranjan Kumar
Das, Deputy Superintendent of Police, Vigilance Cell Unit, Bhubaneswar indicating the alleged
corruption against respondent no. 1 who is the elected Member of the Legislative Assembly of
Gopalpur Constituency directing the Directorate of Vigilance, Cuttack to conduct a preliminary
inquiry and submit a report to the Lokayukta.

1

Office Of The Odisha Lokayukta vs Pradeep Kumar Panigrahi on 23 February, 2023

3. The review petition filed at the instance of the appellant on the premise that Odisha Lokayukta
was never heard and no opportunity of hearing has been afforded before passing of the impugned
Order dated 3rd February, 2021 and it was in violation of the principles of natural justice, came to
be dismissed by passing a non−speaking Order dated 5th April, 2021.

4. Respondent no. 1 is an elected Member of the Legislative Assembly. Mr. Ranjan Kumar Das, the
then Deputy Superintendent of Police, Vigilance Cell Unit, Bhubaneswar, made a complaint dated
9th December, 2020 indicating serious allegations of alleged corruption against Member of the
Odisha Legislative Assembly of Gopalpur Constituency. Along with the complaint, supporting
documents were also annexed. The Odisha Lokayukta, after taking into consideration the contents
of the complaint and the supporting documents annexed thereto, in exercise of power conferred
under Section 20(1) of the Act, 2014 directed the Directorate of Vigilance, Odisha, Cuttack to
conduct a preliminary inquiry against respondent no. 1 and submit a report within two months with
a further direction that the Directorate of Vigilance must ensure that during preliminary inquiry, the
mandate of Section 20(2) has to be complied with and further directed the Office of Lokayukta to
make available all the relevant record to the Directorate of Vigilance for compliance.

5. Immediately on a reference made by the Odisha Lokayukta by its Order dated 11th December,
2020 directing the Directorate of Vigilance to conduct a preliminary inquiry against respondent no.
1 and calling upon the report, came to be challenged by respondent no. 1 by filing writ petition
before the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution. Although the Office of Lokayukta was
impleaded as one of respondent before the High Court but as informed to this Court, no notice was
issued to them and on the first date of hearing, without even affording opportunity of hearing to the
appellant to submit their written response, the Division Bench of the High Court under Order dated
3 rd February, 2021 proceeded on the premise that entrusting Directorate of Vigilance to conduct
preliminary inquiry is not in terms of the mandate of Section 20(1) and set aside the Order dated 11
th December, 2020 with a liberty to the Lokayukta to conduct preliminary inquiry, if so advised,
against respondent no. 1 by the inquiry wing of the Lokayukta with a further liberty to proceed in
conformity with the requirements of Sections 20(2) and 20(3) after the preliminary report being
furnished by the inquiry wing of the Lokayukta.

6. A review filed by the Lokayukta against the Order impugned dated 3rd February, 2021 came to be
dismissed by a non−speaking order dated 5th April, 2021 which is a subject matter of challenge in
the appeals before us.

7. Learned counsel for the appellant submits that the order impugned dated 3rd February, 2021 is in
violation of the principles of nature justice and the finding has been recorded without affording an
opportunity of hearing to the appellant and that apart, it is not in conformity with the mandate of
Section 20(1) of the Act 2014.

8. Learned counsel further submits that Section 20(1) provides an option to the Lokayukta, who, on
receipt of a complaint, if order to hold a preliminary inquiry against any public servant, may
conduct either by its enquiry wing or by any agency to ascertain as to whether there exists any prima
facie case for proceeding in the matter any further. If the relevant provisions of the Act are being

2

Office Of The Odisha Lokayukta vs Pradeep Kumar Panigrahi on 23 February, 2023

looked into, particularly Chapter VIII of the Act 2014, any agency as referred to under Section 25
includes the State Vigilance and Crime Branch for the purpose of conducting preliminary inquiry or
investigation, as the case may be, and that is further strengthened by the procedure for conducting a
preliminary inquiry or investigation envisaged under Section 28 wherein it is open for the
Lokayukta to conduct preliminary inquiry or investigation through the agency of the Government.
In the given facts and circumstances, the finding which has been recorded by the Division Bench of
the High Court that entrusting to conduct preliminary inquiry by the Directorate of Vigilance under
Order dated 11 th December, 2020 is not in conformity with the Act 2014, needs to be interfered
with by this Court.

9. Learned counsel further submits that calling upon the inquiry wing or any agency to conduct a
preliminary inquiry is only for a limited purpose to ascertain whether there exists prima facie case to
proceed in the matter. The Legislature was conscious of the fact that if it may cause any prejudice to
the incumbent against whom the prima facie case has been registered and before any further action
is being taken or to make any recommendation to proceed either to conduct investigation or initiate
a departmental inquiry, it is incumbent upon the Lokayukta to afford an opportunity of hearing to
the public servant as referred to under Sections 20(2) and 20(3) of the Act, 2014. A complete inbuilt
procedure has been prescribed under Chapter VII for conducting preliminary inquiry and
investigation within the powers of the Lokayukta. Chapter VIII prescribes not only the purpose of
conducting preliminary inquiry and investigation but also in reaching to a final conclusion even at
the stage of registering of the charge−sheet as referred to under Section 20(8) of the Act, 2014.

10. Learned counsel further submits that no adverse or prejudicial action was taken by the appellant
in initiating to conduct a preliminary inquiry under its Order dated 11th December 2020, thus the
interference made by the High Court, at this stage, in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 226 of
the Constitution of India was neither valid nor justified.

11. Per contra, learned counsel for the respondents, on the other hand, submits that a complaint was
made by the Deputy Superintendent of Police, Vigilance Cell, Bhubaneshwar dated 9 th December,
2020, who was the Officer of Directorate of Vigilance, Cuttack, Odisha, Cuttack and direction was
given to the Directorate of Vigilance, Odisha to conduct a preliminary inquiry by Order dated 11th
December, 2020, the decision itself was in violation of the principles of natural justice. Once the
complaint was made by the officer of the Directorate of Vigilance, at least entrusting the preliminary
inquiry to be conducted by another Officer of the Directorate of Vigilance, may be senior in the
ladder, was not legally justified. The Officer of the Department has made a complaint on 9th
December, 2020 and other officer is called upon to conduct a preliminary inquiry as stated that one
cannot be a judge in its own cause and that being the reason, the Division Bench of the High Court
has permitted the Lokayukta to conduct an inquiry by the inquiry wing of the Lokayukta and
administrative bias can’t be ruled out of the Directorate of Vigilance who is to conduct a preliminary
inquiry.

12. Learned counsel further submits that since the respondents were duly represented and the
Advocate General of the State appeared along with the State counsel, opportunity of hearing was
afforded to the appellant and plea of the principles of natural justice as prayed for by the appellant

3

Office Of The Odisha Lokayukta vs Pradeep Kumar Panigrahi on 23 February, 2023

being violated, in the facts and circumstances, does not hold good. That apart, review petition came
to be rightly dismissed as the appellant failed to justify any manifest error being committed by the
Division Bench of the High Court under its Order dated 3rd February, 2021 which may call for our
interference.

13. It may be noticed that while issuing notice by this Court on 23rd April, 2021, operation of the
impugned order was stayed. In furtherance of the stay granted by this Court, it is informed that the
appellant has proceeded further and after the preliminary inquiry report being submitted to the
Lokayukta by the Officer Shri P.K. Naik on 28th May, 2021 and after affording opportunity of
hearing to the appellant, a detailed Order was passed by the Lokayukta under Section 20(3)(a) dated
27th September, 2021 directing the Directorate of Vigilance to carry out investigation. In
furtherance thereof, Directorate of Vigilance submitted a detailed report of investigation to the
Lokayukta on 7th June, 2022, however, no further action has been initiated and awaiting orders of
this Court which is indicated in the order dated 24th June, 2022 placed on record along with IA No.
89629 of 2022.

14. We have heard learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance perused the material
available on record.

15. Before we proceed to examine the question raised in the instant appeals, it may be apposite to
first take a bird’s eye view of the Scheme of the Act, 2014.

16. The Act, 2014 has been enacted by the legislature of the State of Odisha having been assented to
by the President on the 16 th January, 2015 with an object to provide for the establishment of the
body of Lokayukta for the State of Odisha to inquire into allegations of corruption against public
functionaries and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. The Act is applicable to the
public servants of the State of Odisha serving in and outside the State and the public servants under
the control of Government of Odisha.

17. A ‘complaint’ has been defined under Section 2(d), and the term ‘preliminary inquiry’ and ‘public
servant’ under Sections 2(l) and 2(n) of the Act 2014 which are stated as follows:− “2. (1) In this Act,
unless the context otherwise requires,— ……

(d) “complaint” means a complaint, made in such form as may be prescribed, alleging that a public
servant has committed an offence punishable under the Prevention of Corruption Act,1988;

……

(l) “preliminary inquiry” means an inquiry conducted under this Act; ……

(n) “public servant” means a person referred to in clauses (a) to (h) of sub− section (1) of section 14
but does not include a public servant in respect of whom the jurisdiction is exercisable by any court
or other authority under the Army Act, 1950, the Air Force Act, 1950, the Navy Act, 1957 and the
Coast Guard Act, 1978 or the procedure is applicable to such public servant under those Acts;

4

Office Of The Odisha Lokayukta vs Pradeep Kumar Panigrahi on 23 February, 2023

…….”.

18. Chapter VII prescribes the procedure in respect of preliminary inquiry and investigation, the
relevant part of which is reproduced as under:− “20. (1) The Lokayukta, on receipt of a complaint, if
it decides to proceed further, may order—

(a) preliminary inquiry against any public servant by its Inquiry Wing or any agency to ascertain
whether there exists a prima facie case for proceeding in the matter; or

(b) investigation by any agency or authority empowered under any law to investigate, where there
exists a prima facie case:

Provided that any investigation under this clause shall be ordered only if in the
opinion of the Lokayukta there is substantial material relating to the existence of a
prima facie case or any earlier statutory investigation or enquiry regarding the same
complaint reveals that a prima facie case exists:

Provided further that before ordering an investigation under this clause, the
Lokayukta shall call for the explanation of the public servant and views of the
competent authority, so as to determine whether there exists a prima facie case for
investigation:

Provided also that a decision to order investigation under this clause shall be taken
by a bench constituted by the Chairperson under section 16.

(2) During the preliminary inquiry referred to in sub−section (1), the Inquiry Wing or
any agency shall conduct a preliminary inquiry and on the basis of material,
information and documents collected, seek the comments on the allegations made in
the complaint from the public servant and competent authority and after obtaining
the comments of the concerned public servant and competent authority, submit,
within sixty days from the date of receipt of the reference, a report to the Lokayukta.

(3) A bench consisting of not less than three Members of the Lokayukta shall
consider every report received under sub−section (2) from the Inquiry Wing or any
agency and after giving an opportunity of being heard to the public servant, decide as
to whether there exists a prima facie case, and make recommendations to proceed
with one or more of the following actions, namely:

—

(a) investigation by any agency (including any special investigation agency);

(b) initiation of the departmental proceedings or any other appropriate action against
the concerned public servant by the competent authority;

5

Office Of The Odisha Lokayukta vs Pradeep Kumar Panigrahi on 23 February, 2023

(c) closure of the proceedings against the public servant and take action to proceed
against the complainant under section 46.

(4) The promotion and other service benefits of a public servant mentioned in clauses
(e) to (h) of sub−section (1) of section 14 shall not be affected until the public servant
is put under suspension on recommendation of the Lokayukta under section 32 or
charge sheet is filed after completion of investigation under clause (a) of sub−section
(3) or a charge memo is issued against the said public servant in a disciplinary
proceeding initiated on the recommendation of the Lokayukta under clause (b) of
sub−section (3).

(5) Every preliminary inquiry referred to in sub−section (1) shall ordinarily be
completed within a period of ninety days and for reasons to be recorded in writing,
within a further period of ninety days from the date of receipt of the complaint.

(6) In case the Lokayukta decides to proceed to investigate into the complaint, it
shall, by order in writing, direct any investigating agency (including any special
agency) to carry out the investigation as expeditiously as possible and complete the
investigation within a period of six months from the date of its order:

Provided that the Lokayukta, for the reasons to be recorded in writing, may extend
the said period by a further period not exceeding six months at a time and for the
maximum period of two years.

(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 173 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, any investigating agency (including any special agency) shall, in
respect of cases referred to it by the Lokayukta, submit the investigation report to the
Lokayukta.

(8) A bench consisting of not less than three Members of the Lokayukta shall
consider every report received by it under sub−section (7) from any investigating
agency (including any special agency) and may, decide as to—

(a) filing of charge−sheet or closure report before the Special Court against the public
servant;

(b) initiating the departmental proceedings or any other appropriate action against
the concerned public servant by the competent authority.

(9) The Lokayukta may, after taking a decision under sub−section (8) on the filing of
the charge sheet, direct its Prosecution Wing to initiate prosecution in a Special Court
in respect of cases investigated by any investigating agency (including any special
agency).

6

Office Of The Odisha Lokayukta vs Pradeep Kumar Panigrahi on 23 February, 2023

…..”

19. Section 20 provides an inbuilt mechanism laying down the procedure to be followed in holding
preliminary inquiry and investigation which the Lokayukta, in the facts and circumstances, on
receipt of a complaint may decide − either order for conducting preliminary inquiry against the
public servant by its inquiry wing or any agency to ascertain whether there exists a prima facie case
for proceeding in the matter; or direct to hold an investigation by any agency or authority
empowered under any law to investigate, to record its satisfaction whether there exists a prima facie
case.

20. Sub−sections (2), (3) and (4) provide the procedure which has to be followed by the inquiry wing
or any agency which has been asked to ascertain the fact as to whether there exists prima facie case
for proceeding in the matter. Such report is placed before a Bench consisting of not less than three
members of the Lokayukta to consider the same under sub−section (2) from the inquiry wing or any
agency and after affording an opportunity of being heard to the public servant, may recommend to
proceed with one or more of the actions as provided under Clauses (a), (b) or (c) of sub−section (3)
to hold departmental action against the public servant. Sub−section (5) prescribes the time schedule
of 90 days under which preliminary inquiry has to be concluded. Sub−section (6) provides the
action to be taken to carry out the investigation as expeditiously as possible and complete the
investigation within a period of six months. Under sub−section(7), notwithstanding anything
contained in Section 173 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the investigating agency may
submit the investigation report to the Lokayukta. Sub−sections (8) and (9) provide the procedure to
be followed after investigating agency has submitted its report for taking further action.

21. Chapter VIII provides the power of the Lokayukta. Under Section 25, the power of
superintendence and direction over the investigating agency including the State Vigilance and Crime
Branch in respect of the matters in so far as they relate to the investigation made by such agency has
been entrusted to Lokayukta.

22. Section 27 clarifies that for the purpose of any preliminary inquiry, the inquiry wing of the
Lokayukta holds powers of a civil Court, under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and any
proceedings before the Lokayukta shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of
Section 193 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.

23. Section 28 authorise the Lokayukta to conduct any preliminary inquiry or investigation and
utilize the services of any officer or organization or investigation agency of the Government.

24. The Act, in fact, is a complete code putting in place the procedure under which the Lokayukta
under the Act, 2014 within its territorial jurisdiction holds the authority to adopt a mechanism in
reference to public servants of the State of Odisha serving in and outside the State and the public
servants under the control of Government of Odisha to inquire into allegations of corruption against
the public functionaries and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

7

Office Of The Odisha Lokayukta vs Pradeep Kumar Panigrahi on 23 February, 2023

25. Mr. Ranjan Kumar Das, Deputy Superintendent of Police, Vigilance Cell Unit, Bhubaneswar was
not a person interested but as an informant submitted a complaint against respondent no. 1 (MLA
Gopalpur Constituency) to Odisha Lokayukta regarding possession of disproportionate assets and
intentionally enriching himself illicitly adopting mal−practices. On the said complaint being
received, the appellant directed the Directorate of Vigilance, Cuttack to conduct a preliminary
inquiry against respondent no.1 in exercise of his power under Section 20(1) of the Act, 2014 by an
order dated 11th December, 2020. Before any action could have been taken by the Directorate of
Vigilance in conducting a preliminary inquiry, a writ petition was filed by respondent no.1 before the
High Court and on the first motion stage, the High Court, without affording an opportunity of
hearing to the appellant, set aside the order dated 11th December, 2020 passed by the appellant for
conducting a preliminary inquiry. The action of the Division Bench of the High Court indeed was in
violation of the principles of natural justice.

26. The aim to the rule of natural justice is to secure justice or to put it negatively, these rules can
operate only in areas not covered by any law validly made. The concept of natural justice, indeed,
has undergone a change with the passage of time, but still the time− tested rules, namely, are (i) no
one shall be a judge in his own case (Nemo debet essse judex propria causa) and (ii) no decision
shall be given against a party without affording him a reasonable opportunity of hearing (audi
alteram partem). At the same time, action of the authority must be held in good faith without bias
and not arbitrary or unreasonable.

27. In the first instance, the Division Bench of the High Court has committed a manifest error in
passing of the order impugned dated 3rd February, 2021 while setting aside the order of the
appellant dated 11th December, 2020 to conduct a preliminary inquiry against respondent no.1 in
exercise of powers under Section 20(1) of the Act, 2014 which is in violation of the principles of
natural justice.

28. Even on merits, the Division Bench has completely overlooked Section 20(1) of the Act, 2014
that empowers the Lokayukta, on receipt of a complaint, obviously after recording satisfaction, in its
discretion if intended to proceed and to hold any inquiry, can conduct either a preliminary inquiry
against a public servant by its inquiry wing or any other agency to ascertain whether there exists a
prima facie case for proceeding in the matter or hold investigation by any agency or authority
empowered under any law to investigate whether there exists a prima facie case.

29. So far as the term ‘any agency’ is concerned, it clearly manifests from Section 25 of Chapter VIII
which entrusts the power of superintendence to the Lokayukta to exercise in such a manner so as to
require any agency, including the State Vigilance and Crime Branch.

30. At the same time, under Section 28, for the purpose of conducting any preliminary inquiry or
investigation, it is open for the Lokayukta to utilize the services of any officer or organization or
investigation agency of the Government and, in the circumstances, if the appellant in its judicious
discretion and on the facts and circumstances of the case, conduct a preliminary inquiry through an
agency of the Government of which reference has been made under Section 28 through the
Directorate of Vigilance, Cuttack, there appears no legal infirmity being committed by the appellant

8

Office Of The Odisha Lokayukta vs Pradeep Kumar Panigrahi on 23 February, 2023

in the decision−making process in conducting a preliminary inquiry which, in our view, was within
the scope and ambit of Section 20(1) of the Act, 2014 and a manifest error was committed by the
Division Bench of the High Court while setting aside the order of the appellant dated 11th December,
2020 to conduct an inquiry against respondent no.1.

31. It is not a case of the respondents that respondent no.1 is not a public servant or the Act, 2014 is
not applicable to him or the Lokayukta in its jurisdiction was not competent to conduct a
preliminary inquiry under Section 20(1) of the Act, 2014. In the given facts and circumstances, the
finding returned by the Division Bench of the High Court under the judgment impugned, in our
view, is not legally sustainable.

32. During the course of submissions made by the parties, it was informed that after the stay was
granted by this Court of the judgment impugned dated 3rd February, 2021, the appellant has
proceeded in conducting further inquiry and actions are being taken after the Directorate of
Vigilance has submitted a preliminary inquiry report to the Lokayukta under Section 20(3)(a) to
carry out investigation and steps are taken by the Directorate of Vigilance in summitting a report of
investigation before the appellant on 7 th June, 2022.

33. Although we may not appreciate the action of the appellant in taking further steps when there
was stay of the order impugned passed by this Court, but at the same time, we granted an
opportunity to the respondents as well to justify if the action taken by the appellant is not in
conformity with the mandate of the Act, 2014, but from the written submissions placed before us,
we do not find any valid objection being raised by the respondents which may call upon this Court to
interfere in furtherance of the action being taken by the appellant after the preliminary inquiry
report was submitted pursuant to order dated 11 th December, 2020. Still we leave it open to
respondent no.1, if further action taken by the appellant is not in conformity with law, he is at liberty
to initiate proceedings as admissible to him under the law.

34. So far as the objection raised by the respondents regarding the action of conducting preliminary
inquiry being bias for the reason that the Deputy Superintendent of Police of the Directorate of
Vigilance has submitted a complaint and the appellant directed the Directorate of Vigilance to
conduct a preliminary inquiry by an order dated 11th December, 2020, which, in fact, was conducted
by a senior officer of the Directorate of Vigliance i.e. Additional Superintendent of Police Vigilance,
Mr. P.K. Naik, who submitted a report to the appellant on 28 th May, 2021 is concerned, we are not
persuaded with the submission of there being any bias on the part of the Directorate of Vigilance cell
in conducting preliminary inquiry for the reason that the Officer who submitted a complaint was
simply an informant and not the person interested, at the same time, preliminary inquiry was
conducted by a different Officer not connected with author of the complaint, thus the plea of bias
was ill−founded. In our view, the principles of bias, even remotely are not attracted in the facts and
circumstances of the present case.

35. The rule against bias is an essential component of modern administrative law. The rule against
bias ensures a fair procedure by excluding decision−makers who are tainted by bias. Under the rule,
actual bias is disqualifying even though it is prohibitively difficult to establish. The basic principle

9

Office Of The Odisha Lokayukta vs Pradeep Kumar Panigrahi on 23 February, 2023

underlying the time−tested rule is that justice must not only be done but must also appears to be
done and this rule has received wide recognition in several decisions of this Court and for our
consideration we take note of the judgment of this Court in A.K. Kraipak and others vs. Union of
India and others1, wherein in para 15 this Court held as under:

“15. It is unfortunate that Naqishbund was appointed as one of the members of the
selection board. It is true that ordinarily the Chief Conservator of Forests in a State
should be considered as the most appropriate person to be in the selection board. He
must be expected to know his officers thoroughly, their weaknesses as well as their
strength. His opinion as regards their suitability for selection to the All−India Service
is entitled to great weight. But then under the circumstances it was improper to have
included Naqishbund as a member of the selection board. He was one of the persons
to be considered for selection. It is against all canons of justice to make a man judge
in his own cause. It is true that he did not participate in the deliberations of the
committee when his name was considered. But then the very fact that he was a
member of the selection board must have had its own impact on the decision of the
selection board. Further admittedly he participated in the deliberations of the
selection board when the claims of his rivals particularly that of Basu was considered.
He was also party to the preparation of the list of selected candidates in order of
preference. At every stage of his participation in the deliberations of the selection
board there was a conflict between his interest and duty. Under those circumstances
it is difficult to believe that he could have been impartial. The real question is not
whether he was biased. It is difficult to prove the state of mind of a person. Therefore
what we have to see is whether there is reasonable ground for believing that he was
likely to have been biased. We agree with the learned Attorney General that a mere
suspicion of bias is not sufficient. There must be a reasonable likelihood of bias. In
deciding the question of bias we have to take into consideration human probabilities
and ordinary course of human conduct. It was in the interest of Naqishbund to keep
out his rivals in order to secure his position from further challenge. Naturally he was
also interested in safeguarding his position while preparing the list of selected
candidates.

(emphasis added) 1 1969 (2) SCC 262

36. The aforesaid view was further considered by a Constitution Bench of this Court in Ashok Kumar
Yadav and others vs. State of Haryana and others2 as under:

“16. We agree with the petitioners that it is one of the fundamental principles of our
jurisprudence that no man can be a judge in his own cause and that if there is a
reasonable likelihood of bias it is “in accordance with natural justice and common
sense that the justice likely to be so biased should be incapacitated from sitting”. The
question is not whether the judge is actually biased or in fact decides partially, but
whether there is a real livelihood of bias. What is objectionable in such a case is not
that the decision is actually tainted with bias but that the circumstances are such as

10

Office Of The Odisha Lokayukta vs Pradeep Kumar Panigrahi on 23 February, 2023

to create a reasonable apprehension in the mind of others that there is a likelihood of
bias affecting the decision. The basic principle underlying this rule is that justice
must not only be done but must also appear to be done and this rule has received
wide recognition in several decisions of this Court. It is also important to note that
this rule is not confined to cases where judicial power stricto sensu is exercised. It is
appropriately extended to all cases where an independent mind has to be applied to
arrive at a fair and just decision between the rival claims of parties. Justice is not the
function of the courts alone; it is also the duty of all those who are expected to decide
fairly between contending parties. The strict standards applied to authorities
exercising judicial power are being increasingly applied to administrative bodies, for
it is vital to the maintenance of the rule of law in a Welfare State where the
jurisdiction of administrative bodies is increasing at a rapid pace that the
instrumentalities of the State should discharge their functions in a fair and just
manner. This was the basis on which the applicability of this rule was extended to the
decision−making process of a selection committee constituted for selecting officers to
the Indian Forest Service in A.K. Kraipak v. Union of India [(1969) 2 SCC 262]. What
happened in this case was that one Naqishbund, the acting Chief Conservator of
Forests, Jammu and Kashmir was a member of the Selection Board which had been
set up to select officers to the Indian Forest Service from those serving in the Forest
Department of Jammu and Kashmir. Naqishbund who was a member of the Selection
Board was also one of the candidates for 2 1985 (4) SCC 417 selection to the Indian
Forest Service. He did not sit on the Selection Board at the time when his name was
considered for selection but he did sit on the Selection Board and participated in the
deliberations when the names of his rival officers were considered for selection and
took part in the deliberations of the Selection Board while preparing the list of the
selected candidates in order of preference. This Court held that the presence of
Naqishbund vitiated the selection on the ground that there was reasonable likelihood
of bias affecting the process of selection.

Hegde, J. speaking on behalf of the Court countered the argument that Naqishbund did not take
part in the deliberations of the Selection Board when his name was considered, by saying :

“But then the very fact that he was a member of the Selection Board must have had
its own impact on the decision of the Selection Board. Further admittedly he
participated in the deliberations of the Selection Board when the claims of his rivals
... was considered. He was also party to the preparation of the list of selected
candidates in order of preference. At every stage of his participation in the
deliberations of the Selection Board there was a conflict between his interest and
duty.... The real question is not whether he was biased. It is difficult to prove the state
of mind of a person. Therefore what we have to see is whether there is reasonable
ground for believing that he was likely to have been biased.... There must be a
reasonable likelihood of bias. In deciding the question of bias we have to take into
consideration human probabilities and ordinary course of human conduct.” This
Court emphasised that it was not necessary to establish bias but it was sufficient to

11

Office Of The Odisha Lokayukta vs Pradeep Kumar Panigrahi on 23 February, 2023

invalidate the selection process if it could be shown that there was reasonable
likelihood of bias. The likelihood of bias may arise on account of proprietary interest
or on account of personal reasons, such as, hostility to one party or personal
friendship or family relationship with the other. Where reasonable likelihood of bias
is alleged on the ground of relationship, the question would always be as to how close
is the degree of relationship or in other words, is the nearness of relationship so great
as to give rise to reasonable apprehension of bias on the part of the authority making
the selection.” (emphasis added)

37. In the instant case, the complaint was made by the Deputy Superintendent of Police (Mr. Ranjan
Kumar Das) of the Directorate of Vigilance, who is, directly or indirectly, not concerned with the
complaint, he can be said to be an informant to the office of the appellant and that apart, a
preliminary inquiry was conducted independently by a senior officer of the Directorate of Vigilance,
Additional Superintendent of Police, Mr. P.K. Naik, who submitted his report of the preliminary
inquiry on 28 th May, 2021, the question of bias in the instant facts and circumstances does not
arise at all and that apart, the Constitution Bench of this Court recently in Mukesh Singh vs. State
(Narcotic Branch of Delhi)3, while examining the question as to whether in case investigation is
conducted by the police officer who himself is a complainant is the trial stands vitiated and the
accused is entitled to acquittal and after examining the scheme of the Code, finally answered the
reference as under:

“13. From the above discussion and for the reasons stated above, we conclude and
answer the reference as under:

13.1. (I) That the observations of this Court in Bhagwan Singh v. State of Rajasthan
[(1976) 1 SCC 15] , Megha 3 2020 (10) SCC 120 Singh v. State of Haryana [(1996) 11
SCC 709] and State v. Rajangam [(2010) 15 SCC 369] and the acquittal of the accused
by this Court on the ground that as the informant and the investigator was the same,
it has vitiated the trial and the accused is entitled to acquittal are to be treated to be
confined to their own facts. It cannot be said that in the aforesaid decisions, this
Court laid down any general proposition of law that in each and every case where the
informant is the investigator there is a bias caused to the accused and the entire
prosecution case is to be disbelieved and the accused is entitled to acquittal.

13.2. (II) In a case where the informant himself is the investigator, by that itself
cannot be said that the investigation is vitiated on the ground of bias or the like
factor. The question of bias or prejudice would depend upon the facts and
circumstances of each case.

Therefore, merely because the informant is the investigator, by that itself the investigation would
not suffer the vice of unfairness or bias and therefore on the sole ground that informant is the
investigator, the accused is not entitled to acquittal. The matter has to be decided on a case−to−case
basis. A contrary decision of this Court in Mohan Lal v. State of Punjab [(2018) 17 SCC 627] and any
other decision taking a contrary view that the informant cannot be the investigator and in such a

12

Office Of The Odisha Lokayukta vs Pradeep Kumar Panigrahi on 23 February, 2023

case the accused is entitled to acquittal are not good law and they are specifically overruled.”
(emphasis added)

38. We are of the considered view that there was no element of bias in conducting a preliminary
inquiry in the instant case and the objection raised by the respondents stands overruled.

39. The further objection raised by the respondents is in reference to the locus standi of the
appellant in filing appeal in this Court and in support of his submission, counsel placed reliance on
the judgments of this Court in National Commission for Women vs. State of Delhi and another4 and
M.S. Kazi vs. Muslim Education Society and others5. In our considered view, the submission is
wholly bereft of merit for the reason that the action of the appellant initiated pursuant to order
dated 11th December, 2020 for conducting a preliminary inquiry in exercise of powers conferred
under Section 20(1) of the Act, 2014 was a subject matter of challenge before the High Court at the
instance of respondent no.1 and if that is being interfered with and the action of the appellant is
being set aside under the impugned judgment dated 3 rd February, 2021, the appellant, indeed, was
a person aggrieved and has a locus standi to question the action interfered with by the Division
Bench of the High Court and the only remedy available with the appellant is to question the order of
the Division Bench of the High Court by filing an special leave petition in this Court under Article
136 of the Constitution.

40. The judgment in National Commission for Women (supra) on which the respondents have
placed reliance was a case where in criminal trial, in the first instance held by the trial Court, the 4
2010 (12) SCC 599 5 2016 (9) SCC 263 accused was convicted and on appeal being preferred by him,
was later acquitted by the competent Court of jurisdiction and obviously appeal could be preferred
against the order of acquittal either by the prosecution i.e. the State Government or the victim,
under Section 378 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, but either of the party has not preferred
any appeal and it was the National Commission for Women who approached this Court by filing a
special leave petition under Article 136 of the Constitution and this Court still has ventured to
examine the appeal preferred by the Commission on merits, but observed that the special leave to
appeal at the instance of the appellant – National Commission for Women, is not maintainable and
obviously at least the National Commission for Women was not a person aggrieved and it has no
locus to object the order passed by the competent court of jurisdiction.

41. At the same time, the judgment of this Court in M.S. Kazi (supra) was a case where the teacher
was terminated by a minority institution after conducting a disciplinary inquiry. As the matter
travelled to the High Court under Article 226/227 of the Constitution and at this stage the Division
Bench of the High Court observed that since the Tribunal is not a party respondent who was the
Administrator before whom the dispute inter se between the parties i.e. the teacher and the minority
institution was examined, the objection was sustainable, still that objection was turned down by this
Court as referred in para 9 and held that it is the person aggrieved who has to pursue his or her
remedy available under the law and in the case on hand the person aggrieved invoked the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal, but the Tribunal was not a necessary party to the proceedings for the
reason that the lis was between teacher and the minority institution and accordingly, this Court held
that the High Court has committed an error in dismissing the letters patent appeal on the ground

13

Office Of The Odisha Lokayukta vs Pradeep Kumar Panigrahi on 23 February, 2023

that it was not maintainable in the absence of Tribunal being a party respondent.

42. Both the judgments relied upon are not even remotely concerned with the facts and
circumstances of the present case. To say in other words, if the order of the appellant directing the
Directorate of Vigilance to conduct the preliminary inquiry in exercise of power under Section 20(1)
of the Act, 2014 dated 11 th December, 2020 has been set aside by the High Court, obviously, the
appellant is a person aggrieved and can certainly question the legality/validity of the judgment of
the High Court impugned by invoking jurisdiction of this Court under Article 136 of the
Constitution.

43. Consequently, the appeals succeed and are accordingly allowed. The judgment of the High Court
dated 3 rd February, 2021 and the review order dated 5th April, 2021 are hereby set aside. No costs.

44. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.

……………………………J. (AJAY RASTOGI) ……………………………J. (BELA M. TRIVEDI) NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY 23, 2023.

14