Orissa Administrative Tribunal Bar ... vs Union Of India on 21 March, 2023

Orissa Administrative Tribunal Bar ... vs Union Of India on 21
March, 2023

Bench: Hima Kohli, Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud

Reportable

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

Civil Appeal No 6805 of 2022

Orissa Administrative Tribunal Bar                     …Appellant
Association

versus

Union of India & others                              …Respondents

And With Civil Appeal No 6806 of 2022 JUDGMENT Dr. Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, CJI Table of
Contents A. Background ....................................................................................................... 4 i. Factual
background ...................................................................................... 4 ii. The impugned judgment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   1 0   B .   S u b m i s s i o n s
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   1 2   C .
Issues............................................................................................................... 17 D. Analysis
........................................................................................................... 19 i. An overview of the
proceedings arising from the abolition of the Madhya Pradesh Administrative Tribunal and the
T a m i l   N a d u   A d m i n i s t r a t i v e   T r i b u n a l   a .   T h e   a b o l i t i o n   o f   t h e   M P A T
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   1 9   b .   T h e   a b o l i t i o n   o f   t h e   T N A T
......................................................................... 21 ii. The Writ Petitions instituted before the Orissa
High Court were maintainable........................................................................................................ 23 iii.
A r t i c l e   3 2 3 - A   d o e s   n o t   p r e c l u d e   t h e   U n i o n   G o v e r n m e n t   f r o m   a b o l i s h i n g   S A T s
.................................................................................................................... 25 iv. Applicability of
Section 21 of the General Clauses Act ........................... 32 a. There is no bar to the applicability of
Section 21 of the General Clauses Act to the administrative order establishing the OAT
.............................................. 33 b. Section 21 of the General Clauses Act is otherwise applicable to
the Administrative Tribunals Act ............................................................................. 37 v. The
n o t i f i c a t i o n   d a t e d   2   A u g u s t   2 0 1 9   i s   n o t   v i o l a t i v e   o f   A r t i c l e   1 4   o f   t h e   C o n s t i t u t i o n
........................................................................................................ 47 a. The notification dated 2

1

Orissa Administrative Tribunal Bar ... vs Union Of India on 21 March, 2023

A u g u s t   2 0 1 9   i s   n o t   a b s u r d   o r   b a s e d   o n   i r r e l e v a n t   o r   e x t r a n e o u s   c o n s i d e r a t i o n s
................................................................................ 47 b. The principles of natural justice have not
been violated ............................ 56 vi. The Union Government did not become functus officio after
establishing the OAT ............................................................................................................... 58 vii.
The notification dated 2 August 2019 is valid despite not being expressed in the name of the
President of India ............................................. 61 viii. The abolition of the OAT is not violative of the
fundamental right of access to justice ................................................................................................. 67
ix. The State Government did not take advantage of its own wrong ........... 70 x. The failure of the
Union Government to conduct a judicial impact assessment before abolishing the OAT does not
vitiate its decision to abolish the OAT ..................................................................................................
71 xi. Miscellaneous contentions ........................................................................ 74 E. Findings and
conclusion................................................................................ 75 PART A

1. IA No. 52385 of 2022 (application for intervention by Mr C Ravichandran Iyer) is allowed.

A.    Background

i. Factual background

2. This appeal arises from a judgment of the Orissa High Court dated 7 June 2021 in a batch of writ
petitions challenging the abolition of the Odisha Administrative Tribunal. 1 Before setting out the
facts which gave rise to the issues in this appeal, it is necessary to understand the context in which
they arose.

3. Parliament inserted Part XIV-A of the Constitution of India by the Constitution (Forty-second
Amendment) Act 1976. Part XIV-A consists of two articles, Articles 323A and 323B. Article 323A
empowers Parliament to provide for the adjudication of certain disputes by administrative tribunals.
Disputes concerning the recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to public
services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of any State or local or other
authority within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India or of any
corporation owned or controlled by the Government, may be adjudicated by administrative
tribunals. Article 323B empowers the legislatures of states to provide for the adjudication of certain
disputes (enumerated in clause 2 of Article 323B) by tribunals. 1 “OAT” PART A

4. In pursuance of the power conferred upon it by Article 323A(1), Parliament enacted the
Administrative Tribunals Act 1985. 2 The Statements of Objects and Reasons of this legislation
records that it was enacted in order to give effect to Article 323A, and also because:

“a large number of cases relating to service matters are pending before the various
courts. It is expected that the setting up of such Administrative Tribunals to deal
exclusively with service matters would go a long way in not only reducing the burden
of the various courts and thereby giving them more time to deal with other cases

2

Orissa Administrative Tribunal Bar ... vs Union Of India on 21 March, 2023

expeditiously but would also provide to the persons covered by the Administrative
Tribunals speedy relief in respect of their grievances.”

5. Section 4(1) of the Administrative Tribunals Act provides that the Central Government shall
establish an administrative tribunal known as the “Central Administrative Tribunal” 3 to adjudicate
disputes concerning the recruitment and conditions of service of persons in connection with posts
under the Union or All-India Service, 4 including disputes with respect to remuneration, pension,
tenure, leave, and disciplinary matters. 5 In terms of Section 4(2) of the Administrative Tribunals
Act, the Central Government may establish an administrative tribunal for a particular state, upon
receiving a request in this regard from the concerned State Government. Once created, the state
administrative tribunal 6 is charged with exercising exclusive jurisdiction over disputes concerning
the recruitment and conditions of service of persons in connection with posts under the concerned
state or 2 “Administrative Tribunals Act” 3 “CAT” 4 Section 14 read with Section 3(q),
Administrative Tribunals Act 5 Section 3(q), Administrative Tribunals Act 6 “SAT” PART A any civil
service of that state, 7 including disputes with respect to remuneration, pension, tenure, leave, and
disciplinary matters. 8

6. The SAT is prohibited from exercising jurisdiction, authority, or power over a matter which the
CAT’s jurisdiction extends. 9 While Section 4(2) of the Administrative Tribunals Act governs the
establishment of SATs, there is no corresponding provision which stipulates the procedure to be
followed to discontinue or abolish them. In terms of Section 29 of the Administrative Tribunals Act,
suits or other proceedings pending before courts or other authorities which would have been within
the jurisdiction of the SAT if the cause of action in such suit or proceeding had arisen after the
establishment of the SAT, stand transferred to the SAT on the date of its establishment. In other
words, cases pending before other fora (including cases pending before the High Court of the
relevant state but excluding those pending before the Supreme Court) stand transferred to the SAT
upon its establishment. Following the enactment of the Administrative Tribunals Act, various states
including Andhra Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, and Maharashtra
requested the Central Government to establish an SAT, and the Central Government issued
notifications establishing them. Odisha was one amongst these states. Upon receiving a request
from the State of Odisha, the Central Government established the OAT on 4 July 1986 by issuing 7
Section 15 read with Section 3(q), Administrative Tribunals Act 8 Section 3(q), Administrative
Tribunals Act 9 Section 15(4), Administrative Tribunals Act PART A Notification No. GSR 934(E),
which was published in the Gazette of India. The OAT commenced functioning soon thereafter.

7. At this time, Section 28 of the Administrative Tribunals Act was still in force.

Section 28 excluded the jurisdiction of all courts except the Supreme Court or the Industrial
Tribunal or Labour Court in relation to matters over which the CAT and the SAT exercised
jurisdiction. Section 28 was enacted pursuant to the enabling provision in Article 323-A of the
Constitution, namely clause 2(d) of Article 323-A. Clause 2(d) provided that Parliament may exclude
the jurisdiction of all courts, except of the Supreme Court under Article 136 of the Constitution with
respect to disputes which administrative tribunals were empowered to adjudicate under clause 1 of
Article 323-A. The effect of Section 28 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, therefore, was that

3

Orissa Administrative Tribunal Bar ... vs Union Of India on 21 March, 2023

appeals from the OAT lay directly to the Supreme Court under Article 136 of the Constitution.
However, this changed with the decision of this Court in L. Chandra Kumar v. Union of India (1997)
3 SCC 261. In its decision in that case, this Court inter alia ruled that:

a. Clause 2(d) of Article 323-A and clause 3(d) of Article 323-B were unconstitutional
to the extent that they excluded the jurisdiction of the High Courts under Articles 226
and 227 and of the Supreme Court under Article 32 of the Constitution;

b. Section 28 of the Administrative Tribunals Act was unconstitutional as were
‘exclusion of jurisdiction’ clauses in all other legislation enacted under Articles 323-A
and 323-B;

PART A c. The jurisdiction conferred upon the High Courts under Articles 226 and
227 and upon the Supreme Court under Article 32 of the Constitution form a part of
the basic structure of the Constitution; and d. Other courts and Tribunals may
perform a supplemental role in discharging the powers conferred by Articles 226/227
and 32 of the Constitution.

As a consequence of this decision, challenges under Article 226 of the Constitution to the decisions
rendered by the SATs lay to Division Benches of the respective High Courts within whose
jurisdiction the SATs operated. The Supreme Court’s jurisdiction could be invoked under Article 136
against the decisions of the High Courts.

8. The decision in L. Chandra Kumar (supra) seems to have influenced the State of Odisha to
request the Union Government to abolish the OAT. By a letter dated 16 September 2015, the Chief
Secretary to the Government of Odisha requested the Secretary to the Government of India,
Department of Personnel and Training to issue a notification under the Administrative Tribunals
Act abolishing the OAT. The letter recorded the State Government’s reason for making this request
in the following terms:

“Government of Odisha is of the view that the Tribunal is not able to serve its original
objectives, particularly after the Hon’ble Apex Court gave the Judgment in L.
Chandra Kumar case of 1997. As a result of this judgment, the very purpose of having
a State Administrative Tribunal (SAT) for speedy redressal of the grievances of the
State Government employees is not fulfilled as any way the aggrieved parties have to
approach the Hon’ble High Court before approaching the Apex Court for a final
verdict.” PART A A note annexed to the letter dated 16 September 2015 elaborated on
the State Government’s rationale for seeking to abolish the OAT:

“As a consequence of the landmark judgment of the Supreme Court [in L. Chandra
Kumar], the objective of the establishment of the Tribunal to give quick justice to the
government employees was defeated… The aggrieved parties are approaching the
High Court against OAT orders and then the Supreme Court resulting in protracted
litigation … Government is incurring a significant sum of expenditure on the OAT …

4

Orissa Administrative Tribunal Bar ... vs Union Of India on 21 March, 2023

The abolition of the Tribunal will reduce the burden of litigation for the Government
and will also reduce the time for resolution of disputes / litigation.” Evidently, the
State of Odisha was of the opinion that the raison d'etre of the OAT was defeated –
the fact that the OAT’s decisions were subject to two tiers of challenge (first before
the High Court and then the Supreme Court) meant that speedy justice could not be
delivered. The State Government proposed to transfer the cases pending before the
OAT to the Orissa High Court.

9. On 12 January 2016, the Union Government requested the State of Odisha to provide information
about the Orissa High Court’s views on the proposal to abolish the OAT, the legal mechanism by
which the cases pending before the OAT could be transferred to the Orissa High Court, and
regarding the plan of action with respect to the employees of the OAT. Accordingly, on 1 February
2016, the State of Odisha solicited the Orissa High Court’s views on the matter. Thereafter, the
Union Government communicated its ‘in-principle’ approval of the proposal to abolish the OAT to
the State of Odisha.

10. By a letter dated 5 February 2019 to the Union Government and the State of Odisha, the Orissa
High Court conveyed that that it had resolved to accept the decision to abolish the OAT and the
attendant proposals regarding the PART A transfer of employees and pending cases. On 22 February
2019, the State of Odisha wrote to the Union of India, intimating it that the employees of the OAT
would be “suitably adjusted in other heads of the department under the Government of Odisha
depending upon the vacancies in equivalent cadre and post.” The letter also stated that the State
Government had decided to transfer the cases pending before the OAT to the Orissa High Court and
that the latter had accepted this decision.

11. The Union Government took recourse to Section 21 of the General Clauses Act 1897 10 and
abolished the OAT by issuing Notification GSR 552(E) on 2 August 2019. The relevant portion of
this notification is extracted below:

“Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (2) of Section 4 of
the Administrative Tribunals Act 1985, read with Section 21 of the General Clauses
Act 1897 (10 of 1897), the Central Government hereby rescinds the said notification
number GSR 934(E), dated the 4th July 1986, except as respects things done or
omitted to be done before such rescission, with effect from the date of publication of
this notification in the Gazette of India.” ii. The impugned judgment

12. In 2019, each of the appellants filed a Writ Petition before the Orissa High Court for quashing
the notification dated 2 August 2019 (as well as the decision of the Cabinet of the State Government
dated 9 September 2015 to abolish the OAT). After considering the rival submissions, the Orissa
High Court dismissed the Writ Petitions by its common judgment dated 7 June 2021, for the
following reasons:

10 “General Clauses Act” PART A

5

Orissa Administrative Tribunal Bar ... vs Union Of India on 21 March, 2023

13. a. Article 323-A is an enabling provision. It does not make it mandatory for the Union
Government to establish administrative tribunals or refrain from abolishing them once they are
established;

b. The decision to abolish the OAT is an administrative decision. There is therefore no bar to the
Union Government invoking Section 21 of the General Clauses Act read with Section 4(2) of the
Administrative Tribunals Act to rescind the notification establishing the OAT; c. The invocation of
Section 21 of the General Clauses Act does not result in a denial of justice because the cases pending
before the OAT will be heard by the Orissa High Court. Hence, litigants are not prejudiced by the
invocation of Section 21;

d. The proposition that what cannot be done directly cannot be done indirectly is not applicable
because neither Article 323-A of the Constitution nor Section 4(2) of the Administrative Tribunals
Act prohibits the Union or State Government from abolishing an SAT; e. The Union Government
was not rendered functus-officio after it established the OAT because it was exercising an
administrative function and not a judicial or quasi-judicial function; f. The jurisdiction of the Orissa
High Court was neither created nor enlarged as a consequence of the notification dated 2 August
2019. Rather, the High Court’s jurisdiction was revived;

PART B g. The decision-making process of the Union and State Governments was not arbitrary,
irrational, or unreasonable, and it did not violate Article 14 of the Constitution;

h. There is no factual foundation for the allegation that the decision to abolish the OAT was
motivated by government servants seeking to avoid contempt proceedings before the OAT. In any
event, all cases including contempt proceedings would be heard by the Orissa High Court; and i. The
notification dated 2 August 2019 was not vitiated for the reason that it did not state that it had been
issued in the name of the President of India.

The High Court also observed that the procedure adopted by the Union Government may have been
rendered arbitrary if it had failed to ensure that the High Court was consulted prior to abolishing the
OAT because such a decision would directly impact the functioning of the High Court. B.
Submissions

14. Mr. Ashok Panigrahi and Dr. Aman Hingorani, learned counsel led arguments on behalf of the
appellants. They were joined by Mr. C Ravichandran Iyer, Advocate-on-Record, who is an
intervenor in this appeal. PART B

15. Their submissions were:

a. Article 323-A of the Constitution is in the nature of a mandate. It requires the
Union Government to establish SATs and does not empower the Union Government
to abolish a SAT, once established; b. Section 21 of the General Clauses Act cannot be
invoked to abolish the OAT. The power to abolish a SAT must flow from the same
legislation that vests the Union Government with the power to establish SATs. The

6

Orissa Administrative Tribunal Bar ... vs Union Of India on 21 March, 2023

Administrative Tribunals Act does not vest either the Union Government or the State
Government with the power to abolish SATs. In any event, the conditions for the
invocation of Section 21 of the General Clauses Act are not satisfied. The abolition of
the OAT was therefore without legal basis;

c. The Administrative Tribunal (Amendment) Bill 2006 was introduced to provide an
enabling provision for the abolition of SATs and for the transfer of pending cases
from the abolished SAT to the relevant High Court. This bill was not enacted into law
and therefore the Union Government and the State Governments do not have the
power to abolish SATs;

d. The State Government’s interpretation of the decision in L. Chandra Kumar
(supra) as reducing the efficiency of the adjudication process for service matters is
incorrect and unreasonable; PART B e. The OAT has two regular benches and two
circuit benches but the High Court has a single bench in Cuttack. The abolition of the
OAT makes the court system less accessible to litigants and violates the fundamental
right of access to justice;

f. The Union and State Governments have violated the principles of natural justice by
failing to provide the OAT Bar Association and the litigants before the OAT with an
opportunity to be heard before abolishing the OAT. This is also violative of Article 14
of the Constitution; g. The notification dated 2 August 2019 by which the OAT was
abolished is invalid because it is not expressed in the name of the President of India
in terms of Article 77 of the Constitution; h. The Constitution does not envisage a
transfer of cases from any court to a particular High Court except as specified in
Article 228 of the Constitution;

i. The State Government is trying to take advantage of its own wrong by failing to fill
the vacancies in the OAT and creating the conditions for the abolition of the OAT.
The failure of the State Government to fill the vacancies is also a breach of Article 256
of the Constitution; j. The abolition of the OAT has the effect of enlarging the
jurisdiction of the Orissa High Court but Parliament alone has the power to create or
enlarge jurisdiction;

PART B k. The real reason for the abolition of the OAT is that officials in Odisha
faced charges of contempt before the OAT and sought to avoid these proceedings by
having the OAT abolished;

l. A judicial impact assessment ought to have been carried out before abolishing the
OAT;

m. Once the Union Government established the OAT, it became functus officio; and
n. The Union Government ought to have obtained the permission of this Court before
issuing the notification dated 2 August 2019.

7

Orissa Administrative Tribunal Bar ... vs Union Of India on 21 March, 2023

16. The submissions urged on behalf of the appellants have been opposed by the Union of India and
the State of Odisha. Mr. Balbir Singh, Additional Solicitor General made the following submissions
for the Union of India:

a. Section 4(2) of the Administrative Tribunals Act enables the Union Government to
establish an SAT upon receiving a request in this behalf from the State Government.
Consequently, it is the prerogative of the State Government to establish, continue, or
abolish the relevant SAT; b. Section 21 of the General Clauses Act may be pressed into
service to abolish an SAT. Neither the Constitution nor the Administrative Tribunals
Act is required to be amended to give the Union Government the power to abolish an
SAT;

PART B c. The fundamental right to justice has not been violated because the cases
pending before the OAT were transferred to the Orissa High Court;

17. Mr. Ashok Kr Parija, learned Advocate General for the State of Odisha supplemented the
arguments put forward by the Union of India. He urged that:

a. The Writ Petitions before the Orissa High Court which led to the impugned
judgment were not maintainable because the rights of the petitioners were not
affected by the abolition of the OAT. Litigants cannot claim a fundamental right to
access the OAT;

b. The State Government took a policy decision to abolish the OAT, in light of the low
rate of disposal of cases by the OAT. The State Government is also of the view that the
purpose of the OAT (to ensure speedy disposal of cases) is not served subsequent to
the decision of this Court in L. Chandra Kumar (supra);

c. The word “may” in Section 4 of the Administrative Tribunals Act is unambiguous
and must be interpreted strictly. d. An intra-court appeal is different from an appeal
to a separate forum and the former streamlines the process of adjudication. It cannot
be said that there is no advantage to be had by abolishing the OAT; e. The principles
of natural justice were not violated; PART C The abolition of the OAT does not make
the court system less accessible to litigants because they would have been required to
travel to Cuttack in any event in order to participate in the writ proceedings before
the Orissa High Court. The number of cases transferred from the Circuit Benches of
the OAT at Berhampur and Sambalpur to the Orissa High Court are 275 and 235
respectively. The Principal Bench at Bhubaneswar and the regular Bench at Cuttack,
on the other hand, had 11,483 and 32,911 cases respectively, which were transferred
to the Orissa High Court. Financial hardships faced by litigants can be alleviated
through compensation schemes which exist for this purpose; and f. It was not
mandatory for the government to conduct a judicial impact assessment test before
abolishing the OAT.

8

Orissa Administrative Tribunal Bar ... vs Union Of India on 21 March, 2023

18. In its counter affidavit, the Orissa High Court detailed the action taken to transfer the cases
pending before the OAT to the High Court – nodal officers were appointed to monitor the transfer, a
committee was constituted to oversee the transfer, the committee devised a methodology for shifting
pending cases, and a dedicated branch called the ‘OA Branch’ was created to deal exclusively with
transferred matters.

C. Issues

19. Based on the submissions which have been canvassed by the parties, the issues which arise for
determination are:

PART C a. Whether the Writ Petitions instituted by the appellants before the Orissa
High Court were maintainable;

b. Whether Article 323-A of the Constitution makes it mandatory for the Union
Government to establish SATs;

c. Whether Section 21 of the General Clauses Act can be invoked to rescind the
notification establishing the OAT, thereby abolishing the OAT;

d. Whether the abolition of the OAT is arbitrary and therefore violative of Article 14
of the Constitution;

e. Whether the abolition of the OAT is violative of the fundamental right of access to
justice;

f. Whether the Union and State Governments have violated the principles of natural
justice by failing to provide the OAT Bar Association and the litigants before the OAT
with an opportunity to be heard before arriving at a decision to abolish the OAT;

g. Whether the notification dated 2 August 2019 is invalid because it is not expressed
in the name of the President of India; h. Whether the transfer of cases from the OAT
to the Orissa High Court has the effect of enlarging the jurisdiction of the latter; i.
Whether the State Government took advantage of its own wrong by ceasing to fill the
vacancies in the OAT;

PART D j. Whether the failure of the Union Government to conduct a judicial impact
assessment before abolishing the OAT vitiates its decision to abolish the OAT; and k.
Whether the Union Government became functus officio after establishing the OAT.

D. Analysis i. An overview of the proceedings arising from the abolition of the
Madhya Pradesh Administrative Tribunal 11 and the Tamil Nadu Administrative
Tribunal 12

9

Orissa Administrative Tribunal Bar ... vs Union Of India on 21 March, 2023

20. The parties to this appeal have advanced some arguments in relation to decisions arising from
the abolition of certain other SATs. It is therefore necessary to understand the decisions of this
Court in relation to the abolition of those SATs. To this end, the abolition of the MPAT and the
TNAT as well as the legal proceedings arising from those decisions are briefly discussed. The effect
of these proceedings on the decision in this case is also examined.

a. The abolition of the MPAT

21. The State of Madhya Pradesh was reorganized into the State of Madhya Pradesh and the State of
Chhattisgarh with the enactment of the Madhya Pradesh Reorganization Act 2000. Section 74(1)(ii)
of this legislation vested the State Governments of these two states with the power to abolish “every
11 “MPAT” 12 “TNAT” PART D Commission, Authority, Tribunal, University, Board or any other
body constituted under a Central Act, State Act or Provincial Act and having jurisdiction over the
existing State of Madhya Pradesh.”

22. The State of Madhya Pradesh issued a notification abolishing the MPAT pursuant to a decision
taken by it along with the State of Chhattisgarh. This notification was challenged before the Madhya
Pradesh High Court. The petitioners in that case also challenged the constitutionality of Section 74
of the Madhya Pradesh Reorganization Act 2000.

23. The High Court upheld the constitutional validity of sub-clause (1) of Section

74. It held that sub-clauses (2) and (3) of Section 71 (concerning the termination of employees and
the compensation for the unexpired period of their tenure respectively) were ultra vires the
Constitution. The High Court also held that the State Government could not have abolished the
MPAT by issuing a notification. Rather, it was required to request the Union Government to issue a
notification abolishing the MPAT because the MPAT was established by the Union Government. It
held that the Union Government would have no choice but to accept such a request and issue a
notification to this effect. The High Court accordingly quashed the notification issued by the State of
Madhya Pradesh by which the MPAT was abolished.

24. On appeal, this Court upheld the interpretation accorded to the Madhya Pradesh Reorganization
Act 2000 by the Madhya Pradesh High Court. The PART D decision of this Court was reported as
M.P. High Court Bar Assn. v. Union of India (2004) 11 SCC 766. 13 As seen from a discussion of the
facts, the MPAT Abolition Case (supra) concerned the powers of the State of Madhya Pradesh under
the Madhya Pradesh Reorganization Act 2000 as well as the constitutional validity of certain
provisions of that enactment. This Court was not called upon to adjudicate whether Section 21 of the
General Clauses Act would be applicable to Section 4(2) of the Administrative Tribunals Act. A
decision on the abolition of an SAT by the exercise of special powers under a legislation enacted for
the reorganization of a state does not have any bearing on whether an SAT may be abolished in
exercise of powers under the Administrative Tribunals Act. The MPAT Abolition Case (supra) is
therefore not germane to the issue of whether Section 21 of the General Clauses Act would be
applicable to Section 4(2) of the Administrative Tribunals Act. However, the issue whether the
decision to abolish the MPAT was arbitrary, unreasonable and therefore violative of Article 14 of the

10

Orissa Administrative Tribunal Bar ... vs Union Of India on 21 March, 2023

Constitution was decided in that case. A similar issue is before us in the present case and this aspect
of the decision in the MPAT Abolition Case (supra) may be instructive.

b. The abolition of the TNAT Between 1994 and 2004, the Government of Tamil Nadu requested the
Union Government to abolish the TNAT. Thereafter, it stopped appointing the 13 “MPAT Abolition
Case” PART D Chairperson, the Vice Chairperson and the Members of the TNAT, which was
rendered inoperative as a result. Approximately 30,000 cases were pending before it at this time.
Various parties instituted writ petitions before the Madras High Court seeking directions to the
State Government of Tamil Nadu to fill the vacancies in the TNAT to enable it to function until it
was abolished. These writ petitions culminated in the decision of the Madras High Court in Tamil
Nadu Government All Department Watchman and Basic Servants Association v. Union of India14.

25. In its decision in the above case, the Madras High Court held that the Union Government had
the power to rescind a notification establishing an SAT, under Section 21 of the General Clauses Act.
It relied on the MPAT Abolition Case (supra) to hold that it was open to the State Government to
take a “policy decision” to abolish the SAT and request the Union Government to abolish it. It
further held that the latter would have no option but to issue a notification in this regard. On this
basis, it directed the Union Government to issue a notification abolishing the TNAT “as there is no
necessity for the Central Government to wait for the amendment before the Parliament and the
mere issuance of Notification would suffice for abolition of the Tribunal.” Two appeals against the
decision in the TNAT Abolition Case (supra) were preferred before this Court. The first was
dismissed in limine by an order dated 16 August 2005. The second was an appeal filed by the Union
of India. Before this appeal could be adjudicated on merits, the Union Government issued a 14 2005
SCC OnLine Mad 333- “TNAT Abolition Case” PART D notification on 17 February 2006 abolishing
the TNAT. On 28 March 2017, this Court dismissed the appeal for having become infructuous. It
observed that the question of law had been kept open.

26. The TNAT Abolition Case (supra) does not hence constitute a precedent which binds this Court.
The proceedings arising from the TNAT Abolition Case (supra) in appeal before this Court, too, do
not have a bearing on the approach to be adopted while deciding the merits of the issues before us
because the question of law was expressly kept open.

ii. The Writ Petitions instituted before the Orissa High Court were maintainable

27. The State of Odisha has interrogated the maintainability of the Writ Petitions instituted by the
appellants before the Orissa High Court (which led to the impugned judgment) on the ground that
the rights of the petitioners were not impacted by the abolition of the OAT.

28. The appellants are the OAT Bar Association, Cuttack and the Odisha Retired Police Officers’
Welfare Association. Both associations are registered under the Societies Registration Act 1860.
Section 6 of the Societies Registration Act 1860 authorizes registered societies to sue and be sued.
Both the appellants are therefore organizations which are entitled to approach the High Court under
Article 226 of the Constitution.

11

Orissa Administrative Tribunal Bar ... vs Union Of India on 21 March, 2023

29. Both appellants have also alleged that an existing legal right of theirs was violated. As held by
this Court in Ghulam Qadir v. Special Tribunal (2002) PART D 1 SCC 33, the existence of a legal
right of the petitioner which is alleged to have been violated is the foundation for invoking the
jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226:

“38. There is no dispute regarding the legal proposition that the rights under Article
226 of the Constitution of India can be enforced only by an aggrieved person except
in the case where the writ prayed for is for habeas corpus or quo warranto. Another
exception in the general rule is the filing of a writ petition in public interest. The
existence of the legal right of the petitioner which is alleged to have been violated is
the foundation for invoking the jurisdiction of the High Court under the aforesaid
article. The orthodox rule of interpretation regarding the locus standi of a person to
reach the court has undergone a sea change with the development of constitutional
law in our country and the constitutional courts have been adopting a liberal
approach in dealing with the cases or dislodging the claim of a litigant merely on
hypertechnical grounds. If a person approaching the court can satisfy that the
impugned action is likely to adversely affect his right which is shown to be having
source in some statutory provision, the petition filed by such a person cannot be
rejected on the ground of his not having the locus standi. In other words, if the
person is found to be not merely a stranger having no right whatsoever to any post or
property, he cannot be non-suited on the ground of his not having the locus standi.”
(emphasis supplied)

30. In State of Orissa v. Ram Chandra Dev AIR 1964 SC 685, a Constitution Bench of
this Court held that the existence of a right is the foundation of a petition under
Article 226:

“8. … Under Article 226 of the Constitution, the jurisdiction of the High Court is
undoubtedly very wide. Appropriate writs can be issued by the High Court under the
said article even for purposes other than the enforcement of the fundamental rights
and in that sense, a party who invokes the special jurisdiction of the High Court
under Article 226 is not confined to cases of illegal invasion of his fundamental rights
alone. But though the jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226 is wide in that
sense, the concluding words of the article clearly indicate that before a writ or an
appropriate order can be issued in favour of a party, it must be established that the
party has a right and the said right is illegally invaded or PART D threatened. The
existence of a right is thus the foundation of a petition under Article 226.” (emphasis
supplied)

31. In this case, the Odisha Retired Police Officers’ Welfare Association alleged that
its right to speedy redressal of grievances (a facet of the fundamental right of access
to justice) was violated. The OAT Bar Association joined the Odisha Retired Police
Officers’ Welfare Association in alleging that the state’s action of abolishing the OAT
violated its right under Article 14 of the Constitution. Having alleged that these rights

12

Orissa Administrative Tribunal Bar ... vs Union Of India on 21 March, 2023

were violated by the abolition of the OAT, they were entitled to invoke the High
Court’s jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution. Whether there is substance
in the grievance is a separate matter which has to be analysed.

iii. Article 323-A does not preclude the Union Government from abolishing SATs

32. In order to assess whether it is mandatory for the Union Government to establish SATs, it is
necessary to advert to Article 323-A of the Constitution of India:

“323A. Administrative tribunals.—(1) Parliament may, by law, provide for the
adjudication or trial by administrative tribunals of disputes and complaints with
respect to recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to public
services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of any State or of any
local or other authority within the territory of India or under the control of the
Government of India or of any corporation owned or controlled by the Government.

(2) A law made under clause (1) may—

(a) provide for the establishment of an administrative tribunal for the Union and a
separate administrative tribunal for each State or for two or more States;

PART D

(b) specify the jurisdiction, powers (including the power to punish for contempt) and authority
which may be exercised by each of the said tribunals;

(c) provide for the procedure (including provisions as to limitation and rules of evidence) to be
followed by the said tribunals;

(d) exclude the jurisdiction of all courts, except the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under article
136, with respect to the disputes or complaints referred to in clause (1);

(e) provide for the transfer to each such administrative tribunal of any cases pending before any
court or other authority immediately before the establishment of such tribunal as would have been
within the jurisdiction of such tribunal if the causes of action on which such suits or proceedings are
based had arisen after such establishment;

(f) repeal or amend any order made by the President under clause (3) of article 371D;

(g) contain such supplemental, incidental and consequential provisions (including provisions as to
fees) as Parliament may deem necessary for the effective functioning of, and for the speedy disposal
of cases by, and the enforcement of the orders of, such tribunals.

13

Orissa Administrative Tribunal Bar ... vs Union Of India on 21 March, 2023

(3) The provisions of this article shall have effect notwithstanding anything in any other provision of
this Constitution or in any other law for the time being in force.” (emphasis supplied)

33. Clauses (1) and (2) of Article 323-A use the expression “may,” indicating that Article 323-A does
not compel Parliament to enact a law to give effect to it. Parliament is entrusted with the discretion
to enact a law which provides for the adjudication of certain disputes by administrative tribunals. It
is a permissive provision. The provision is facilitative and enabling.

34. However, in certain cases, the power to do something may be coupled with a duty to exercise
that power. In Official Liquidator v. Dharti Dhan (P) Ltd. (1977) 2 SCC 166, this Court expounded on
when the word “may” carries with PART D it an obligation to exercise the power conferred by that
word in a particular manner:

“8. Thus, the question to be determined in such cases always is whether the power
conferred by the use of the word “may” has, annexed to it, an obligation that, on the
fulfilment of certain legally prescribed conditions, to be shown by evidence, a
particular kind of order must be made. If the statute leaves no room for discretion the
power has to be exercised in the manner indicated by the other legal provisions which
provide the legal context. Even then the facts must establish that the legal conditions
are fulfilled … It is not the conferment of a power which the word “may” indicates
that annexes any obligation to its exercise but the legal and factual context of it.

…

10. The principle laid down above has been followed consistently by this Court
whenever it has been contended that the word “may” carries with it the obligation to
exercise a power in a particular manner or direction. In such a case, it is always the
purpose of the power which has to be examined in order to determine the scope of
the discretion conferred upon the donee of the power.

If the conditions in which the power is to be exercised in particular cases are also specified by a
statute then, on the fulfilment of those conditions, the power conferred becomes annexed with a
duty to exercise it in that manner.” (emphasis supplied)

35. In Dhampur Sugar Mills Ltd. v. State of U.P. 15, this Court held that the intention of the
legislature must be discerned while determining whether a provision is directory or mandatory:

“36. … In our judgment, mere use of word “may” or “shall” is not conclusive. The
question whether a particular provision of a statute is directory or mandatory cannot
be resolved by laying down any general rule of universal application. Such
controversy has to be decided by ascertaining the intention of the legislature and not
by looking at the language in which the provision is clothed. And for finding out the
legislative intent, the court must examine the scheme of the Act, purpose and object
underlying the provision, consequences likely to ensue or inconvenience likely to

14

Orissa Administrative Tribunal Bar ... vs Union Of India on 21 March, 2023

result if the 15 (2007) 8 SCC 338 PART D provision is read one way or the other and
many more considerations relevant to the issue.”

36. In order for the word “may” to acquire the character of the word “shall”, the following aspects of
the provision or legislation (or in this case, the Constitution) must be analysed:

a. The legal and factual context of the conferment of the power; b. The purpose of the
power;

c. Whether the statute (or the Constitution) specifies the conditions in which the
power is to be exercised; and d. The intention of the legislature discerned inter alia
from the scheme of the enactment, the purpose and object of the provision, the
consequences of reading the provision one way or another, and other relevant
considerations.

This is not an exhaustive list of factors which will aid courts in interpreting whether a
provision is directory or mandatory.

37. Article 323-A does not specify the conditions in which the power to enact laws providing for the
adjudication of certain disputes by administrative tribunals must be exercised. It therefore cannot
be said that Parliament was obligated to exercise this power upon the fulfilment of certain
conditions.

38. The legal and factual context of the power to enact laws providing for administrative tribunals
may be understood from the Statement of Objects PART D and Reasons appended to the
Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Bill 1976. The Statement of Objects indicates that the
object was “To reduce the mounting arrears in High Courts and to secure the speedy disposal of
service matters, revenue matters and certain other matters of special importance in the context of
the socio- economic development and progress, it is considered expedient to provide for
administrative and other tribunals for dealing with such matters while preserving the jurisdiction of
the Supreme Court in regard to such matters under Article 136 of the Constitution. It is also
necessary to make certain modifications in the writ jurisdiction of the High Courts under article
226.” The Statement of Objects and Reasons also sheds light on the purpose of the power to provide
for administrative tribunals i.e., to reduce mounting arrears in the High Courts and to secure the
speedy disposal of service matters. The purpose and the legal and factual context of the power
conferred by Article 323-A do not have the effect of narrowing the scope of the discretion afforded to
Parliament by the word “may.” The purpose of reducing arrears in the High Courts or securing the
speedy disposal of service cases is not of a nature as to cast an obligation upon Parliament to enact
laws providing for administrative tribunals. This is because the same purpose can be achieved
through other routes. Article 323-A merely provides for the enactment of legislation as of one of
many routes. It is open to Parliament to choose any legally acceptable method to reduce arrears in
the High Courts and secure the speedy disposal of service matters, including but not limited to
creating administrative tribunals. Article 323-A does not deprive Parliament of the power to choose
an alternate course of action to reduce arrears or ensure speedy justice, by any other modality,

15

Orissa Administrative Tribunal Bar ... vs Union Of India on 21 March, 2023

including by strengthening other PART D adjudicatory mechanisms. The intention of Parliament
could not have been to mandate the establishment and continuation of administrative tribunals.
Besides the purpose of the provision discussed above, nothing in the scheme of Article 323-A
indicates that it is a mandatory provision. The consequences of reading Article 323-A as mandating
the creation of administrative tribunals, would be to foreclose the possibility of the adoption of an
alternate course of action to achieve the desired objective of reducing arrears and ensuring speedy
justice. This, too, indicates that it could not have been the intention of Parliament to mandate the
establishment of administrative tribunals as the only remedy to mounting arrears or as the only
manner in which speedy justice could be secured.

39. Another important consequence of interpreting Article 323-A as being mandatory is that it
prevents Parliament and the State Governments from evaluating the manner in which
administrative tribunals function by inter alia accounting for:

a. The rate of disposal of cases;

b. The quality of the judgments;

c. How often the decisions of the SAT are overturned in the writ jurisdiction, appeal
or review;

d. Whether the tribunals are functioning independently; e. The availability of
qualified and suitable candidates for the posts of members and chairpersons of the
tribunals;

PART D f. Whether SATs do indeed reduce arrears in the High Courts and streamline
the justice delivery mechanism;

g. The cost incurred by the state; and h. The costs (monetary and otherwise) to
litigants. The Orissa High Court refers to some of these factors in paragraphs 70 to 75
of the impugned judgment albeit in a slightly different context. The intention of
Parliament could not have been to prevent the Union or State Governments from
evaluating the efficiency and desirability of administrative tribunals once they were
established. However, the effect of reading Article 323-A as a mandatory provision
would be to do precisely that.

40. The appellants have relied on the decision of this Court in Dilip K Basu v. State of West Bengal
(2015) 8 SCC 744 to argue that it is mandatory for the Union Government to establish SATs. In that
case, this Court was required to interpret Section 21 of the Protection of Human Rights Act 1993
which stipulated that State Governments “may” constitute a State Human Rights Commission. The
question was whether the word “may” ought to be read as the word “shall.” This Court noted that the
Protection of Human Rights Act 1993 enjoined the State Human Rights Commissions to promote
human rights, prevent their violation, and provide redressal. It held that this legislative intent would
be negated if State Human Rights Commissions were not established in every state. This Court

16

Orissa Administrative Tribunal Bar ... vs Union Of India on 21 March, 2023

reasoned that the consequence of this was that Section 21 of the Protection of Human Rights Act
1993 not only conferred State Governments with the power to set up State Human Rights PART D
Commissions but also imposed on them the duty to do so. In the present case, the intention of
Parliament in enacting Article 323-A of the Constitution (i.e., to reduce arrears and provide speedy
justice) would not necessarily be negated in the absence of SATs in each state, for the reasons
discussed above.

41. We also note that in Dilip K Basu (supra), the fact that victims or complainants would not have
access to an efficacious remedy in the absence of State Human Rights Commissions weighed heavily
with this Court. They would be required to approach the National Human Rights Commission,
which this Court noted could prove inaccessible to people living in places far away from New Delhi
where it is headquartered. Here, the absence of SATs does not leave litigants without an efficacious
remedy. The High Courts or other forums already designated for the purpose of adjudicating service
matters continue to be operational in each state and the absence of SATs does not inconvenience
litigants any more than they otherwise would have been.

42. Hence, the word “may” in Article 323-A of the Constitution is not imparted with the character of
the word “shall.” Article 323-A is a directory, enabling provision which confers the Union
Government with the discretion to establish an administrative tribunal. The corollary of this is that
Article 323-A does not act as a bar to the Union Government abolishing an administrative tribunal
once it is created.

iv. Applicability of Section 21 of the General Clauses Act PART D

43. The Union Government invoked Section 21 of the General Clauses Act read with Section 4(2) of
the Administrative Tribunals Act to rescind the notification establishing the OAT. Section 21 of the
General Clauses Act, which is a rule of construction, is extracted below:

“Power to make, to include power to add to, amend, vary or rescind, orders, rules or
bye-laws.— Where, by any Act or Regulation, a power to issue notifications, orders,
rules or bye-laws is conferred then that power includes a power, exercisable in the
like manner and subject to the like sanction and conditions (if any), to add to, amend,
vary or rescind any notifications, orders, rules or byelaws so issued.”

44. The appellants contend that the Union Government could not have taken recourse to Section 21
of the General Clauses Act. A two-step analysis must precede the answer to the question posed by
the appellants.

a. There is no bar to the applicability of Section 21 of the General Clauses Act to the administrative
order establishing the OAT

45. In Indian National Congress (I) v. Institute of Social Welfare 16, this Court held that Section 21
of the General Clauses Act cannot be pressed into service to vary, amend, or review a quasi-judicial
order or notification. It is important to note that a quasi-judicial order or notification cannot be

17

Orissa Administrative Tribunal Bar ... vs Union Of India on 21 March, 2023

rescinded by relying upon Section 21 of the General Clauses Act. The notification dated 2 August
2019 rescinded the notification dated 4 July 1986 by which the OAT was established. It is therefore
the notification dated 4 July 1986 which established the OAT which must be analysed to determine
whether it is a quasi-judicial notification, and not the notification dated 2 August 2019, the 16
(2002) 5 SCC 685 PART D effect of which was to abolish the OAT. If the answer is that the decision
to establish the OAT was indeed a quasi-judicial decision, Section 21 of the General Clauses Act
cannot be relied on to reverse this decision. As a consequence, the notification dated 2 August 2019
will be invalid, being improperly issued. If, however, the decision to establish the OAT was
administrative , there would be no bar to the invocation of Section 21 of the General Clauses Act to
rescind the notification establishing the OAT.

46. This Court discussed the meaning and contours of a quasi-judicial act in Province of Bombay v.
Khushaldas S. Advani17, where SR Das, J. in his concurring opinion held:

“80.1.(i) that if a statute empowers an authority, not being a court in the ordinary
sense, to decide disputes arising out of a claim made by one party under the statute
which claim is opposed by another party and to determine the respective rights of the
contesting parties who are opposed to each other, there is a lis and prima facie and in
the absence of anything in the statute to the contrary it is the duty of the authority to
act judicially and the decision of the authority is a quasi-judicial act; and 80.2.(ii)
that if a statutory authority has power to do any act which will prejudicially affect the
subject, then, although there are not two parties apart from the authority and the
contest is between the authority proposing to do the act and the subject opposing it,
the final determination of the authority will yet be a quasi-judicial act provided the
authority is required by the statute to act judicially.

81. In other words, while the presence of two parties besides the deciding authority
will prima facie, and in the absence of any other factor impose upon the authority the
duty to act judicially, the absence of two such parties is not decisive in taking the act
of the authority out of the category of quasi-judicial act if the authority is nevertheless
required by the statute to act judicially.”

47. In Indian National Congress (I) (supra), this Court held that:

17 (1950) SCC 551 PART D “29. … another test which distinguishes administrative
function from quasi-judicial function is, the authority who acts quasi-judicially is
required to act according to the rules, whereas the authority which acts
administratively is dictated by the policy and expediency.”

48. In Board of High School and Intermediate Education v. Ghanshyam Das Gupta 18, this Court
expounded upon when an authority is required to act judicially:

“8. … Now it may be mentioned that the statute is not likely to provide in so many
words that the authority passing the order is required to act judicially; that can only

18

Orissa Administrative Tribunal Bar ... vs Union Of India on 21 March, 2023

be inferred from the express provisions of the statute in the first instance in each case
and no one circumstance alone will be determinative of the question whether the
authority set up by the statute has the duty to act judicially or not. The inference
whether the authority acting under a statute where it is silent has the duty to act
judicially will depend on the express provisions of the statute read along with the
nature of the right affected, the manner of the disposal provided, the objective
criterion if any to be adopted, the effect of the decision on the person affected and
other indicia afforded by the statute.”

49. From the above decisions, it emerges that:

a. The decision of an authority is prima facie, and in the absence of any other factor, a
quasi-judicial act when there is a lis before it, with two parties with competing
claims;

b. When the authority has the power to do something which will prejudicially affect
the subject, the decision it takes is a quasi-judicial act even in the absence of a lis and
two parties with competing claims, when the authority is required by the statute in
question to act judicially. The express provisions of the statute, the nature of the right
affected, the manner of disposal, the objective criterion (if any) to be adopted while
18 AIR 1962 SC 1110 PART D deciding one way or the other, the effect of the decision,
and other signs in the statute may be considered when evaluating whether there is a
duty to act judicially; and c. The decision of an authority is quasi-judicial when it is
made in accordance with rules. The decision is administrative when it is dictated by
policy and expediency.

50. Having laid down the above principles, it must be realised that the distinction between
quasi-judicial and administrative acts is not always well defined and its application is not always
certain. Doctrine and practice are not necessarily happy partners. The instant case evidently does
not involve a lis or two parties with competing claims appearing before an authority who will
determine their respective rights. Further, the act of the Union Government establishing the OAT
did not prejudicially affect the subject in any manner. Litigants or other citizens were not left
without a forum. They could continue to pursue their remedies before the OAT when it was first
established, instead of before the Orissa High Court.

51. The Union Government was not acting in a judicial capacity when it set up the OAT. On the
establishment of the OAT, pending cases before the High Court were transferred to the OAT.
Indeed, the decision to establish an SAT is based on policy and expediency. It is up to each State
Government to evaluate the need for an SAT within their state, to consider the advantages and
disadvantages as well as the financial, administrative, and other practical aspects of establishing an
SAT. The Union Government may then establish PART D the SAT upon receiving a request, in terms
of Section 4(2) of the Administrative Tribunals Act. The decision to establish an SAT is undoubtedly
an administrative decision. Administrative decisions, unlike quasi-judicial decisions, may be
reversed by the application of Section 21 of the General Clauses Act. The applicability of Section 21

19

of the General Clauses Act does not stand excluded in the present case.

Orissa Administrative Tribunal Bar ... vs Union Of India on 21 March, 2023

52. The appellants’ reliance on Industrial Infrastructure Development Corpn.

(Gwalior) M.P. Ltd. v. CIT 19 is misplaced for similar reasons. In that case, Section 21 of the General
Clauses Act was found to be inapplicable to the order because it was a quasi-judicial order. For the
reasons discussed above, the order establishing the OAT is an administrative order.

53. We clarify that the distinction between quasi-judicial and administrative decisions has been
invoked for the purpose of determining whether Section 21 of the General Clauses Act may be
invoked to reverse the decision to establish an SAT. Administrative orders continue to be amenable
to judicial review in accordance with law.

b. Section 21 of the General Clauses Act is otherwise applicable to the Administrative Tribunals Act

54. Having decided that there is no threshold bar to the applicability of Section 21 of the General
Clauses Act, we now consider whether it applies in the present 19 (2018) 4 SCC 494 PART D case.
The locus classicus on this subject is State of Bihar v. D N Ganguly 20, where this Court held:

“9. … It is well settled that this section embodies a rule of construction and the
question whether or not it applies to the provisions of a particular statute would
depend on the subject- matter, context, and, the effect, of the relevant provisions of
the said statute. In other words, it would be necessary to examine carefully the
scheme of the Act, its object and all its relevant and material provisions before
deciding whether by the application of the rule of construction enunciated by Section
21, the appellant's contention is justified that the power to cancel the reference made
under Section 10(1) can be said to vest in the appropriate government by necessary
implication. If we come to the conclusion that the context and effect of the relevant
provisions is repugnant to the application of the said rule of construction, the
appellant would not be entitled to invoke the assistance of the said section. We must,
therefore, proceed to examine the relevant provisions of the Act itself.”

55. In Kamla Prasad Khetan v. Union of India 21, a Constitution Bench of this Court
held that:

“10. … Section 21 of the General Clauses Act embodies a rule of construction, and that
rule must have reference to the context and subject-matter of the particular statute to
which it is being applied”

56. Section 21 of the General Clauses Act can be invoked when its application would
not be repugnant to the subject-matter, context, and effect of the statute and when it
is in harmony with its scheme and object. The court may refer to the provisions of the
statute in question to determine whether Section 21 of the General Clauses Act will be
applicable.

20

Orissa Administrative Tribunal Bar ... vs Union Of India on 21 March, 2023

57. The scheme of the Administrative Tribunals Act is briefly analysed below:

20 1959 SCR 1191 21 1957 SCR 1052 PART D a. Section 4 enables the Union Government to establish
an SAT upon receipt of a request in this behalf from the concerned State Government; b. Section 5
provides for the composition of SATs. Sections 8 and 10B stipulate the term of office of the
Chairperson and the Members; c. Section 15 governs the jurisdiction of SATs;

d. Chapter IV sets out the procedure to be followed before the Tribunal as well as the powers
exercisable by it; and e. Section 29 provides that every suit or proceeding pending before any court
or authority immediately before the date of establishment of a tribunal under the Administrative
Tribunals Act which would have been within the jurisdiction of the tribunal if the cause of action in
such suit or proceeding had arisen after the establishment of the tribunal, stands transferred to the
tribunal on the date of its establishment.

58. The Administrative Tribunals Act does not contain a provision and a corresponding procedure
for the abolition of an SAT once it is established. However, this does not mean that the abolition of
an SAT, once it is set up, is impermissible. First, the Administrative Tribunals Act does not proscribe
the abolition of an SAT by the Union Government, upon the latter receiving a request from the
concerned State Government. Second, nothing in the scheme of the statute implies or suggests that
such an abolition would be incompatible with the objective sought to be achieved. To the contrary, if
the concerned State Government is of the considered view that the SAT is failing PART D to meet
the objectives of the Administrative Tribunals Act or that an alternate route for meeting the same
objectives is preferable to that of operating an SAT, it is free to act upon its view and request the
Union Government to abolish the SAT. An amendment to the Administrative Tribunals Act is not a
prerequisite for the State Government to make a request to the Union Government.

59. As noticed above, the object of the Administrative Tribunals Act is to reduce arrears and enable
the provision of speedy justice to litigants. Abolishing an SAT would not frustrate this objective
because SATs are not the only method by which the object is capable of being achieved. Further, the
effect of such an abolition would not be to deprive litigants of a remedy because the cases before the
SAT would stand revived in the forum in which they were pending prior to the establishment of that
SAT. The subject matter and the context of the Administrative Tribunals Act, too, do not militate
against the application of Section 21 of the General Clauses Act. There is therefore nothing in the
Administrative Tribunals Act which is repugnant to the application of Section 21 of the General
Clauses Act. The relevant State Government has the implied power to issue a request to abolish the
SAT in its state to the Union Government. The Union Government in turn has the implied power to
rescind the notification by which that SAT was established, thereby abolishing the SAT.

PART D

60. The appellants have relied on decisions of this Court in Lt. Governor of H.P. v. Avinash Sharma
22 and State of M.P. v. Ajay Singh 23 to support their case. In Avinash Sharma (supra), this Court
held that after the Government takes possession of land pursuant to a notification under Section
17(1) of the Land Acquisition Act 1894, the land vests with the Government and the notification

21

Orissa Administrative Tribunal Bar ... vs Union Of India on 21 March, 2023

cannot be cancelled under Section 21 of the General Clauses Act. Further, the notification could not
be withdrawn in exercise of the powers under Section 48 of the Land Acquisition Act 1894, once
possession of the land was taken. The present case does not concern the acquisition of land, making
the decision in Avinash Sharma (supra) irrelevant to the question at hand. Moreover, Section 48 of
the Land Acquisition Act 1894 had a specific provision governing a withdrawal from acquisition and
hence the conditions contained in the statutory provision could not be obviated by taking recourse
to Section 21 of the General Clauses Act. The scheme of the Land Acquisition Act 1894 and the
scheme of the Administrative Tribunals Act are different and the scheme and context of each
enactment must be considered on its own merits.

61. In Ajay Singh (supra), this Court held that the rule of construction embodied in Section 21 of the
General Clauses Act did not apply to the provisions of the Commissions of Inquiry Act 1952 because
the subject-matter, context and effect of its provisions were inconsistent with the application of
Section 21. In that case, the State of Madhya Pradesh had constituted a single-member high 22
(1970) 2 SCC 149 23 (1993) 1 SCC 302 PART D powered committee to investigate an issue of public
importance that had arisen within its territory. It later attempted to reconstitute the high-powered
committee by replacing the single member. The question in Ajay Singh (supra) was whether the
state government could rely on Section 21 of the General Clauses Act to rescind the notification by
which it had appointed the member at the first instance.

62. This Court answered in the negative because Section 3 of the Commissions of Inquiry Act 1952
provided for the power to fill any vacancies whereas Section 7 provided for the only situation in
which a Commission which was already constituted would cease to exist. This Court observed that
the Commissions of Inquiry Act 1952 did not provide for the power to reconstitute a Commission or
replace its members. The scheme of the enactment and its context indicated that Section 21 of the
General Clauses Act could not be invoked. Further, the object of the Commissions of Inquiry Act
1952 would be frustrated if the appropriate government were permitted to reconstitute a
Commission midway through the task that it was charged with completing because it made it
possible for an independent agency to exist, free from governmental control. In the present case,
there is no such impediment to the application of Section 21 of the General Clauses Act. The object
of the Administrative Tribunals Act would not stand frustrated if an SAT is created and then
abolished. The Union and State Governments may take alternate routes (some of which may have
already been in operation, supplementing SATs) towards achieving the same objective. Hence, the
decision in Ajay Singh (supra) does not assist the appellants’ case.

PART D

63. The appellants have also argued that the Union Government’s power to abolish SATs must flow
from the same legislation that vests it with the power to establish them. It is their contention that
the Union Government does not have the power to abolish SATs because the Administrative
Tribunals Act does not provide for it. This argument fails for the simple reason that the very purpose
of Section 21 of the General Clauses Act is to provide for contingencies such as the instant case when
the statute in question does not explicitly provide for the power to add to, amend, vary, or rescind a
notification (or order, rule, or by-law) which has been issued. Of course, the application of Section

22

Orissa Administrative Tribunal Bar ... vs Union Of India on 21 March, 2023

21 of the General Clauses Act is subject to the test laid down in D N Ganguly (supra) as discussed
previously as well as the other requirements mentioned in the provision itself.

64. If the argument of the appellants were to be accepted, Section 21 of the General Clauses Act
would be rendered otiose. It would not apply to any statute which does not explicitly provide for the
power to add to, amend, vary, or rescind notifications, orders, rules or bye-laws. On the other hand,
if the statute itself conferred the power to add to, amend, vary, or rescind notifications, orders, rules
or by-laws, there would be no need to rely on Section 21 of the General Clauses Act. This is not a
conceivable position because courts must interpret statutes so as to give effect to their provisions
rather than to render them futile. 24 24 M. Pentiah v. Muddala Veeramallappa (1961) 2 SCR 295
PART D

65. The appellants have also submitted that what cannot be done directly cannot be done indirectly.
For the reasons discussed above, neither Article 323-A of the Constitution nor the Administrative
Tribunals Act prohibit the abolition of SATs. Hence, it cannot be said that the Union Government is
barred from abolishing the SATs “directly” and that it has resorted to Section 21 of the General
Clauses Act to evade such a ban and “indirectly” abolish the OAT. The Union Government’s reliance
on Section 21 of the General Clauses Act to abolish the OAT is legally permissible.

66. The appellants have urged that the Administrative Tribunal (Amendment) Bill 2006 was
introduced in Parliament to provide an enabling provision for the abolition of SATs and for the
transfer of pending cases from the abolished SAT to the relevant High Court. This bill was referred
to the Rajya Sabha Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, which
submitted its report on 5 December 2006. The report recommended that the power to abolish an
SAT should not be granted to the executive. It is argued that the Union Government does not have
the power to abolish SATs because this Bill was not enacted into law because of the
recommendations contained in the report of the Standing Committee.

67. The appellants seem to be implying that Parliament was of the opinion that the Union
Government did not have the power to abolish SATs in the absence of an enabling provision. It may
also be the case that Parliament introduced the Administrative Tribunal (Amendment) Bill 2006 in
order to clarify the power of the Union Government to abolish SATs rather than to confer it with
PART D that power. This Court cannot possibly enter into a discussion or analysis of all the
potential reasons for a proposed amendment.

68. The appellants have put forth another argument on similar lines. It is their case the Union
Government’s stance before the Madras High Court in the TNAT Abolition Case (supra) must
influence this Court’s decision on whether the Union Government has the power to rescind a
notification establishing SATs. The Union Government’s stance was recorded in paragraph 4 of the
TNAT Abolition Case (supra):

“4. On the other hand, the stand taken by the Central Government, the first
respondent herein, is that though the Government of Tamil Nadu has sent a proposal
to the Central Government for abolition, this cannot be done through Notification.

23

Orissa Administrative Tribunal Bar ... vs Union Of India on 21 March, 2023

The appropriate legislation for this proposal has to be brought in the Parliament and
the same is being contemplated by the Law Department which after due processing
and approval will be brought before the Parliament. Mere Notification of the Central
Government would not suffice in this case, since Section 74 of the Madhya Pradesh
Reorganisation Act, 2000 would specifically provide for the abolition through
Notification. But, such a provision is not available in this State. Therefore, suitable
Parliamentary amendment to the Administrative Tribunal Act is necessary to
consider such proposal. The necessary steps for the same are being taken by the
Central Government.”

69. The Union Government’s stance on a question of law before a court in another case or for that
matter, any party’s position on a question of law, does not preclude this Court from interpreting the
law. In Zakir Abdul Mirajkar v. State of Maharashtra25, a two-judge Bench of this Court (of which
one of us, Dr. DY Chandrachud, J. was a part) held:

“36. … A submission which is made on a question of law by counsel appearing for a
party (in this case, the state) cannot bind that party 25 (2022) SCC OnLine SC 1092
PART D or for that matter, preclude this Court from correctly interpreting the law.”
The Union Government’s stance before the Madras High Court in the TNAT Abolition
Case (supra) will therefore not steer this Court’s exegesis of the law.

70. At this juncture, we may also deal with three interrelated arguments put forward by the
appellants with respect to the transfer of cases from the abolished OAT to the Orissa High Court:

a. The Constitution of India (including Article 323-A) does not envisage a transfer of
cases from any court or tribunal to a particular High Court except in terms of Article
228 of the Constitution; b. While Section 29 of the Administrative Tribunals Act
provides for the transfer of cases from the High Courts (or other courts and
authorities) to the relevant SATs, there is no provision which enables the transfer of
cases from the abolished SATs back to the forum in which they would have been
heard if not for the establishment of SATs; and c. The abolition of the OAT has the
effect of enlarging the jurisdiction of the Orissa High Court but Parliament alone has
the power to create or enlarge jurisdiction. Reliance is placed on A.R. Antulay v. R.S.
Nayak (1988) 2 SCC 602.

71. The response to the three arguments is that the transfer of cases from the OAT to the Orissa High
Court is, properly characterized, a revival of the latter’s jurisdiction. We agree with the impugned
judgment that the Orissa PART D High Court’s jurisdiction in relation to matters pending before the
OAT is not being created or enlarged by the abolition of the OAT. It previously exercised such
jurisdiction and is merely resuming its jurisdiction over the same subject matter. It is for this reason
that the decision in A.R. Antulay (supra) is not applicable to the facts of the present case.

72. The natural consequence of the Union Government rescinding the notification establishing the
OAT would be to restore the status quo ante. Nothing in either Article 323-A of the Constitution or

24

Orissa Administrative Tribunal Bar ... vs Union Of India on 21 March, 2023

the Administrative Tribunals Act prevents such a revival. Further, the absence of a provision in the
Constitution which explicitly permits a revival does not act as a barrier to such a revival. For the
reasons discussed above, we hold that the Union Government’s reliance on Section 21 of the General
Clauses Act is in accordance with law. v. The notification dated 2 August 2019 is not violative of
Article 14 of the Constitution a. The notification dated 2 August 2019 is not based on irrelevant or
extraneous considerations

73. The appellants have urged that the notification dated 2 August 2019 is based on an incorrect
understanding of the decision in L. Chandra Kumar (supra) and is arbitrary, unreasonable and
violative of Article 14 of the Constitution. PART D

74. The principle that Article 14 strikes at arbitrariness and that arbitrary action by the state violates
the fundamental guarantee of equality has been recognized as a basic postulate since the decision in
E.P. Royappa v. State of T.N.26:

“85. … equality is antithetic to arbitrariness. In fact equality and arbitrariness are
sworn enemies; one belongs to the rule of law in a republic while the other, to the
whim and caprice of an absolute monarch. Where an act is arbitrary, it is implicit in it
that it is unequal both according to political logic and constitutional law and is
therefore violative of Article 14 … Articles 14 and 16 strike at arbitrariness in State
action and ensure fairness and equality of treatment. They require that State action
must be based on valid relevant principles applicable alike to all similarly situate and
it must not be guided by any extraneous or irrelevant considerations because that
would be denial of equality.” (emphasis supplied) The State Government’s decision to
abolish the OAT will therefore have to be scrutinized with a view to understanding
whether any extraneous or irrelevant considerations intruded into the decision.

75. The phrase ‘arbitrary’ is often used synonymously with the phrase ‘unreasonable.’ The test as to
whether an action is reasonable was formulated by the Court of Appeal in Associated Provincial
Picture Houses, Limited v. Wednesbury Corporation 27:

“It is true the discretion must be exercised reasonably. Now what does that mean? …
For instance, a person entrusted with a discretion must, so to speak, direct himself
properly in law. He must call his own attention to the matters which he is bound to
consider. He must exclude from his consideration matters which are irrelevant to
what he has to consider. If he does not obey those rules, he may truly be said, and
often is said, to be acting “unreasonably.” Similarly, there may be something so
absurd that no sensible person could ever dream that it lay within the powers of the
authority.” 26 (1974) 4 SCC 3 27 [1948] 1 K.B. 223 PART D This Court has
consistently assessed the validity of executive action on the anvil of the test laid down
in Wednesbury Corporation (supra), including in G.B. Mahajan v. Jalgaon Municipal
Council 28, Tata Cellular v. Union of India29, Punjab Communications Ltd. v. Union
of India 30 and Union of India v. International Trading Co.31.

25

Orissa Administrative Tribunal Bar ... vs Union Of India on 21 March, 2023

76. The reasons for the State Government’s decision to abolish the OAT are recorded in a document
titled ‘A note indicating the rationale’ with the subject ‘Abolition of Odisha Administrative Tribunal.’
This note was prepared by the General Administration Department, Government of Odisha and is
dated 16 September 2015. The relevant parts of the note are extracted below:

“1. Background Odisha Administrative Tribunal (OAT) was established on 14th July,
1986 under the Administrative Tribunal Act, 1985 by Government of India on the
request of Government of Odisha. The Tribunal under the Act was to have similar
jurisdiction as the High Court. The applicants were supposed to be freed from the
requirement of having to approach the High Court for disposal of their grievances. In
lieu of the High Court the aggrieved government employees could go to the Tribunal
and from there on to the Supreme Court directly …

2. Supreme Court Landmark Judgment (18th March, 1997) However, with the
decision of the Supreme Court in L Chandra Kumar (1997) the provision of the Act
that aggrieved parties could appeal before the Supreme Court against the orders of
the Tribunal was held unconstitutional … it was held that the parties aggrieved with
the orders of the Tribunal may approach the High Court first before going to the
Supreme Court …

3. Impact of the Supreme Court Judgment 28 (1991) 3 SCC 91 29 (1994) 6 SCC 651 30
(1999) 4 SCC 727 31 (2003) 5 SCC 437 PART D As a consequence of the landmark
judgment of the Supreme Court, the objective of the establishment of the Tribunal to
give quick justice to the government employees was defeated and several States felt
that the existence of the Tribunal was rendered futile.” (emphasis supplied) The State
Government enclosed this note with its letter dated 16 September 2015 to the Union
Government, requesting it to abolish the OAT. The relevant portion of the letter is
extracted below:

“This is to state that the State Administrative Tribunal has been functioning in
Odisha since 14.07.1986. Government of Odisha is of the view that the Tribunal is not
able to serve its original objectives, particularly after the Hon'ble Apex Court gave the
Judgment in L. Chandra Kumar case of 1997. As a result of this judgment, very
purpose of having a State Administrative Tribunal (SAT) for speedy redressal of the
grievances of the State Government employees is not fulfilled as any way the
aggrieved parties have to approach the Hon'ble High Court before approaching the
Apex Court for a final verdict.

Government of Odisha, after taking into account this, have decided to recommend to
the Government of India to abolish the Odisha Administrative Tribunal. A note
indicating the rationale adopted by the State Government in arriving at this decision
is enclosed herewith for your ready reference.” (emphasis supplied)

26

Orissa Administrative Tribunal Bar ... vs Union Of India on 21 March, 2023

77. Similar reasons have been recorded in various other documents of the State Government which
relate to the abolition of the OAT. The State Government requested the Union Government to
establish the OAT with a view to creating an alternate forum to the Orissa High Court. The State
Government envisioned a structure of litigation whereby appeals from the OAT would lie directly to
the Supreme Court, and would exclude the High Court both as the court of first instance as well as a
forum of appeal. In the State Government’s view, the structure of litigation under the Administrative
Tribunals Act would ensure that the dispute achieved quietus in a maximum of two tiers of PART D
litigation. However, the decision of this Court in L. Chandra Kumar (supra) held that the
jurisdiction of High Courts could not be ousted. This resulted in the creation of three tiers of
litigation under the Administrative Tribunals Act – first, before the OAT, followed by the High
Court, and culminating with the Supreme Court. The State Government was consequently of the
opinion that the “speedy redressal of grievances” was no longer possible in view of the additional
rung of litigation. It was of the opinion that its reason for establishing the OAT no longer survived.

78. The appellants contend that the State Government has misinterpreted the decision in L.
Chandra Kumar (supra). It is their submission that the number of tiers of litigation remains the
same even if the OAT is abolished and that there is therefore no advantage to be obtained by
abolishing the OAT. Instead of parties instituting a case before the OAT at the first instance and
preferring a petition under Article 226 before a Division Bench of the High Court and a Special
Leave Petition under Article 136 before the Supreme Court, they will institute a case directly before
the High Court. This will be heard by a single judge and parties have the remedy of a writ appeal
before a Division Bench of the High Court and a further challenge before this Court. There are
hence, three tiers of litigation, regardless of the forum in which the proceedings are conducted. The
appellants also contend that the Orissa High Court is itself burdened with a large number of pending
cases and that an increase in its workload would not result in efficiency in the disposal of cases.
PART D

79. It was not the State Government’s case that it was obliged to abolish the OAT as a result of the
decision in L. Chandra Kumar (supra) or that the abolition of the OAT would result in fewer tiers of
litigation. Rather, the State Government evaluated the effect of the decision in L. Chandra Kumar
(supra) on the purpose that it intended to achieve with the establishment of the OAT. Tribunals,
including administrative tribunals, may be set up for any number of reasons. All the reasons which
could possibly or theoretically have had a bearing on the State Government’s decision to establish
the OAT are not relevant. Only the State Government’s actual reason for establishing the OAT is
relevant in considering whether it misinterpreted L. Chandra Kumar’s case (supra). The State
Government’s reason for setting up the OAT was to achieve speedy justice. A crucial factor (to its
mind) was the elimination of a tier of litigation. The State Government was of the opinion that the
creation of the OAT would not fulfil the purpose of a speedy redressal of grievances because there
was no improvement to the justice delivery system through the elimination of a tier of litigation.

80. As for the submission that the Orissa High Court’s pendency will increase if the cases pending
before the OAT are transferred to it, the State Government is entitled to structure its justice delivery
systems within the parameters defined by law. Its decision may be set aside only if it is
unconstitutional or without the authority of law.

27

Orissa Administrative Tribunal Bar ... vs Union Of India on 21 March, 2023

81. In addition to the impact of the decision in L. Chandra Kumar (supra), the State Government
considered other factors related to the functioning of the PART D OAT. In the note dated 16
September 2015, the State Government furnished other reasons for its decision to abolish the OAT:

“Government is incurring a significant sum of expenditure on the OAT as is exhibited
in the table given below:

Table 1: Plan and Non-Plan Provision for OAT (Rs in Lakhs) Head of Expenditure
2014-15 2015-16 Non-Plan 616.24 697.69 Total 821.83 897.69 The following table
represents the institution and disposal of OA and MP cases in OAT month wise from
January 2014 to December 2014:-

Table 2 shows that there were 47,619 cases pending at the beginning of 2014. During
the calendar year 2014, 7417 cases were PART D disposed whereas 13,823 fresh cases
were instituted. At the end of the year 2014, the number of pending cases went up to
54,334 … As an institutional mechanism it seems the Tribunal has not been able to
provide speedy decisions …” (emphasis in original) The State Government was
therefore concerned not only with the additional tier of litigation at the Orissa High
Court but also with the expenditure incurred to operate the OAT as well as the rate at
which the OAT disposed of cases. It was persuaded to abolish the OAT due to a
combination of all these factors.

82. From the above discussion, the following conclusions emerge:

a. While arriving at the decision to abolish the OAT, the State Government
considered relevant reasons. It considered whether the OAT was capable of fulfilling
the purpose for which it was established after the decision in L. Chandra Kumar
(supra). It placed in the balance the expenditure incurred to operate the OAT as well
as the rate of disposal of cases. These reasons were not irrelevant to the decision as to
whether a tribunal ought to be continued;

b. The State Government’s act of consulting the Orissa High Court (upon receiving a
request to this effect from the Union Government) before deciding to abolish the OAT
was not irrelevant or extraneous. The cases before the OAT were to be transferred to
the Orissa High Court and the opinion of the latter was relevant to State
Government’s decision; c. The State Government did not consider factors which were
irrelevant or extraneous to its decision; and PART D d. The decision to abolish the
OAT was not one which was so absurd that no reasonable person or authority would
ever have taken it. The decision to abolish a tribunal which it had established, based
on an analysis of relevant factors is, by no stretch of imagination, an absurd or
unreasonable decision.

83. This Court reached a similar conclusion in the MPAT Abolition Case (supra). The appellants in
that case argued that the decision to abolish the MPAT was arbitrary, unreasonable, and violative of

28

Article 14 of the Constitution. This Court rejected their argument in the following terms:

Orissa Administrative Tribunal Bar ... vs Union Of India on 21 March, 2023

“57. … The notification was issued by the Central Government in 1988 and the State
Administrative Tribunal was established for the State of Madhya Pradesh. At that
time, as per well-settled legal position, decisions rendered by the Administrative
Tribunals constituted under the Act of 1985 were “final” subject to jurisdiction of this
Court under Article 136 of the Constitution. … If, in view of subsequent development
of law in L. Chandra Kumar [(1997) 3 SCC 261 : 1997 SCC (L&S) 577 : AIR 1997 SC
1125] the State of Madhya Pradesh felt that continuation of State Administrative
Tribunal would be “one more tier” in the administration of justice inasmuch as after a
decision is rendered by the State Administrative Tribunal, an aggrieved party could
approach the High Court under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution and, hence, it
felt that such Tribunal should not be continued further, in our opinion, it cannot be
said that such a decision is arbitrary, irrational or unreasonable. From the
correspondence between the State of Madhya Pradesh and the Central Government
as well as from the affidavit-in-reply, it is clear that the decision of this Court in L.
Chandra Kumar [(1997) 3 SCC 261 : 1997 SCC (L&S) 577 : AIR 1997 SC 1125] had
been considered by the State of Madhya Pradesh in arriving at a decision to abolish
State Administrative Tribunal. Such a consideration, in our opinion, was relevant,
germane and valid.” The decision to abolish the MPAT was based on similar
considerations as the decision to abolish the OAT. For these reasons, the abolition of
the OAT is not arbitrary or unreasonable. It does not violate Article 14 of the
Constitution.

PART D

84. Our choice of the test articulated in Wednesbury Corporation (supra) must not be understood to
mean that no other yardstick may be utilized to test the constitutional legitimacy of executive action,
under Article 14. This Court has previously approved of the use of the proportionality test to
evaluate the validity of certain kinds of executive action, including in Om Kumar v. Union of India
32 and Teri Oat Estates (P) Ltd. v. UT, Chandigarh 33. The proportionality test may well be
applicable to other cases where executive overreach is alleged.

b. The principles of natural justice have not been violated

85. The appellants submit that the Union and State Governments have violated the principles of
natural justice by failing to provide the OAT Bar Association and the litigants before the OAT with
an opportunity to be heard before abolishing the OAT. They argue that this violates Article 14 of the
Constitution.

86. The decision to establish, continue or abolish the OAT is in the nature of a policy formulated and
implemented by the State Government (acting with the Union Government under the
Administrative Tribunals Act). The public at large does not have a right to be heard before a policy is
formulated and implemented. The process of consultation with the public, with experts, and with

29

Orissa Administrative Tribunal Bar ... vs Union Of India on 21 March, 2023

other stakeholders may be desirable and would facilitate a participatory democracy. However, each
member of the class that would be impacted by a 32 AIR (2000) SC 3689 33 (2004) 2 SCC 130
PART D policy decision cannot be afforded an opportunity of hearing. This would not only be time
consuming and expensive, but deeply impractical.

87. BALCO Employees' Union (Regd.) v. Union of India 34 concerned the validity of the decision of
the Union of India to disinvest and transfer 51% shares of Bharat Aluminium Company Limited. The
petitioner in that case (the union of the company’s employees) inter alia submitted that it had a right
to be heard before and during the process of disinvestment. This Court rejected this argument,
observing that:

“57. … As a matter of good governance and administration whenever such policy
decisions are taken, it is desirable that there should be wide range of consultations
including considering any representations which may have been filed, but there is no
provision in law which would require a hearing to be granted before taking a policy
decision. In exercise of executive powers, policy decisions have to be taken from time
to time. It will be impossible and impracticable to give a formal hearing to those who
may be affected whenever a policy decision is taken. One of the objects of giving a
hearing in application of the principles of natural justice is to see that an illegal action
or decision does not take place. Any wrong order may adversely affect a person and it
is essentially for this reason that a reasonable opportunity may have to be granted
before passing of an administrative order. In case of the policy decision, however, it is
impracticable, and at times against the public interest, to do so, but this does not
mean that a policy decision which is contrary to law cannot be challenged. … If the
decision is otherwise illegal as being contrary to law or any constitutional provision,
the persons affected like the workmen, can impugn the same, but not giving a
pre-decisional hearing cannot be a ground for quashing the decision.” (emphasis
supplied) Although the decision in BALCO Employees' Union (Regd.) (supra) was
rendered in the context of a policy decision with economic implications, it would be
applicable in the present case. The principle enunciated in that case 34 (2002) 2 SCC
333 PART D is equally applicable to other categories of policy decisions. This is
because it is impractical to hear every member of the class impacted by a policy
decision.

88. The absence of a right to be heard before the formulation or implementation of a policy does not
mean that affected parties are precluded from challenging the policy in a court of law. What it means
is that a policy decision cannot be struck down on the ground that it was arrived at without offering
the members of the public at large (or some section of it) an opportunity to be heard. The challenge
to a policy may be sustainable if it is found to vitiate constitutional rights or is otherwise in breach of
a mandate of law.

89. For the reasons discussed above, the decision to abolish the OAT cannot be assailed on the
ground that there was a violation of the principles of natural justice. Article 14 of the Constitution
has not been violated. vi. The Union Government did not become functus officio after establishing

30

the OAT

Orissa Administrative Tribunal Bar ... vs Union Of India on 21 March, 2023

90. P Ramanatha Aiyer’s The Law Lexicon (1997 edition) defines the term functus officio as:

“A term applied to something which once has had a life and power, but which has
become of no virtue whatsoever … One who has fulfilled his office or is out of office;
an authority who has performed the act authorised so that the authority is exhausted”

91. Black’s Law Dictionary (5th edition) defines the term as follows:

“Having fulfilled the function, discharged the office, or accomplished the purpose,
and therefore of no further force or authority … an PART D instrument, power,
agency, etc. which has fulfilled the purpose of its creation, and is therefore of no
further virtue or effect.”

92. The doctrine of functus officio gives effect to the principle of finality. Once a judge or a
quasi-judicial authority has rendered a decision, it is not open to her to revisit the decision and
amend, correct, clarify, or reverse it (except in the exercise of the power of review, conferred by law).
Once a judicial or quasi-judicial decision attains finality, it is subject to change only in proceedings
before the appellate court.

93. For instance, Section 362 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 provides that a court of law is
not to alter its judgment once it is signed:

“362. Court not to alter judgment.—Save as otherwise provided by this Code or by
any other law for the time being in force, no Court, when it has signed its judgment or
final order disposing of a case, shall alter or review the same except to correct a
clerical or arithmetical error.” In Hari Singh Mann v. Harbhajan Singh Bajwa 35, this
Court recognized that Section 362 was based on the doctrine of functus officio:

“10. … The section is based on an acknowledged principle of law that once a matter is
finally disposed of by a court, the said court in the absence of a specific statutory
provision becomes functus officio and disentitled to entertain a fresh prayer for the
same relief unless the former order of final disposal is set aside by a court of
competent jurisdiction in a manner prescribed by law. The court becomes functus
officio the moment the official order disposing of a case is signed. Such an order
cannot be altered except to the extent of correcting a clerical or an arithmetical
error.”

94. The doctrine of functus officio exists to provide a clear point where the adjudicative process ends
and to bring quietus to the dispute. Without it, decision-making bodies such as courts could
endlessly revisit their decisions. 35 (2001) 1 SCC 169 PART D With a definitive endpoint to a case
before a court or quasi-judicial authority, parties are free to seek judicial review or to prefer an
appeal. Alternatively, their rights are determined with finality. Similar considerations do not apply

31

to decisions by the state which are based entirely on policy or expediency.

Orissa Administrative Tribunal Bar ... vs Union Of India on 21 March, 2023

95. Turning to the present case, the appellants’ argument that the Union Government was rendered
functus officio after establishing the OAT does not stand scrutiny. The decision to establish the OAT
was administrative and based on policy considerations. If the doctrine of functus officio were to be
applied to the sphere of administrative decision-making by the state, its executive power would be
crippled. The state would find itself unable to change or reverse any policy or policy-based decision
and its functioning would grind to a halt. All policies would attain finality and any change would be
close to impossible to effectuate.

96. This would impact not only major policy decisions but also minor ones. For example, a minor
policy decision such as a bus route would not be amenable to any modification once it was notified.
Once determined, the bus route would stay the same regardless of the demand for, say, an
additional stop at a popular destination. Major policy decisions such as those concerning subsidies,
corporate governance, housing, education and social welfare would be frozen if the doctrine of
functus officio were to be applied to administrative decisions. This is not conceivable because it
would defeat the purpose of having a government and the foundation of governance. By their very
nature, policies are subject to change depending on the circumstances PART D prevailing in society
at any given time. The doctrine of functus officio cannot ordinarily be applied in cases where the
government is formulating and implementing a policy.

97. In the present case, the State and Union Governments’ authority has not been exhausted after
the establishment of an SAT. Similarly, the State and Union Governments cannot be said to have
fulfilled the purpose of their creation and to be of no further virtue or effect once they have
established an SAT. The state may revisit its policy decisions in accordance with law. For these
reasons, the Union Government was not rendered functus officio after establishing the OAT.

vii. The notification dated 2 August 2019 is valid despite not being expressed in the name of the
President of India

98. The appellants challenge the notification dated 2 August 2019 on the ground that it does not
comply with the requirements of clause (1) of Article 77 because it was not issued in the name of the
President of India.

99. Article 77 of the Constitution of India indicates:

“Conduct of business of the Government of India.— (1) All executive action of the
Government of India shall be expressed to be taken in the name of the President. (2)
Orders and other instruments made and executed in the name of the President shall
be authenticated in such manner as may be specified in rules to be made by the
President, and the validity of an order or instrument which is so authenticated shall
not be called in question on the ground that it is not an order or instrument made or
executed by the President.

32

Orissa Administrative Tribunal Bar ... vs Union Of India on 21 March, 2023

PART D (3) The President shall make rules for the more convenient transaction of the business of
the Government of India, and for the allocation among Ministers of the said business” Article 166
corresponds to Article 77. It states:

“Conduct of Business of the Government of a State.— (1) All executive action of the
Government of a State shall be expressed to be taken in the name of the Governor. (2)
Orders and other instruments made and executed in the name of the Governor shall
be authenticated in such manner as may be specified in rules to be made by the
Governor, and the validity of an order or instrument which is so authenticated shall
not be called in question on the ground that it is not an order or instrument made or
executed by the Governor.

(3) The Governor shall make rules for the more convenient transaction of the
business of the Government of the State, and for the allocation among Ministers of
the said business in so far as it is not business with respect to which the Governor is
by or under this Constitution required to act in his discretion” Clause (1) of Article
166 corresponds to clause (1) of Article 77. As a consequence, decisions of this Court
with respect to clause (1) of Article 166 will be of persuasive value while interpreting
clause (1) of Article 77.

100. In Air India Cabin Crew Assn. v. Yeshaswinee Merchant 36, a two-judge Bench of this Court
held that the exercise of statutory power is not rendered invalid if it is not expressed to have been
taken in the name of the President:

“72. In our opinion, reference to Article 77 is wholly inappropriate. The exercise of
statutory power under Section 34 by the Central Government, even though not
expressed to have been taken in the name of President, does not render it invalid.
Clause (2) of Article 77 insulates an executive action of the Government formally
taken in the name of President from challenge on the ground that it is not an order or
instrument made or executed by President. Even if an executive action of the Central
Government is not formally expressed to have been taken in the name of President,
Article 77 36 (2003) 6 SCC 277 PART D does not provide that it would, therefore, be
rendered void or invalid.

… In Major E.G. Barsay v. State of Bombay (1962) 2 SCR 195, a two-judge bench of this Court held:

“25. … Shortly stated, the legal position is this: Article 166(1) is only directory.
Though an impugned order was not issued in strict compliance with the provisions of
Article 166(1), it can be established by evidence aliunde that the order was made by
the appropriate authority. If an order is issued in the name of the Governor and is
duly authenticated in the manner prescribed in Rule (2) of the said Article, there is an
irrebuttable presumption that the order or instrument is made or executed by the
Governor. Any non-compliance with the provisions of the said rule does not
invalidate the order, but it precludes the drawing of any such irrebuttable

33

Orissa Administrative Tribunal Bar ... vs Union Of India on 21 March, 2023

presumption. This does not prevent any party from proving by other evidence that as
a matter of fact the order has been made by the appropriate authority. Article 77
which relates to conduct of business of the Government of India is couched in terms
similar to those in Article 166 and the same principles must govern the interpretation
of that provision.” (emphasis supplied)

101. Similar principles govern the interpretation of Article 166 and Article 77. A notification which is
not in compliance with clause (1) of Article 77 is not invalid, unconstitutional or non-est for that
reason alone. Rather, the irrebuttable presumption that the notification was issued by the President
of India (acting for the Union Government) is no longer available to the Union Government. The
notification continues to be valid and it is open to the Union Government to prove that the order
was indeed issued by the appropriate authority.

102. In the present case, the notification dated 2 August 2019 was not issued in the name of the
President. However, this does not render the notification invalid. The effect of not complying with
Article 77 is that the Union Government cannot claim the benefit of the irrebuttable presumption
that the PART D notification dated 2 August 2019 was issued by the President. Hence, the
appellants’ argument that the notification dated 2 August 2019 is invalid and unconstitutional is
specious.

103. Here, it is appropriate to note that the notification dated 4 July 1986 (by which the OAT was
established) was also not issued in the name of the President. However, the appellants seek to
preserve the establishment of the OAT by that notification while assailing the notification abolishing
the OAT. If the arguments of the appellants were to be accepted, the notification dated 4 July 1986
would be invalid. We are therefore not inclined to entertain the argument that the notification dated
2 August 2019 is invalid and non-est.

104. We are satisfied that both the notification dated 4 July 1986 and the notification dated 2 August
2019 were, in substance, issued by the President (acting for the Union Government). The
notifications were published in the Gazette of India in accordance with law and there is nothing on
record to support the suggestion that an authority which is not empowered to issue the notification
has issued it. To the contrary, Section 4 of the Administrative Tribunals Act empowers the Union
Government to issue a notification establishing the OAT and as discussed previously, the attendant
power to rescind a notification so issued is also available to the Union Government. The issuance of
both notifications was an exercise of the Union Government’s statutory power under the
Administrative Tribunals Act. PART D

105. The appellants place reliance on the decision of a Constitution Bench of this Court in Dattatraya
Moreshwar Pangarkar v. State of Bombay 37 and specifically on the sentence in paragraph 24, which
states:

“24. …when the executive decision affects an outsider or is required to be officially
notified or to be communicated it should normally be expressed in the form
mentioned in Article 166(1) i.e. in the name of the Governor.”

34

Orissa Administrative Tribunal Bar ... vs Union Of India on 21 March, 2023

106. The appellants have failed to notice the very next sentence in paragraph 24, by which this Court
accepts the argument that Article 166 is a directory provision:

“24. … The learned Attorney General then falls back upon the plea that an omission
to make and authenticate an executive decision in the form mentioned in Article 166
does not make the decision itself illegal, for the provisions of that article, like their
counterpart in the Government of India Act, are merely directory and not mandatory
… In my opinion, this contention of the learned Attorney General must prevail.

25. It is well settled that generally speaking the provisions of a statute creating public
duties are directory and those conferring private rights are imperative. When the
provisions of a statute relate to the performance of a public duty and the case is such
that to hold null and void acts done in neglect of this duty would work serious general
inconvenience or injustice to persons who have no control over those entrusted with
the duty and at the same time would not promote the main object of the legislature, it
has been the practice of the courts to hold such provisions to be directory only, the
neglect of them not affecting the validity of the acts done.”

107. Article 77 is a directory provision. Article 77(1) refers to the form in which the decision taken by
the executive is to be expressed. This is evident from the phrase “expressed to be taken” in clause (1)
of Article 77. It does not have any bearing on the process of decision-making itself. The public or the
citizenry would stand to suffer most from the consequences of declaring an 37 (1952) 1 SCC 372
PART D order that is not expressed in the name of the President null and void. Hence, the
appellants’ reliance on Dattatraya Moreshwar Pangarkar (supra) is misplaced.

108. The appellants also seek to rely on State of Uttaranchal v. Sunil Kumar Vaish 38, where a
two-judge bench of this Court observed:

“23. … unless an order is expressed in the name of the President or the Governor and
is authenticated in the manner prescribed by the rules, the same cannot be treated as
an order on behalf of the Government.” In this case, no reference is made to the
decision of the Constitution Bench in Dattatraya Moreshwar Pangarkar (supra),
which would be binding on the two-judge bench in Sunil Kumar Vaish (supra). As
noted above, Dattatraya Moreshwar Pangarkar (supra) held that the provisions of
Article 166 were directory and not mandatory. This would apply squarely to the
provisions of Article 77 as well. The decision in Sunil Kumar Vaish (supra) is of no
assistance to the appellants’ case.

109. Finally, the appellants have relied on Gulf Goans Hotel Co. Ltd. v. Union of India39 to support
their case. However, the decision in this case does not support the position urged by the appellants
because it, too, holds that the consequence of non-compliance with Article 77(1) is that it deprives
the Union Government of the immunity conferred by Article 77(2). It also notices that executive
action exercised pursuant to powers conferred under a statute 38 (2011) 8 SCC 670 39 (2014) 10
SCC 673 PART D stands on a different footing from executive action taken independent of a statute:

35

Orissa Administrative Tribunal Bar ... vs Union Of India on 21 March, 2023

“19. Article 77 of the Constitution provides the form in which the Executive must
make and authenticate its orders and decisions. Clause (1) of Article 77 provides that
all executive action of the Government must be expressed to be taken in the name of
the President. The celebrated author H.M. Seervai in Constitutional Law of India, 4th
Edn., Vol. 2, 1999 describes the consequences of government orders or instructions
not being in accordance with clauses (1) or (2) of Article 77 by opining that the same
would deprive the orders of the immunity conferred by the aforesaid clauses and they
may be open to challenge on the ground that they have not been made by or under
the authority of the President in which case the burden would be on the Government
to show that they were, in fact, so made. In the present case, the said burden has not
been discharged in any manner whatsoever. The decision in Air India Cabin Crew
Assn. v. Yeshaswinee Merchant [(2003) 6 SCC 277, p. 311, para 72 :

2003 SCC (L&S) 840] , taking a somewhat different view can, perhaps, be explained
by the fact that in the said case the impugned directions contained in the government
letter (not expressed in the name of the President) was in exercise of the statutory
power under Section 34 of the Air Corporations Act, 1953. In the present case, the
impugned guidelines have not been issued under any existing statute.” (emphasis
supplied) In the present case, the notification dated 2 August 2019 was issued in
exercise of the statutory powers under the Administrative Tribunals Act.

110. For the reasons discussed in this segment, the notification dated 2 August 2019
is valid despite not being expressed in the name of the President of India.

viii. The abolition of the OAT is not violative of the fundamental right of access to justice PART D

111. The appellants have urged that the abolition of the OAT has made the court system less
accessible to litigants and that it is therefore violative of the fundamental right of access to justice.
They have relied on the decision in Anita Kushwaha v. Pushap Sudan 40, where a Constitution
Bench of this Court discussed the components of access to justice:

“33. Four main facets that, in our opinion, constitute the essence of access to justice
are:

(i) the State must provide an effective adjudicatory mechanism;

(ii) the mechanism so provided must be reasonably accessible in terms of distance;

(iii) the process of adjudication must be speedy; and

(iv) the litigant's access to the adjudicatory process must be affordable.” The
appellants contend that the abolition of the OAT breaches the second and fourth
facets of the right of access to justice. They argue that the OAT has two regular
benches and two circuit benches but the Orissa High Court has one seat in Cuttack,

36

Orissa Administrative Tribunal Bar ... vs Union Of India on 21 March, 2023

thereby making the adjudicatory mechanism less accessible in terms of distance.
They urge that the distance also makes the adjudicatory process less affordable
because of the cost of travelling to Cuttack from different parts of the state.

112. The fundamental right of access to justice is no doubt a crucial and indispensable right under
the Constitution of India. However, it cannot be interpreted to mean that every village, town, or city
must house every forum of adjudication created by statute or the Constitution. It is an undeniable
fact 40 (2016) 8 SCC 509 PART D that some courts and forums will be located in some towns and
cities and not others. Some or the other litigants will be required to travel some distance to access a
particular forum or court.

113. To reiterate the ruling in Anita Kushwaha (supra), adjudicatory mechanisms must be
reasonably accessible in terms of distance. The High Court of Orissa has creatively utilised
technology to bridge the time taken to travel from other parts of Odisha to Cuttack. Indeed, other
High Courts must replicate the use of technology to ensure that access to justice is provided to
widely dispersed areas. This will ensure that citizens have true access to justice by observing and
participating in the proceedings before the High Courts in cases of concern to them. The submission
made on behalf of the State of Odisha that compensation schemes may be used to alleviate financial
hardships must also be taken into account. Further, legal aid programs sponsored by the state are
also useful in addressing any financial hardships, as observed by this Court in Anita Kushwaha
(supra):

“40. Affordability of access to justice has been, to an extent, taken care of by the
State-sponsored legal aid programmes under the Legal Services Authorities Act,
1987. Legal aid programmes have been providing the much needed support to the
poorer sections of the society in accessing justice in courts.”

114. Significantly, the Orissa High Court has established benches which will operate virtually in
multiple cities and towns across the state. This negates the appellants’ argument that the Orissa
High Court is less accessible than the OAT. In fact, the number of virtual benches of the High Court
is greater than the number of benches of the OAT. Litigants from across the state can access the
High Court with greater ease than they could access the OAT. PART D

115. Litigants may therefore approach the Orissa High Court for the resolution of disputes. The
abolition of the OAT does not leave litigants without a remedy or without a forum to adjudicate the
dispute in question. It is therefore not violative of the fundamental right of access to justice. ix. The
State Government did not take advantage of its own wrong

116. The appellants have argued that the State Government tried to take advantage of its own wrong
by failing to fill the vacancies in the OAT and creating the conditions for the abolition of the OAT.

117. In paragraph 85 of this judgment, a portion of the note prepared by the General Administration
Department, Government of Odisha dated 16 September 2015 is extracted. The note details the State
Government’s reasons for requesting the Union Government to abolish the OAT. The extract in

37

Orissa Administrative Tribunal Bar ... vs Union Of India on 21 March, 2023

paragraph 85 reflects data on the institution, disposal, and pendency of cases before the OAT for the
year 2014. The State Government had not ceased to make appointments to the OAT at the time at
which this note was prepared. At that time, the OAT was functioning as it usually did. The State
Government found the OAT’s usual performance (i.e., rate of disposal of cases) to be unsatisfactory.
This aspect of the OAT’s functioning played a role in the State Government’s decision to abolish the
OAT.

118. As noticed in the impugned judgment:

“48. … after the decision of the Government of Odisha to abolish the OAT became
public, it ceased to make appointments to fill up the vacancies in the OAT. This led to
the OAT Bar Association, Cuttack filing W.P.(C) No. 15693 of 2017 in this Court
seeking a PART D mandamus to the Government of Odisha to fill up the vacancies in
the OAT.” (emphasis supplied) Therefore, the State Government discontinued
appointments to the OAT as a result of its decision to abolish the OAT and not vice
versa. The appellants’ averment confuses the sequence of events on which their
argument is based. The State Government based its decision on an evaluation of the
OAT’s functioning in the year 2014, which was prior to its decision to abolish the
OAT. Hence, there is no “wrong” which the State Government took advantage of.
Similarly, we do not agree with the argument of the appellants that the Union of
India had systematically made the OAT non-functional.

119. A related argument put forth by the appellants is that the State Government’s failure to fill the
vacancies in the OAT is a breach of Article 256 of the Constitution. Article 256 inter alia stipulates
that the executive power of every State shall be so exercised as to ensure compliance with the laws
made by Parliament. It is not necessary for us to address ourselves to this argument because the
prayers in the Writ Petitions which resulted in the impugned judgment did not seek an adjudication
as to the violation of Article 256. The lis before the Orissa High Court was limited to the validity of
the decision to abolish the OAT. We therefore confine our judgment on appeal to the same issue.

x. The failure of the Union Government to conduct a judicial impact assessment before abolishing
the OAT does not vitiate its decision to abolish the OAT PART D

120. The appellants contend that the Union Government ought to have mandatorily complied with
the directions of a Constitution Bench of this Court (of which one of us, Dr, DY Chandrachud, J was
a part) in Rojer Mathew v. South Indian Bank Ltd. 41 prior to abolishing the OAT. The intervenor in
this matter has also advanced the argument that the Union Government ought to have taken the
permission of this Court before abolishing the OAT.

121. In Rojer Mathew (supra), this Court directed the Union Government to conduct a judicial
impact assessment of certain tribunals. The operative part of this judgment (from the majority
opinion of Ranjan Gogoi, CJI) in relation to judicial impact assessments is extracted below:

38

Orissa Administrative Tribunal Bar ... vs Union Of India on 21 March, 2023

“223.7. There is a need-based requirement to conduct “judicial impact assessment” of
all the Tribunals referable to the Finance Act, 2017 so as to analyse the ramifications
of the changes in the framework of tribunals as provided under the Finance Act,
2017. Thus, we find it appropriate to issue a writ of mandamus to the Ministry of Law
and Justice to carry out such “judicial impact assessment” and submit the result of
the findings before the competent legislative authority.”

122. The direction to conduct a judicial impact assessment, therefore, was of a general nature. It was
not geared towards proposals to abolish specific tribunals such as the OAT. Rather, a need was felt
to analyse the consequences of the restructuring of tribunals by the Finance Act 2017 and a writ of
mandamus was issued in this regard to the Ministry of Law and Justice. The judicial impact
assessment was also directed to be conducted in order to better understand the case load, efficacy,
financial impact, and accessibility 41 (2020) 6 SCC 1 PART D of tribunals at large, in addition to the
filling of vacancies. 42 We note that neither the majority opinion authored by Ranjan Gogoi, CJI nor
the opinions of Dr. DY Chandrachud, J. or Deepak Gupta, J. contain a direction to the effect that a
tribunal shall not be abolished in the absence of a judicial impact assessment. In the present case,
the Union Government issued the notification dated 2 August 2019 in a valid exercise of its powers
under Section 21 of the General Clauses Act. The failure to conduct a judicial impact assessment
does not vitiate its decision to abolish the OAT. Nothing in the judgment in Rojer Mathew (supra)
also indicates the need for the Union Government to obtain the permission of this Court before
abolishing the OAT.

123. However, this is not to say that the Union Government and more specifically, the Ministry of
Law and Justice may dispense with the directions of this Court in Rojer Mathew (supra). The
judgment was delivered on 13 November 2019. More than three years have since passed and the
Ministry of Law and Justice is yet to conduct a judicial impact assessment.

124. An assessment such as the one directed to be conducted would only shed light on the
impediments faced in the delivery of justice. The lack of an assessment precludes any well-informed,
intelligent action concerning tribunals in the country (as a whole). This, in turn, has cascading
effects for the citizenry, which is deprived of a well-oiled machinery by which it can access justice.
We therefore reiterate the directions of this Court in Rojer 42 See paragraphs 185, 222, 223.7, 234,
387 – 390.

PART D Mathew (supra) and direct the Ministry of Law and Justice to conduct a judicial impact
assessment at the earliest.

xi. Miscellaneous contentions

125. A miscellaneous contention remains to be considered.

126. The appellants have submitted that the so-called real reason for the abolition of the OAT is that
many top-ranking officials faced charges of contempt before the OAT, for the reason that they had
failed to implement its orders. It is averred that these officials influenced the State Government to

39

Orissa Administrative Tribunal Bar ... vs Union Of India on 21 March, 2023

abolish the OAT. The appellants argue that the State and Union Governments did not deny this
allegation in their counter affidavits before the Orissa High Court and that this allegation is true
because of ‘non-traverse.’

127. There is nothing on record which indicates the truth of the appellants’ allegations or even
points to a possibility of the truth of such an allegation. It is entirely unsubstantiated and appears to
be a last-ditch attempt to sustain their challenge to the abolition of the OAT. In any event, the
averment belies logic. All cases pending before the OAT would be transferred to the Orissa High
Court, without exception. This includes contempt petitions. Hence, it would not be possible for
officials or others to avoid contempt proceedings as a result of the abolition of the OAT.

PART E E. Findings and conclusion

128. In view of the discussion above, we hold that the abolition of the OAT was constitutionally valid
for the following reasons:

a. The Writ Petitions instituted before the Orissa High Court were maintainable
because the appellants claimed that their constitutional rights had been violated.
They were therefore entitled to invoke the jurisdiction of the High Court under
Article 226 of the Constitution; b. Article 323-A does not preclude the Union
Government from abolishing SATs because it is an enabling provision which confers
the Union Government with the power to establish an administrative tribunal at its
discretion (upon receiving a request from the relevant State Government in terms of
the Administrative Tribunals Act). The legal and factual context of the power to
establish administrative tribunals, the purpose of this power and the intention of the
legislature establish that there is no duty to exercise the power conferred by the
Administrative Tribunals Act, such that the enabling provision becomes a mandatory
provision; c. The Union Government acted in valid exercise of its powers when it
invoked Section 21 of the General Clauses Act read with Section 4(2) of the
Administrative Tribunals Act to rescind the notification establishing the OAT because
the decision to establish the OAT was an administrative decision and not a
quasi-judicial decision. Moreover, Section 21 of the General Clauses Act is not
repugnant to the subject- PART E matter, context and effect of the Administrative
Tribunals Act and is in harmony with its scheme and object;

d. The notification dated 2 August 2019 by which the OAT was abolished is not
violative of Article 14 of the Constitution. The State Government did not consider any
irrelevant or extraneous factors while arriving at the decision to request the Union
Government to abolish the OAT. The decision to abolish the OAT is itself not absurd
or so unreasonable that no reasonable person would have taken it;

e. The principles of natural justice were not violated because the class of people who
were affected by the decision to abolish the OAT did not have a right to be heard. The
public at large (or some sections of it) did not have a right to be heard before the

40

Orissa Administrative Tribunal Bar ... vs Union Of India on 21 March, 2023

policy decision was taken; f. The Union Government did not become functus officio
after establishing the OAT because the doctrine cannot ordinarily be applied in cases
where the government is formulating and implementing a policy; g. The notification
dated 2 August 2019 is valid though it is not expressed in the name of the President
of India because non-compliance with Article 77 of the Constitution does not
invalidate a notification or render it unconstitutional;

h. The abolition of the OAT is not violative of the fundamental right of access to
justice because the Orissa High Court will hear cases which were pending before the
OAT prior to its abolition; PART E i. The State Government did not take advantage of
its own wrong because it stopped filling the vacancies of the OAT only after deciding
to abolish it. It did not rely on the vacancies (and the consequent increase in
pendency) created by its inaction to abolish the OAT; and j. The failure of the Union
Government to conduct a judicial impact assessment before abolishing the OAT does
not vitiate its decision to abolish the OAT because the directions in Rojer Mathew
(supra) were of a general nature and did not prohibit the abolition of specific
tribunals such as the OAT in the absence of a judicial impact assessment. However,
the Ministry of Law and Justice is directed to conduct a judicial impact assessment as
directed by this Court in Rojer Mathew (supra).

129. The challenge to the constitutional validity of the impugned notification dated 2 August 2019 by
which the OAT was abolished is rejected. The judgment of the High Court shall stand affirmed in
terms of the conclusions recorded above. The appeals are dismissed.

130. Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.

.…………………...............................CJI.

[Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud] .……………………...............................J. [Hima Kohli] New Delhi;

March 21, 2023

41