Pawan Kumar Chourasia vs The State Of Bihar on 14 March, 2023

Pawan Kumar Chourasia vs The State Of Bihar on 14 March,
2023

Author: Abhay S. Oka

Bench: Rajesh Bindal, Abhay S. Oka

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.2230 of 2010

Pawan Kumar Chourasia                              …..Appellant

Versus

State of Bihar                                     …..Respondent

JUDGMENT

Abhay S. Oka, J.

FACTUAL BACKGROUND

1. The appellant who is accused no.1 was prosecuted along with four others for the offences
punishable under Section 302 read with Section 34 as well as Section 201 of the Indian Penal Code
(for short, ‘IPC’). The appellant has been convicted for both offences. For the offence under Section
302 read with Section 34 of IPC, he has been sentenced to undergo life imprisonment. The High
Court confirmed the conviction of the appellant, whereas the remaining four accused were
acquitted.

2. First informant is one Lakhi Prasad Chourasia (PW−5). First Information Report (FIR) was
registered on 20 th June 1989. The statement of the first informant on the basis of which the FIR
was registered notes that it has been recorded in the presence of Radhey Prasad Mandal (PW−1);
Kisan Lal Mandal (PW−4); Satya Narain Mandal (PW−6); and Mohammad Tamijuddin (PW−7). It
is alleged that on 10th June 1989, PW−5 had lodged a missing report. The missing report was in
respect of his son Kamlesh and nephew Bulla, son of one Hira Chaurasia (PW−9). They were
missing from 02nd June 1989. PW−5 stated that at about 02:00 p.m. on 20 th June 1989, he
received a secret information that both the boys had been murdered by the present appellant in
association with others. Therefore, he along with the persons mentioned above went to the house of

1

Pawan Kumar Chourasia vs The State Of Bihar on 14 March, 2023

the appellant and made inquiries. Though initially, the appellant denied, after some persuasion, he
admitted in presence of the aforesaid persons that he and four others (co−accused) had killed both
the boys by strangulating them and had concealed their bodies in the field of one Bhagirath at Nakki
Bari. PW−5 along with the appellant and others went to the said field. The appellant removed the
soil and both dead bodies were found. Thereafter, he came to the police station and lodged a
complaint.

3. The prosecution examined 10 witnesses. PW−1 Radhey Prasad Mandal; PW−2 Jagdish Prasad
Chourasia; PW−3 Shobha Lal Mandal; PW−4 Kisan Lal Mandal; PW−5 the complainant himself;
and PW−6 Satya Narain Mandal were declared hostile. According to the prosecution case, the
appellant had made a confession in presence of these witnesses. PW−7 Md. Tamijuddin; PW−8
Suchai Mandal and PW−9 Hira Lal Chourasia supported the prosecution case and deposed about
the extra−judicial confession made by the appellant to them. PW−10 is a doctor who performed the
autopsy. The Investigation Officer was not examined. The conviction of the appellant is based on the
extra−judicial confession. Both the Courts have believed the prosecution case regarding the alleged
extra−judicial confession.

4. With the assistance of the learned counsel appearing for the parties, we have perused the
depositions of the prosecution witnesses and in particular P.W. nos.7 to 9 and the findings recorded
by the courts below.

EVIDENTIARY VALUE OF EXTRA−JUDICIAL CONFESSION

5. As far as extra−judicial confession is concerned, the law is well settled. Generally, it is a weak
piece of evidence. However, a conviction can be sustained on the basis of extra−judicial confession
provided that the confession is proved to be voluntary and truthful. It should be free of any
inducement. The evidentiary value of such confession also depends on the person to whom it is
made. Going by the natural course of human conduct, normally, a person would confide about a
crime committed by him only with such a person in whom he has implicit faith. Normally, a person
would not make a confession to someone who is totally a stranger to him. Moreover, the Court has
to be satisfied with the reliability of the confession keeping in view the circumstances in which it is
made. As a matter of rule, corroboration is not required. However, if an extra−judicial confession is
corroborated by other evidence on record, it acquires more credibility.

ANALYSIS OF EVIDENCE

6. As narrated earlier, PW−1 to PW−6 including the complainant himself whose son was killed did
not support prosecution. The case of the prosecution was that the appellant had confessed to PW−1
to PW−

9. We have carefully analyzed the evidence of P.W. Nos.7, 8 and 9 who were the only material
prosecution witnesses. Here is the analysis of their evidence:−

2

Pawan Kumar Chourasia vs The State Of Bihar on 14 March, 2023

(a) PW−7 has stated that on 20th June 1989 at about 02:30 p.m. when he along with PW−1 and
PW−6 and other persons were talking near the gate of Bhagirath Mandal, PW−5 came there and told
them that he had received information that Pawan(appellant) had murdered his son Kamlesh and
nephew Bulla and had concealed their dead bodies. The prosecution has made no attempt to
investigate into the source of the alleged information received by PW−5.

(b) The version of PW−8 Suchai is different. PW−8 Suchai’s name is not mentioned in the complaint
of PW−5. PW−8 Suchai claims that on 06th June 1989, he heard the appellant telling two persons
that he had murdered two boys and had concealed their dead bodies. It is pertinent to note that
though PW−8 had knowledge about the alleged confession made by the appellant on 06th June
1989, he did not complain to the police. The omission to report to the police is very significant as he
was admittedly the uncle of the deceased Bulla. His silence creates more suspicion about the
prosecution case.

(c) PW−8 stated that he along with others went along with the appellant to the place where dead
bodies were buried. His version is that the appellant made a confession when he along with others
was sitting at the gate of Bhagirath. The witness has not stated that PW−1 to PW−9 visited the house
of the appellant on 20th June 1989 when the appellant made the extra−judicial confession. Though
PW−8 did not say so, PW−9 Hiralal stated that it was PW−8 who took out the dead bodies after
some digging was made by the appellant.

(d) As far as PW−9 Hiralal is concerned, he is the father of Bulla.

He has not stated the place at which the extra−judicial confession was allegedly made by the
appellant. He simply stated that 19 days after his son went missing, the appellant disclosed in his
presence to one Bhagirath (not examined by the prosecution), PW−1, PW−4 and PW−6 that he had
murdered both the boys and had concealed their dead bodies in the field of Bhagirath. His version is
that it was Suchai (PW−8) who took out the bodies. However, PW−8 himself did not state that he
took out the bodies.

(e) According to the version of PW−7, PW−1 did not inform him about any extra−judicial confession
made by the appellant but PW−1 informed him that he had received the information that the
appellant had murdered both boys. Out of these three witnesses, PW−7 is the only witness who
stated that the appellant made the confession in his own house.

(f) According to the version of PW−7, in the afternoon of 20 th June 1989, he was informed by PW−
5 that the appellant had murdered both the boys. There is no explanation as to why PW−7 did not
approach the police. This conduct of the witness is unnatural.

(g) None of these three witnesses who supported the prosecution, have stated that the appellant was
either their relative or a close acquaintance. In fact, they have not even stated that they personally
knew the appellant. There is nothing on record to show that the relationship between the appellant
and these three witnesses was such that the appellant had implicit faith in these three witnesses and,
therefore, he confided with them.

3

Pawan Kumar Chourasia vs The State Of Bihar on 14 March, 2023

(h) Even after the alleged extra−judicial confession of committing murder was made before them by
the appellant, PW−7 to PW−9 did not report to the police. The prosecution case is that without
informing the police, they accompanied the appellant to the field of Bhagirath where dead bodies
were found buried. This conduct of PW−7 to PW−9 is unusual and unnatural. PW−7 to PW−9 are
not consistent about the place at which the alleged confession was made.

(i) There is no explanation offered by the prosecution for not examining Bhagirath who was also
present according to PW−9 when the alleged confession was made. This omission becomes more
significant as the dead bodies were allegedly found in his land.

CONCLUSION

7. Hence, the prosecution’s case about extra−judicial confession does not inspire confidence at all.
Moreover, there are no other circumstances brought on record which could support or corroborate
the prosecution case. Therefore, in our considered view, the evidence in form of the extra−judicial
confession of the appellant deserves to be discarded. Admittedly, there is no other evidence against
the appellant. Therefore, the conviction of the appellant cannot be sustained at all. Accordingly, the
impugned judgments are set aside and the appellant is acquitted of the offences alleged against him.
The bail bonds of the appellant stand cancelled. The appeal is allowed.

…………………………………J. [ABHAY S. OKA] …………………………………J. [RAJESH BINDAL] New
Delhi March 14, 2023.

4