Pr. Commissioner Of Income Tax ... vs Servants Of People Society on 31 January, 2023

Pr. Commissioner Of Income Tax ... vs Servants Of People
Society on 31 January, 2023

Author: S. Ravindra Bhat

Bench: Dipankar Datta, S. Ravindra Bhat

1

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 614 OF 2023
[@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO(S). 11017 OF 2022]

PR. COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX
(EXEMPTIONS) DELHI                                                     …APPELLANT(S)

VERSUS

SERVANTS OF PEOPLE SOCIETY                                            …RESPONDENT(S)

JUDGMENT

S. RAVINDRA BHAT, J.

1. Special leave granted. Mr. D. Mahesh Babu waives notice of appeal on behalf of the sole
respondent [hereafter called “the assessee”]. The appeal is heard finally.

2. The Commissioner of Income Tax (hereafter referred to “revenue”) is aggrieved by the impugned
judgment and order of the Delhi High court1. The impugned judgment upheld the decision of the
Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (“ITAT”) which affirmed the views expressed by the Commissioner
of Income Tax (Appeals) (hereafter called “Appellate Commissioner”). The Appellate Commissioner
and the ITAT were of the opinion that the respondent organisation (a registered society, hereafter
also called “the assessee”) was a charitable trust entitled to the benefit of exemption 1 dated
16.11.2021 in ITA No. 161/2021 and that it is registered under Section 12AA and 80G of the Income
Tax Act (hereafter called the “Act”) were valid.

1

Pr. Commissioner Of Income Tax ... vs Servants Of People Society on 31 January, 2023

3. The facts are that the assessee society was founded in the year 1921 by the legendary freedom
fighter Lala Lajpat Rai during the freedom struggle for the nation building, general awareness and
welfare of the people. In 1928 the famous freedom fighter of Odhisha Shri Pt. Gopa Bandhu Dass
made a Will of his property and his printing press which is managing the Oriya newspaper “Samaj”-
for people’s welfare. The assessee was enjoying exemption under Section 11 of the Act but the same
was denied during the A.Y. 1973-74 and later allowed by the ITAT and affirmed by the High Court.
The assessee was also earlier allowed exemption for three years i.e. 1990-91 to 1992-93 under
Section 10(23C)(iv) of the Act. The assessee has established and is running schools in the name of
Balwant Rai Mehta Vidya Bhawan in Lajpat Nagar and in Greater Kailash in New Delhi and one
Medical Centre in Lajpat Nagar and old age home in Dwarka in Delhi. The assessee is also building a
hospital in the name of Gopa Bandhu Medical Research Centre in Odisha. The assessee was also
allowed exemption under Section 11(1) but the same has been denied during the A.Y. 2010-11 and
2011-12. The Assessee Officer denied the exemption invoking the proviso to Section 2(15) on the
ground that the assessee is involved in trade, commerce or business as it manages and runs a
printing press and a newspaper. The assessee argued that it was primarily a non-profit institution
involved in charitable activities and did not engage in any trade, commerce or business or any such
activity.

4. The assessee approached the Appellate Commissioner who allowed its plea and directed that the
income earned by it ought to enjoy the benefit of exemption. The revenue carried the matter in
appeal to the ITAT and the High Court, both unsuccessfully. As a consequence, it has approached
this Court in appeal by the special leave.

5. It is urged on behalf of the revenue that the Appellate Commissioner and the Tribunal fell into
error in granting the exemption to the assessee. The Learned Additional Solicitor General Mr. Balbir
Singh, points out that the ITAT followed the decision of the Delhi High Court in India Trade
Promotion Organisation v. Director General of Income Tax (Exemption)2 and other decisions. It
was urged that those decisions are no longer good law in view of the judgment of this Court in CIT v.
Ahmedabad Urban Development Authority3, whereby the Court has held that activities which are in
the nature of trade, and carry on by a trust established for general public utility, have to specify
certain parameters.

6. Learned counsel highlighted that the assessee in this case is not merely earning revenue from sale
of newspaper but also earned substantial advertisement revenue.

7. Learned counsel for the assessee urges that this court should not intervene given that the
Appellate Commissioner as well as the ITAT and the High Court have concurrently upheld its claim
for exemption on the ground that it is a charitable trust entitled to be treated as such thereby eligible
for exemption. It was submitted that the activity of generating income through advertisement is only
incidental and income from advertisement cannot be called part of the main object of the trust but
rather necessary for it to attain its charitable objectives.

Analysis and Findings

2

Pr. Commissioner Of Income Tax ... vs Servants Of People Society on 31 January, 2023

8. During the relevant assessment year, the assessee society claimed exemption, inter alia, in respect
of income from newspapers, which included advertisement revenue, to the extent of (cid:132) 9,52,57,869/-
and surplus of (cid:132) 2,16,50,901 from its activities in Delhi.

2 371 ITR (Del) 333 3 2022 SCC Online SC 1461

9. The judgment of this court, in Ahmedabad Urban Development Authority had examined various
kinds of activities to determine whether they are charitable in nature, relatable to trusts or societies
with general public utility objectives. The court then recorded its findings, regarding the true
interpretation of “charitable objects” under Section 2 (15) and summarized the findings as follows:

“IV. Summation of conclusions

267. In view of the foregoing discussion and analysis, the following conclusions are
recorded regarding the interpretation of the changed definition of “charitable
purpose” (w.e.f. 01.04.2009), as well as the later amendments, and other related
provisions of the IT Act.

A. General test under Section 2(15) A.1. It is clarified that an assessee advancing general public
utility cannot engage itself in any trade, commerce or business, or provide service in relation thereto
for any consideration (“cess, or fee, or any other consideration”);

A.2. However, in the course of achieving the object of general public utility, the concerned trust,
society, or other such organization, can carry on trade, commerce or business or provide services in
relation thereto for consideration, provided that (i) the activities of trade, commerce or business are
connected (“actual carrying out…” inserted w.e.f. 01.04.2016) to the achievement of its objects of
GPU; and (ii) the receipt from such business or commercial activity or service in relation thereto,
does not exceed the quantified limit, as amended over the years (Rs. 10 lakhs w.e.f. 01.04.2009;
then Rs. 25 lakhs w.e.f. 01.04.2012; and now 20% of total receipts of the previous year, w.e.f.
01.04.2016);

A.3. Generally, the charging of any amount towards consideration for such an activity (advancing
general public utility), which is on cost-basis or nominally above cost, cannot be considered to be
“trade, commerce, or business” or any services in relation thereto. It is only when the charges are
markedly or significantly above the cost incurred by the assessee in question, that they would fall
within the mischief of “cess, or fee, or any other consideration” towards “trade, commerce or
business”. In this regard, the Court has clarified through illustrations what kind of services or goods
provided on cost or nominal basis would normally be excluded from the mischief of trade,
commerce, or business, in the body of the judgment.

A.4. Section 11(4A) must be interpreted harmoniously with Section 2(15), with which there is no
conflict. Carrying out activity in the nature of trade, commerce or business, or service in relation to
such activities, should be conducted in the course of achieving the GPU object, and the income,
profit or surplus or gains must, therefore, be incidental. The requirement in Section 11(4A) of

3

Pr. Commissioner Of Income Tax ... vs Servants Of People Society on 31 January, 2023

maintaining separate books of account is also in line with the necessity of demonstrating that the
quantitative limit prescribed in the proviso to Section 2(15), has not been breached. Similarly, the
insertion of Section 13(8), seventeenth proviso to Section 10(23C) and third proviso to Section
143(3) (all w.r.e.f. 01.04.2009), reaffirm this interpretation and bring uniformity across the
statutory provisions.

10. This court had also considered the nature of income derived by a trust, which was managing a
newspaper. The observations pertaining to that assessee, i.e. the Tribune Trust, are relevant:

“257. It is noticed from the impugned judgment that the High Court concedes to the
fact that the trust's activities were held by the Privy Council to constitute financing of
objects of ‘general public utility’; further that merely because thousands of
newspapers were being published made no difference. It still continues to be a GPU
charity.

258. The question then is whether the nature of receipts and income garnered by the
Trust, in the course of actually carrying out its activity of publishing newspaper, can
be characterized as “in the nature of trade, commerce or business” or “service in
relation to trade, commerce or business”, for any consideration. During the course of
submissions, it was urged that advertisement revenue should not be treated as
business or commercial receipts since that virtually is the lifeblood which sustains the
activity of publication of newspapers. It was highlighted that the object of
maintaining the activity of publishing and distribution of newspaper remains the
advancement of general public utility, as it has the effect of both notifying and
educating the general public about the current affairs and developments. The
inclusion of advertisements also serves as information to the general public,
especially in areas of employment, availability of resources, etc. Therefore,
publication of advertisement is intrinsically connected with the activity of printing
and publishing of newspapers.

259. The publication of advertisements for consideration, in the opinion of the court,
by the newspaper, cannot but be termed as an activity in the nature of carrying on
business, trade or commerce for a fee or consideration. That the newspaper
published by the trust (“the Tribune”) in this case is funded mainly through
advertisement is no basis for holding that publishing such advertisements by the
Trust does not constitute business. The object of the trust to involve or engage in
publication of newspapers. Publishing advertisements is obviously to garner receipts
which are in the nature of profit. Now, by virtue of the amended definition of Section
2(15), GPU charities can engage themselves in business or commercial activity or
profit, only if the receipts from such activities do not exceed the quantitative limit of
the overall receipts earned in a given year. While the assessee's contention that
publication of advertisement is intrinsically linked with newspaper activity (thereby
fulfilling sub-clause (i) of the proviso to Section 2(15), i.e. an activity in the course of
actual carrying on of the activity towards advancement of the object) is acceptable,

4

Pr. Commissioner Of Income Tax ... vs Servants Of People Society on 31 January, 2023

nevertheless, the condition imposed by sub-clause (ii) of the proviso to Section 2(15)
has to also be fulfilled. In the present case, that percentage had been exceeded, as
evident from the record.”

11. In the present case, the Appellate Commissioner, the ITAT and the High Court merely followed
the judgment of the Delhi High Court in India Trade Promotion Organisation. However, the law
with regard to interpretation of Section 2 (15) has undergone a change, due to the decision in
Ahmedabad Urban Development Authority (supra). As a result, this court is of the opinion, that
matter should be remitted for fresh consideration of the nature of receipts in the hands of the
assessee, in the present case. As a result, the matter requires to be re-examined, and the question as
to whether the amounts received by the assessee qualify for exemption, under Section 2 (15) or
Section 11 needs to be gone into afresh.

12. In view of the foregoing discussion, the revenue’s appeal succeeds in part. The AO shall examine
the documents and relevant papers and render fresh findings on the issue whether respondent is a
charitable trust, entitled to exemption of its income. The AO shall complete the hearing and pass
orders within four months. The appeal is allowed to the above extent.

...............................................J. [S. RAVINDRA BHAT] ..............................................J. [DIPANKAR
DATTA] NEW DELHI, JANUARY 31, 2023

5