Pradeep Kumar vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 16 March, 2023

Pradeep Kumar vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 16 March, 2023

Author: Sanjay Karol

Bench: B.R. Gavai, Vikram Nath, Sanjay Karol

1

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1304 OF 2018

PRADEEP KUMAR                                        ...APPELLANT

VERSUS

STATE OF CHHATTISGARH                                ...RESPONDENT

JUDGMENT

SANJAY KAROL, J.

1. On 01.10.2003, Umesh Chowdhary, a resident of village Chitarpur falling within the territorial
limits of Police Station Dhaurpur District was allegedly murdered by accused Pradeep Kumar
(Appellant No. 2 in CRA No.940 of 2004) before the High Court Chhattisgarh, Bilaspur and Bhainsa
alias Nandlal (Appellant No.1. before the High Court in the very same appeal) in relation to which
FIR No.126/03 (Ex.P-6) was registered at Police Station Dhaurpur.

2. On 02.10.2003, Investigation Officer, I. Tirkey (PW-19) commenced investigation and after
verifying the place of occurrence sent the dead body for post-mortem analysis which was conducted
by Dr. Kamlesh Kumar (PW-14) in terms of his report (Ex.P-10). Investigation revealed that the
crime was committed on account of animosity which the Appellant was harbouring against the
deceased. The motive being the former’s desire to use the shop in possession of the deceased in
village Chitarpur.

3. The Trial Court, based on the extra judicial confessional statement (Ex.P-11) of accused Pradeep
Kumar made in the presence of Ramkripal Soni (PW-1) and Gopal Yadav (PW-7), the depositions of

1

Pradeep Kumar vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 16 March, 2023

Gajadhar Chowdhary (PW-10) father of the deceased, co-villagers Sirodh (PW-6), Radhika (PW-13)
wife of (PW-7), all establishing the factum of prior animosity/“tension” inter se the parties; and with
the addition of the police recovered keys of the shop of the deceased and his currency notes
amounting to Rs.300/- from the possession of the Appellant. The Court convicted both the accused
in relation to offences punishable under Section 302/34 IPC and 201/34 IPC and sentenced them to
serve imprisonment for life and pay fine of Rs.500/- in relation to the offence under Section 302/34
as also suffer imprisonment for seven years and pay fine of Rs.500/- in respect of the offence
punishable under Section 201 IPC.

4. The Trial Court found the testimonies of both PW-1 and PW-7 reliable (despite PW-1 not
supporting the prosecution) and the prosecution to have established the factum of accused Pradeep
Kumar having confessed his guilt before the Investigation Officer (PW-19). The Ld. Trial Court also
found the recovery of articles seized as a result of the disclosure of statement, to be an additional
link, as a chain of events, in support of the case set up by the prosecution.

5. However in an appeal preferred by both the accused, the High Court upheld the conviction of
accused Pradeep Kumar in relation to all the offences and the sentences in terms thereunder, but
acquitted accused Bhainsa alias Nandlal on all counts.

6. Hence, the present appeal filed by the Appellant – accused Pradeep Kumar. Significantly, none of
the Courts below have returned finding to the effect that the guilt of the accused stands proven by
the prosecution, beyond reasonable doubt. Suspicion, howsoever grave or probable it may be,
cannot substitute the evidence, be it circumstantial or direct in nature, in establishing the guilt of
the accused beyond reasonable doubt, the onus of which, at the first instance, is to be discharged by
the prosecution. The distance between “may be” and “must be” is quite large and it divides vague
conjectures from solid conclusions. [Shivaji Sahabrao Bobade & Another v. State of Maharashtra,
(1973) 2 SCC

793.]

7. The High Court, by relying upon the principles of law enunciated by the Apex Court in Hari
Charan Kurmi vs State Of Bihar, AIR 1964 SC 1184, to the effect that confession of a co-accused
being inculpatory in nature, cannot be used against the accused, acquitted Bhainsa alias Nandlal.

8. However, in so far as accused Pradeep Kumar is concerned the Court found testimonies of (PW-1)
and (PW-7) to be absolutely inspiring in confidence and that the witnesses “being independent and
disinterested”, having no reason to “manufacture evidence”, “falsely implicating” the accused.
Further, the High Court held that the defence was not able to show that the extra-judicial confession
made by Pradeep Kumar (Appellant No.2) before the said witnesses was “involuntary” or “made on
account of any coercion”, “inducement”, “promise” or “favour”. The Court below also held that there
is no reason “whatsoever” to disbelieve the testimonies of PW-1 & PW-7 qua the issue of
extrajudicial confession.

2

Pradeep Kumar vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 16 March, 2023

9. The accused cannot be convicted on the principles of preponderance of probability. It is the duty
of this Court to ensure avoidance of miscarriage of justice at all costs and the benefit of doubt, if any,
given to the accused. [Sujit Biswas v. State of Assam, (2013) 12 SCC 406, Hanumant Govind
Nargundkar v. State of M.P. (AIR 1952 SC 343) and State v. Mahender Singh Dahiya, (2011) 3 SCC
109].

10. The impugned judgement to say the least, is sketchy. The presumption of the guilt of accused
Pradeep Kumar by both the courts below is based on improper and incomplete appreciation of
evidence which in the considered view of this Court, has resulted into travesty of justice.

11. The prosecution case, at best, rests upon three circumstances (a) the alleged confessional
statement of accused Pradeep Kumar made before PW-1 and PW-7; (b) prior animosity/“tension”
between Pradeep Kumar and the deceased; and (c) the recovery of the keys of the shop of the
deceased and his currency notes amounting to Rs.300/- on the asking of the accused.

12. Since both the Courts below have placed paramount significance and reliance to the extra
judicial confession made by the Appellant, it is important to take note of the principles enunciated
by this Court in the case of Sahadevan v. State of T.N., (2012) 6 SCC 403 as under:

“ 16. …..

(i) The extra-judicial confession is a weak evidence by itself. It has to be examined by
the court with greater care and caution.

(ii)    It should be made voluntarily and
should be truthful.
(iii)   It should inspire confidence.
(iv)    An extra-judicial confession attains

greater credibility and evidentiary value if it is supported by a chain of cogent
circumstances and is further corroborated by other prosecution evidence.

(v) For an extra-judicial confession to be the basis of conviction, it should not suffer
from any material discrepancies and inherent improbabilities.

(vi) Such statement essentially has to be proved like any other fact and in accordance
with law.”

13. Before we deal with each of the aforesaid circumstances, we must place on record certain
undisputed facts. Those being

(a) the homicidal death of deceased Umesh Chowdhary S/o Gajadhar Chowdhary, (b) the identity of
the deceased, (c) the recovery of the dead body of the deceased from the Dodki Nala of village
Chitarpur, (d) the post-mortem of the dead body conducted by PW-14 affirming the deceased to
have died as a result of asphyxia due to throttling and (e) the cause of the death being homicidal in

3

Pradeep Kumar vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 16 March, 2023

nature. The ante- mortem analysis reflects multiple abrasions present on the front portion of the
neck of the deceased caused by a hard and blunt object. There was a fracture of the hyoid bone,
congestion in both the lungs and the trachea rings.

14. Proceeding further, examining the testimonies of the prosecution witnesses we find that it is the
case of Manorama Devi (PW-11), w/o the deceased to have deposed that on 1.10.2003 finding her
husband not to have returned home at night, asked her elder son Vinay Kumar (PW-12) to visit the
shop and makes enquiries. Soon, he returned informing that his father’s dead body was lying
besides the road at Dodki Nala with marks of injuries. On the basis of suspicion, Gajadhar
Chowdhary (PW-10) father of the deceased lodged a complaint with the police bearing FIR
No.126/03 (Ex.P-6) dated 2.10.2003.

15. Significantly, at this point in time, neither PW-11 nor PW-12 had suspected any person to have
committed the crime.

16. Gajadhar Chowdhary (PW-10) states that it was he who made inquiries about the death of the
deceased and as disclosed to him by Sirodh (PW-6), owner of the shop, deceased was lastly seen by
him closing the shop around 8:00 PM. We note that there is a significant time gap between when
the deceased was lastly seen by him and the time of the crime. Also he was not seen in the company
of the accused. In his testimony he states that accused Bhainsa and Pradeep Kumar killed Umesh
Chowdhary but then this fact is based on “his suspicion” for the reason that accused had “harboured
animosity” in connection with the shop. Well that is about all and without any further elaboration.

17. Significantly, even this limited fact is not disclosed in the complaint. Also to this effect, we find
there is material improvement in his testimony. That apart, we do not find this witness to be reliable
or his testimony worthy of credence. He failed to make inquiries about the cause of the incident
from any of the villagers. He is not a spot witness. He is also not the witness who had lastly seen the
Appellant with the deceased or the Appellant having gone either towards the shop of the deceased or
the place of occurrence of the incident, both being two separate places. However, what is crucial,
rendering his version to be self belied, in his unequivocal admission that, “no quarrel ever took place
prior to the fatal incident between the deceased and the accussed” and that he “never lodged any
report in connection with any quarrel.”

18. To this very effect, we may also take note of the deposition of Sirodh (PW-6) who, in any event,
has not supported the prosecution in Court.

19. When we come to the deposition of Vinay Kumar (PW-12) son of the deceased, unequivocally he
states that “... later on the police personnel told me that accused persons have thrown my father
after committing murder...” Now this totally belies the testimony of his grandfather Gajadhar
Chowdhary (PW-10). To similar effect, it is the testimony of Radhika (PW-13) who only adds that
“...Later on I came to know that Umesh has been murdered. I heard from the villagers...”.
Significantly, her statement that she was not informed by her husband (PW-7), of the deceased
being murdered by the Appellant was not recorded in her previous statement with which she was
confronted. But what is crucial is her deposition is that her husband himself was a suspect and that

4

Pradeep Kumar vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 16 March, 2023

she admits it to be correct, “... that the police personnel took my husband for inquiry in connection
with the murder of deceased. The police personnel kept my husband for one day...” This negates one
of the circumstances that there was tension between the deceased and the accused, which was, the
motive of commission of crime, i.e. issue of use of the shop inter se the parties.

20. We notice in respect of the next circumstance, which is the recovery of keys and the money, that
there is no independent corroborated material except for the confessional statement of the accused,
which also is not proven on record. Even otherwise, the keys, the currency notes and the blood
stained clothes were not sent for chemical analysis. There is only an unexhibited copy of the FSL
Report of the alleged blood stained clothes of the Appellant which stands not proven by anyone. Also
none has come forward to depose that the accused had kept the keys of the shop with himself, for
after all, it is not the case of the prosecution that the shop belonged to the accused.

21. The substratum of the evidence, that is the extra judicial confessional statement of the Appellant,
apart from being hit by Section 27 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, we find it not to have been
supported by Ramkripal Soni (PW-1) and Gopal Yadav (PW-7), who as is evident, was himself a
suspect. He admits it to be “...correct to say that the Inspector had detained me and some villagers
where the dead body was laying...” and “...it is correct to say that I did not disclose the statement
made by accused Pradeep to any other person before 4 o’clock...” We have already noticed his wife
Radhika (PW-13) to have supported this statement. Now, if this witness was himself a suspect, his
testimony cannot be said to be unimpeachable or free from blemish. Still further, deposition of
PW-7 reveals the witness not to have deposed truthfully and the prosecution to have introduced
another theory as according to him the accused had immediately, after the incident confessed the
crime with him. This was in the night intervening first and second October, 2003. But then, he does
not disclose such fact to anyone. We may remind the prosecution that he is a co- villager. His
version also appears to be false for he admits voices and noises were audible from the place of the
occurrence of the incident and that he heard none on the fateful day. He admits that there are
houses of other persons including Ramsanehi, closer to the spot of crime. He did not bother to make
inquiries for ascertaining the truth from any of the co-villagers, including all those named by him.
This witness, in our considered view, cannot be said to be reliable and trustworthy and this we say
so for the reason, that as according to his deposition, he received information of the death of
deceased at 7:00-8:00 AM, the following morning and yet he did not visit the spot of the crime until
the police reached, which was at 10:00 AM and only much later, got his statement recorded at about
4:00 PM. His stoic silence, in not informing or meeting any of the family members of the deceased,
neighbours or Police is unexplainable.

22. Dealing with the star witness of the prosecution which is the Investigation Officer, I.Tirkey
(PW-19), we find his testimony to be wholly unworthy of any credence:

unbelievable; and the witness to be unreliable. This we say so for the reasons that he
did not record the statement of Gajadhar Chowdhary (PW-10) or Gopal Yadav
(PW-7) in respect any prior animosity between the deceased and the accused. The
evidence pertaining to the genesis of the crime was not collected by him. He also does
not state as to what made him detain accused Pradeep Kumar on 3.10.2023. Be that

5

Pradeep Kumar vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 16 March, 2023

as it may, he did not examine witnesses, who in our considered view, perhaps may
have thrown some light about regard to the actual occurrence of the incident. He
admits that houses of Ramsevak, Gopal and Rashri are just at a distance of 30 to 70
meters from the spot of the crime. Yet, he did not examine any of them. Why so? No
explanation is forthcoming. Crucially, he admits that, “the investigation concluded
having no direct evidence” indicating the time and the manner in which the crime
took place. He admits to have prepared some document in relation to the keys
recovered from the accused however no such fact is recorded in his diary. In fact,
such fact is not found recorded in the Panchnama prepared by him. The basis for the
Investigation Officer (PW-19) to have arrived at the guilt of co-accused Bhainsa is
missing in his statement. In fact, he does not even state to have suspected Bhainsa of
having committed any crime. The sole basis for the Investigation Officer (PW-19) to
have arrested the Appellant for having committed the crime is his extra judicial
confession (Ex. P.11) which in our considered view, apart from becoming
inadmissible, is of no use as it has not led to recovery of any new fact – be it the place
of the grocery shop; prevailing tension between the accused and the deceased;
recovery of the body of the deceased near the Dodki drain: All these facts were known
to the police from before and as far as recovery of money and keychain is concerned
we have already discussed issue.

23. Apart from sending the dead body for post-mortem, the Investigation Officer (PW-19) does not
state what investigation he conducted on the crime spot. It is the case of the prosecution that only
this person conducted the investigation and that he was not engaged in any other crime or had to
attend to other urgent work, resulting into the delay thereof. Perusal of the First Information Report
(Ex.P-6) does reveal Gajadhar Chowdhary (PW-10) to have disclosed the name of accused Pradeep
Kumar as a suspect in the crime. Whether such report was lodged in time or not, itself is in doubt.
That apart if the Investigation Officer (PW-19) was himself aware of the suspect then what
prevented him from immediately detaining or examining him. In fact, it has come on record that
other persons were detained as suspects. The investigation conducted is absolutely shady and has
been done in a casual manner. In this backdrop it cannot be said that the prosecution witnesses,
more specifically (PW-19), (PW-10) and (PW-7) have deposed truthfully.

24. It is important to note that the cardinal principles in the administration of criminal justice in
cases where heavy reliance is placed on circumstantial evidence, is that where two views are
possible, one pointing to the guilt of the accused and the other towards his innocence, the one which
is favourable to the accused must be adopted. [Kali Ram v. State of H.P. (1973) 2 SCC 808].

25. In the present case, we state that the circumstances present before us, taken together, do not
establish conclusively only one hypothesis, that being the guilt of the accused, Pradeep Kumar. The
presumption of innocence remains in favour of the accused unless his guilt is proven beyond all
reasonable doubts against him. [Babu v. State Kerala, (2010) 9 SCC 189]. The cherished principles
or golden threads of proof beyond reasonable doubt which runs through the web of our law should
not be stretched morbidly which was done by the Courts below.

6

Pradeep Kumar vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 16 March, 2023

26. In the present case, we find neither the chain of circumstances to have been completely
established nor the guilt of the accused alone, having committed the crime to be proven, much less
beyond reasonable doubt. This Court has stated essential conditions that must be fulfilled before an
accused can be convicted in a case revolving around circumstantial evidence in the landmark case of
Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Mahrashtra, (1984) 4 SCC 116:

“153. A close analysis of this decision would show that the following conditions must
be fulfilled before a case against an accused can be said to be fully established:

(1) the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should be
fully established.

It may be noted here that this Court indicated that the circumstances concerned “must or should”
and not “may be” established. There is not only a grammatical but a legal distinction between “may
be proved” and “must be or should be proved” as was held by this Court in Shivaji Sahabrao Bobade
v. State of Maharashtra [(1973) 2 SCC 793 : 1973 SCC (Cri) 1033 : 1973 Crl LJ 1783] where the
observations were made: [SCC para 19, p. 807: SCC (Cri) p. 1047] “Certainly, it is a primary
principle that the accused must be and not merely may be guilty before a court can convict and the
mental distance between ‘may be’ and ‘must be’ is long and divides vague conjectures from sure
conclusions.” (2) the facts so established should be consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt of
the accused, that is to say, they should not be explainable on any other hypothesis except that the
accused is guilty, (3) the circumstances should be of a conclusive nature and tendency, (4) they
should exclude every possible hypothesis except the one to be proved, and (5) there must be a chain
of evidence so complete as not to leave any reasonable ground for the conclusion consistent with the
innocence of the accused and must show that in all human probability the act must have been done
by the accused.”

27. Normally, we do not interfere with the concurrent findings of fact of the Courts below. We step
in only in exceptional cases or where gross errors are committed, overlooking crying circumstances
and well established principles of criminal jurisprudence leading to miscarriage of justice. Hence it
becomes our bounden duty to correct such findings in view of the principles enunciated in
Ramaphupala Reddy v. State of Andhra Pradesh, (1970) 3 SCC 474, Balak Ram v. State of U.P.,
(1975) 3 SCC 219 and Bhoginbhai Hirjibhai V. State of Gujarat, (1983) 3 SCC

217.

28. To conclude, we state that both the courts below, erred in finding the Appellant guilty of having
committed the crime, charged for, under Section 302/34 IPC read with 201/34 IPC. Hence we set
aside the findings of guilt and sentence arrived at vide judgment dated 28.08.2004 by the Ld. Trial
Court as subsequently affirmed by the High Court in its judgement dated 21.07.2017 in CRA No.940
of 2004 titled as Bhainsa@Nandlal and Anr. vs. The State of Chhattisgarh.

29. The appeal is allowed and the Appellant stands acquitted of all the charges framed against him.

7

We direct the Appellant Pradeep Kumar be released forthwith unless required in any other case.

Pradeep Kumar vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 16 March, 2023

………………………..J. (B.R. Gavai) …………………….…J. (Sanjay Karol) Dated: 16th March, 2023;

Place: New Delhi.

8