Prakash Nayi @ Sen vs The State Of Goa on 12 January, 2023

Prakash Nayi @ Sen vs The State Of Goa on 12 January, 2023

Author: M. M. Sundresh

Bench: M.M. Sundresh, B.R. Gavai

1

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2010 OF 2010

Prakash Nayi @ Sen                                                             …Appellant

Versus

State of Goa                                                                  …Respondent

JUDGMENT

M. M. Sundresh, J.

“Was’t Hamlet wronged Laertes? Never Hamlet. If Hamlet from himself be ta'en away, And when
he's not himself does wrong Laertes, Then Hamlet does it not; Hamlet denies it. Who does it, then?
His madness. if't be so, Hamlet is of the faction that is wronged; His madness is poor Hamlet's
enemy.”

-William Shakespeare (Source : Hamlet, W.S. (Play) Act-5 Scene-2 Line-245)

1. While acknowledging the hurt that he has caused to Laertes for causing the death of his father,
whom he murdered by way of a mistaken identity, Hamlet pleads temporary madness. While
pleading so, he disassociates himself from the act as if it was done by a third person and he was
made to suffer the consequence. He thus pleads to treat him as a victim rather than an offender.
Though the act of Hamlet does constitute a culpable homicide coming within the definition of
Section 300 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 an act of unsound mind would not attract the same.
Through these lines, Shakespeare brings out the agony of a man having to justify his act of madness.

2. Raising the plea of insanity on the mandate of Section 84 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860
(hereinafter ‘the IPC’), the appellant seeks reversal of the order of conviction passed by the Division
Bench of the High Court of Bombay at Goa, confirming the order of the Additional Sessions Judge,

1

Prakash Nayi @ Sen vs The State Of Goa on 12 January, 2023

S.G. Margao-II. As we are dealing with the seminal issue of applicability of Section 84 of the IPC and
in the light of the focus made by the counsel for the appellant, we do not propose to go into the
merits.

3. We have heard Shri Aftab Ali Khan, the counsel appointed from the Supreme Court Legal Services
Committee.

SECTION 84 of The Indian Penal Code, 1860 “84. Act of a person of unsound mind. - Nothing is an
offence which is done by a person who, at the time of doing it, by reason of unsoundness of mind, is
incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that he is doing what is either wrong or contrary to
law.”

4. Section 84 of the IPC recognizes only an act which could not be termed as an offence. It starts
with the words “nothing is an offence”. The said words are a clear indication of the intendment
behind this laudable provision. Such an act shall emanate from an unsound mind. Therefore, the
existence of an unsound mind is a sine qua non to the applicability of the provision. A mere unsound
mind per se would not suffice, and it should be to the extent of not knowing the nature of the act.
Such a person is incapable of knowing the nature of the said act. Similarly, he does not stand to
reason as to whether an act committed is either wrong or contrary to law. Needless to state, the
element of incapacity emerging from an unsound mind shall be present at the time of commission.

5. The provision speaks about the act of a person of unsound mind. It is a very broad provision
relatable to the incapacity, as aforesaid. The test is from the point of view of a prudent man.
Therefore, a mere medical insanity cannot be said to mean unsoundness of mind. There may be a
case where a person suffering from medical insanity would have committed an act, however, the test
is one of legal insanity to attract the mandate of Section 84 of the IPC. There must be an inability of
a person in knowing the nature of the act or to understand it to be either wrong or contrary to the
law.

6. The aforesaid provision is founded on the maxim, actus non reum facit nisi mens sit rea, i.e., an
act does not constitute guilt unless done with a guilty intention. It is a fundamental principle of
criminal law that there has to be an element of mens rea in forming guilt with intention. A person of
an unsound mind, who is incapable of knowing the consequence of an act, does not know that such
an act is right or wrong. He may not even know that he has committed that act. When such is the
position, he cannot be made to suffer punishment. This act cannot be termed as a mental rebellion
constituting a deviant behaviour leading to a crime against society. He stands as a victim in need of
help, and therefore, cannot be charged and tried for an offence. His position is that of a child not
knowing either his action or the consequence of it.

7. We wish to place reliance on the following decisions of this Court:

(cid:133) Surendra Mishra v. State of Jharkhand (2011) 11 SCC 495 “11. In our opinion, an
accused who seeks exoneration from liability of an act under Section 84 of the Penal
Code is to prove legal insanity and not medical insanity. Expression "unsoundness of

2

Prakash Nayi @ Sen vs The State Of Goa on 12 January, 2023

mind" has not been defined in the Penal Code and it has mainly been treated as
equivalent to insanity. But the term “insanity” carries different meaning in different
contexts and describes varying degrees of mental disorder. Every person who is
suffering from mental disease is not ipso facto exempted from criminal liability. The
mere fact that the accused is conceited, odd, irascible and his brain is not quite all
right, or that the physical and mental ailments from which he suffered had rendered
his intellect weak and affected his emotions or indulges in certain unusual acts, or
had fits of insanity at short intervals or that he was subject to epileptic fits and there
was abnormal behaviour or the behaviour is queer are not sufficient to attract the
application of Section 84 of the Penal Code.” (cid:133) Hari Singh Gond v. State of Madhya
Pradesh (2008) 16 SCC “10. “7. Section 84 lays down the legal test of responsibility in
cases of alleged unsoundness of mind. There, is no definition of "unsoundness of
mind" in the IPC. The courts have, however, mainly treated this expression as
equivalent to insanity. But the term ‘insanity’ itself has no precise definition. It is a
term used to describe varying degrees of mental disorder. So, every person, who is
mentally diseased, is not ipso facto exempted from criminal responsibility. A
distinction is to be made between legal insanity and medical insanity. A court is
concerned with legal insanity, and not with medical insanity...” (cid:133) Bapu @ Gajraj
Singh v. State of Rajasthan 2007 8 SCC 66 “10. Section 84 embodies the fundamental
maxim of criminal law i.e. actus non reum facit nisi mens sit rea (an act does not
constitute guilt unless done with a guilty intention). In order to constitute an offence,
the intent and act must concur; but in the case of insane persons, no culpability is
fastened on them as they have no free will (furios is nulla voluntas est).

11. The section itself provides that the benefit is available only after it is proved that at
the time of committing the act, the accused was labouring under such a defect of
reason, from disease of the mind, as not to know the nature and quality of the act he
was doing, or that even if he did not know it, it was either wrong or contrary to law
then this section must be applied. The crucial point of time for deciding whether the
benefit of this section should be given or not, is the material time when the offence
takes place. In coming to that conclusion, the relevant circumstances are to be taken
into consideration, it would be dangerous to admit the defence of insanity upon
arguments derived merely from the character of the crime. It is only unsoundness of
mind which naturally impairs the cognitive faculties of the mind that can form a
ground of exemption from criminal responsibility. Stephen in History of the Criminal
Law of England, Vol. II, p. 166 has observed that if a person cut off the head of a
sleeping man because it would be great fun to see him looking for it when he woke
up, would obviously be a case where the perpetrator of the act would be incapable of
knowing the physical effects of his act. The law recognizes nothing but incapacity to
realise the nature of the act and presumes that where a man's mind or his faculties of
ratiocination are sufficiently dim to apprehend what he is doing, he must always be
presumed to intend the consequence of the action he takes…” Section 105 of the
Indian Evidence Act 1872 “105. Burden of proving that case of accused comes within
exceptions. —When a person is accused of any offence, the burden of proving the

3

Prakash Nayi @ Sen vs The State Of Goa on 12 January, 2023

existence of circumstances bringing the case within any of the General Exceptions in
the Indian Penal Code, (45 of 1860), or within any special exception or proviso
contained in any other part of the same Code, or in any law defining the offence, is
upon him, and the Court shall presume the absence of such circumstances.”

8. The burden of proof does lie on the accused to prove to the satisfaction of the Court that one is
insane while doing the act prohibited by law. Such a burden gets discharged based on a prima facie
case and reasonable materials produced on his behalf. The extent of probability is one of
preponderance. This is for the reason that a person of unsound mind is not expected to prove his
insanity beyond a reasonable doubt. Secondly, it is the collective responsibility of the person
concerned, the Court and the prosecution to decipher the proof qua insanity by not treating it as
adversarial. Though a person is presumed to be sane, once there are adequate materials available
before the Court, the presumption gets discharged.

9. Section 105 of the Indian Evidence Act, which places the burden of proving, has its exceptions.
Though, as a general principle, the onus is upon the person accused to bring his case under the
exception, dealing with the case under Section 84 of the IPC, one has to apply the concept of
preponderance of probabilities. The aforesaid provision has to be read along with Section 8 of the
Indian Evidence Act. The better way to reconcile the aforesaid provision would be to have a look into
the behaviour and conduct before, during and after the occurrence.

10. As Section 84 of the IPC has its laudable objective behind it, the prosecution and the Court have
their distinct roles to play. The agency has to take up the investigation from the materials produced
on behalf of the person claiming unsoundness. It has to satisfy itself that the case would not come
within the purview of Section 84 of the IPC.

11. The Court on its part has to satisfy itself as to whether the act was done by a person with an
unsound mind within the rigour of Section 84 of the IPC.

12. We wish to place reliance on the classical decision of this Court in Dahyabhai Chhaganbhai
Thakkar v. State of Gujarat (AIR 1964 SC 1563), wherein the Court held that:

“(7) The doctrine of burden of proof in the context of the plea of insanity may be
stated in the following propositions:

(1) The prosecution must prove beyond reasonable doubt that the accused had
committed the offence with the requisite mens rea; and the burden of proving that
always rests on the prosecution from the beginning to the end of the trial.

(2) There is a rebuttable presumption that the accused was not insane, when he
committed the crime, in the sense laid down by Section 84 of the Indian Penal Code:
the accused may rebut it by placing before the court all the relevant evidence oral,
documentary or circumstantial, but the burden of proof upon him is no higher than
that rests upon a party to civil proceedings.

4

Prakash Nayi @ Sen vs The State Of Goa on 12 January, 2023

(3) Even if the accused was not able to establish conclusively that he was insane at the
time he committed the offence, the evidence placed before the court by the accused or
by the prosecution may raise a reasonable doubt in the mind of the court as regards
one or more of the ingredients of the offence, including mens rea of the accused and
in that case the court would be entitled to acquit the accused on the ground that the
general burden of proof resting on the prosecution was not discharged.”

13. This Court in the case of Bapu (supra) has held that:

“8. …The onus of proving unsoundness of mind is on the accused. But where during
the investigation previous history of insanity is revealed, it is the duty of an honest
investigator to subject the accused to a medical examination and place that evidence
before the court and if this is not done, it creates a serious infirmity in the
prosecution case and the benefit of doubt has to be given to the accused. The onus,
however, has to be discharged by producing evidence as to the conduct of the accused
shortly prior to the offence and his conduct at the time or immediately afterwards,
also by evidence of his mental condition and other relevant factors.

xxx xxx xxx

12. Mere abnormality of mind or partial delusion, irresistible impulse or compulsive
behaviour of a psychopath affords no protection under Section 84 as the law
contained in that section is still squarely based on the outdated M'Naughton rules of
19th century England. The provisions of Section 84 are in substance the same as
those laid down in the answers of the Judges to the questions put to them by the
House of Lords, in M'Naughton's case [(1843) 4 St Tr NS 847 (HL)]. Behaviour,
antecedent, attendant and subsequent to the event, may be relevant in finding the
mental condition of the accused at the time of the event, but not that remote in time.
It is difficult to prove the precise state of the offender's mind at the time of the
commission of the offence, but some indication thereof is often furnished by the
conduct of the offender while committing it or immediately after the commission of
the offence.

A lucid interval of an insane person is not merely a cessation of the violent symptoms of the
disorder, but a restoration of the faculties of the mind sufficiently to enable the person soundly to
judge the act; but the expression does not necessarily mean complete or perfect restoration of the
mental faculties to their original condition. So, if there is such a restoration, the person concerned
can do the act with such reason, memory and judgment as to make it a legal act; but merely a
cessation of the violent symptoms of the disorder is not sufficient.”

14. This Court in a recent decision in Devidas Loka Rathod v. State of Maharashtra (2018) 7 SCC
718, has held that:

5

Prakash Nayi @ Sen vs The State Of Goa on 12 January, 2023

“11. Section 84 IPC carves out an exception, that an act will not be an offence, if done
by a person, who at the time of doing the same, by reason of unsoundness of mind, is
incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or what he is doing is either wrong or
contrary to law. But this onus on the accused, under Section 105 of the Evidence Act
is not as stringent as on the prosecution to be established beyond all reasonable
doubts. The accused has only to establish his defence on a preponderance of
probability, as observed in Surendra Mishra v. State of Jharkhand (2011) 11 SCC 495 :
(2011) 3 SCC (Cri) 232, after which the onus shall shift on the prosecution to
establish the inapplicability of the exception. But, it is not every and any plea of
unsoundness of mind that will suffice. The standard of test to be applied shall be of
legal insanity and not medical insanity, as observed in State of Rajasthan v. Shera
Ram (2012) 1 SCC 602 : (2012) 1 SCC (Cri) 406, as follows:

(Shera Ram, SCC p. 614, para 19) “19…Once, a person is found to be suffering from
mental disorder or mental deficiency, which takes within its ambit hallucinations,
dementia, loss of memory and self-control, at all relevant times by way of appropriate
documentary and oral evidence, the person concerned would be entitled to seek
resort to the general exceptions from criminal liability.”

12. The crucial point of time for considering the defence plea of unsoundness of mind
has to be with regard to the mental state of the accused at the time the offence was
committed collated from evidence of conduct which preceded, attended and followed
the crime as observed in Ratan Lal v. State of M.P. (1970) 3 SCC 533 : 1971 SCC (Cri)
139, as follows: (SCC pp. 533-34, para 2) “2. It is now well settled that the crucial
point of time at which unsoundness of mind should be established is the time when
the crime is actually committed and the burden of proving this lies on the accused. In
Dahyabhai Chhaganbhai Thakkar v. State of Gujarat (1964) 7 SCR 361 : AIR 1964 SC
1563, it was laid down that ‘there is a rebuttable presumption that the accused was
not insane. when he committed the crime, in the sense laid down by Section 84 of the
Penal Code, the accused may rebut it by placing before the court all the relevant
evidence- oral, documentary or circumstantial, but the burden of proof upon him is
no higher than that which rests upon a party to civil proceedings’.”

13. If from the materials placed on record, a reasonable doubt is created in the mind
of the Court with regard to the mental condition of the accused at the time of
occurrence, he shall be entitled to the benefit of the reasonable doubt and consequent
acquittal, as observed in Vijayee Singh v. State of U.P. (1990) 3 SCC 190 : 1990 SCC
(Cri) 378.” CHAPTER XXV OF THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE 1973

15. Chapter XXV of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 (hereinafter ‘Cr.P.C.’), though procedural
in nature, also becomes substantive when it deals with an accused person of unsound mind. A
well-laid procedure is contemplated under Sections 328 to 339 of Cr.P.C. There is not even a need
for an application under Section 329 of Cr.P.C. in finding out as to whether an accused would be
sound enough to stand a trial, rather it is the mandatory duty of the Court. Under Section 330, the

6

Prakash Nayi @ Sen vs The State Of Goa on 12 January, 2023

Court can even go to the extent of discharging such a person if his inability to stand trial continues
with a rigid chance of improvement. As per Section 334 of Cr.P.C., the judgment of the Court shall
include a specific finding that the act was committed due to unsoundness of mind, though it was
actually done. The reason is simple as there cannot be an acquittal on the ground of unsoundness of
mind unless the act is actually done.

16. The whole idea under the provisions discussed is to facilitate a person of unsound mind to stand
trial, not only because of his reasoning capacity, but also to treat him as the one who is having a
disability. The role of the Court is to find the remedial measures and do complete justice.

17. Having noted the scope and ambit of Chapter XXV of Cr.P.C., including the provisions
incorporated by way of amendments in the year 2009, one has to take into account the fact that the
Court has a larger role to play while considering the case under Section 84 of the IPC. If a friendly
approach is required to be followed during the trial, when adequate powers have been conferred
upon the Court to even discharge an accused on the ground of an unsound mind, the same
reasoning will have to be applied with much force when it comes to Section 84 of the IPC.

18. We find adequate materials on the assessment and evaluation of legal and medical insanity,
which are totally different from each other. We shall furnish the following relevant material on
medical jurisprudence:

Jaisingh P. Modi, A Textbook on Medical Jurisprudence and Toxicology, 26th Edn.
2018, pg. 938 “Ascertainment of Mental Illness: Clinical assessment and Questions
that would require to be addressed. -Forensic psychiatry attempts to help Courts
determine the mental condition of the accused to determine whether the person
could have intended to commit the crime and whether he is in a fit state to stand the
trial. Medical insanity and legal insanity are not necessarily congruent. A mental
illness that requires institutional care or administration of therapeutic care for
medical insanity may not still be sufficient insulate the person from consequences of
a criminal act and punishment if s/he is not legally insane. The assessment shall be to
elicit such information as the law qualifies the general exception for proof of
culpability under Section 84 of IPC. Is the accused mentally unsound? Is the mental
unsoundness such that s/he is not capable of knowing (i) the nature of act; or (ii) the
act is wrong, or (iii) contrary to law? These questions are directly related to testing
the requirement of law. Is s/he capable of understanding the nature of proceedings in
Court and stand trial? This shall be necessary to ensure that he has sufficient ability
to consult with is counsel instruct him for a fair trial and defence. Every accused is
bound to know the nature of proceedings against him/her. What was the mental
condition of the accused, when the crime took place? Is it likely that the accused is
malingering mental illness? The answers will point out to fixing the criminal
responsibility to the acts attributed to him/her. Post-trial care may issue questions
like: What is prognosis for cure for the mental illness? Will s/he be dangerous not to
be let at large? In many a foreign jurisdiction, the questions may vary depending on
the nature of proof of insanity and its intensity that is relevant under law to appraise

7

Prakash Nayi @ Sen vs The State Of Goa on 12 January, 2023

criminal responsibility for the act: Could there have been an irresistible impulse to
commit the act charged with? Was the mental condition so severe that s/he had no
capacity to control his/her behaviour? Was s/he under any form of delusion to inflict
the criminal assault to fend off falsely perceived personal harm or injury? The
evaluation process.-The evaluation process generally includes, broadly, three major
components or sources of data: (a) an interview with the accused (b) forensic
assessment instruments, and (c) third party information including (but by no means
limited to) collateral reports, witness statements, victim statements, police reports,
and records of various sorts (i.e., mental health, treatment, school, medical, crime
scene, etc.). Along with these sources, the role of delusions in evaluations of criminal
responsibility (as the nature and quality of the accused 'delusionality') is often central
in determining the extent of impairment in mental state at the time of the offence,
especially in contested cases that may have a bearing on limiting responsibility if not
completely exonerating him from the offence charged with. The role of the expert is
not to present legal conclusions or formal psychopathological diagnoses. Rather, the
role of examiner, as expert, is to import state of-the-art/science knowledge about the
existence of various psychopathological conditions and their relationship to various
behavioural, perceptual, cognitive and judgmental capacities into the legal/moral
decisional process.” SCHIZOPHRENIA

19. Now, we shall come to the mental illness caused by Schizophrenia. We do not wish to go into the
said issue as it being one within the exclusive knowledge of the experts, except to quote the relevant
text available:

(cid:133) Jaisingh P. Modi, a textbook on Medical Jurisprudence and Toxicology, 26th Edn.
2018, pg. 922 “(ii) Schizophrenia. -Kraepelin (Emil Kraepelin, German psychiatrist.),
in 1896, named this disease as 'dementia praecox’. In 1911, Eugen Bleuler (Paul
Eugen Bleuler, Swiss psychiatrist and Eugenicist.) introduced the term
'schizophrenia' which literally means disintegration of mind. The term dementia
praecox was changed because it implied that the disease always ended in dementia,
which it did not. The term praecox meant that the disease developed at the time of
puberty or adolescence, but in many cases developed outside that period. Since it was
thought that the disease always ended in dementia, it meant a hopeless prognosis,
which created a spirit of defeatism in the minds of people.” (cid:133) Elizabeth A. Martin
(2007), “Oxford Concise Medical Dictionary (7th edition)”, pg. 642 “Schizophrenia n.
a severe *mental illness characterised by a disintegration of the process of thinking,
of contact with reality, and of emotional responsiveness. Positive symptoms, such as
*delusions and *hallucinations (especially of voices), are common, and any
*Schneiderian first-rank symptoms are particularly indicative of the illness. Negative
symptoms include social withdrawal, impairment of ego boundaries, and loss of
energy and initiative. Schizophrenia is diagnosed only if symptoms persist for at least
one month. The illness can spontaneously remit, run a course with infrequent or
frequent relapses, or become chronic. The prognosis has improved with
*anti-psychotic drugs and with vigorous psychological and social management and

8

Prakash Nayi @ Sen vs The State Of Goa on 12 January, 2023

rehabilitation. The many causes include genetic factors, environmental stress, and
possibly illicit drug use.” (cid:133) American Psychiatric Association 2013, Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders : DSM-5, 5th Edn, American Psychiatric
Association, Washington DC. pg.

“Schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders include schizophrenia, other
psychotic disorders, and schizotypal (personality) disorder. They are defined by
abnormalities in one or more of the following five domains: delusions, hallucinations,
disorganized thinking (speech), grossly disorganized or abnormal motor behavior
(including catatonia), and negative symptoms.”

20. We thus, appreciate that Schizophrenia is certainly an over-powering mental illness.

FACTS AND ANALYSIS

21. The case of the prosecution is that the appellant attacked the deceased at a store in which he was
working, which belonged to the brother of his grandfather, who did not have any issue. There was no
motive and the overt act attributed is that he assaulted the deceased with an iron locking plate
without any provocation and premeditation. The occurrence took place on 14.05.2004 at 6:00 a.m.
It was seen by PW2. He took the material object and came out of the shop and went to the bus stand.
Thereafter, he came back to the shop and left it there. He once again walked to the bus stand and
was sitting on a chair. He neither moved away from the said place nor made any attempt to leave.

22. A treatment was indeed given to him at the GMC Hospital, Bhiwani in the State of Haryana prior
to the occurrence. He was taken as an in-patient for a period from 17.11.2003 till 26.11.2003. He was
suffering from anxiety neurosis with reactive depression and had symptoms of acid peptic disease
and mild hypertension. The treatment given to him was akin to one meant for schizophrenia.
Accordingly, he was prescribed the medicine ‘Thioril’.

23. Before the Court of Sessions, an application under Section 329 of Cr.P.C. was filed on behalf of
the appellant. Even while considering the application for bail, the Court noticed the inability of the
appellant to understand the ongoing proceedings. Two doctors were examined as AWs 1 and 2, for
the fact that he was indeed suffering from schizophrenia. AW2 was examined to show that he was
taking the treatment earlier at GMC Hospital at Bhiwani. AW1 is the doctor who examined him after
the occurrence on the orders of the trial court. She had deposed that he was indeed suffering from
chronic schizophrenia. She was further examined as DW1. She once again made a clear deposition in
tune with the certificate issued by her earlier that he was suffering from schizophrenia, and it must
have been from the age of 14 or 15 years. The fact that he was unable to understand the act
committed, and his subsequent incarceration was taken note of. While issuing the first certificate,
this Government doctor in clear terms had stated that the appellant was not fit enough to stand the
trial. However, she gave another certificate after treating him as an in-patient to the effect that he
could stand trial thereafter.

9

Prakash Nayi @ Sen vs The State Of Goa on 12 January, 2023

24. The Court of Sessions and the High Court rendered the conviction on merits. The plea of
insanity was also taken. It was accordingly rejected on the ground that PW6, the brother of the
grandfather of the appellant, did not find any abnormality and that his mother has not been
examined. Further, PW10 being the doctor who physically examined the accused after the incident,
stated that the accused was mentally well.

25. However, the evidence of the Government doctor who deposed as AW1 and DW1 was brushed
aside, so also the evidence of DW2, who was the uncle of the accused, and clearly spoke about the
earlier treatment received by the accused. The evidence of AW2 was not even taken note of. The
conduct, though subsequent, of the appellant, was ignored.

26. Before this Court, a report was called for from the District and Sessions Judge, Bhiwani as the
medicine prescription and other documents could not be deciphered, and there was no discussion
on the prior treatment given. We are of the view, that the aforesaid exercise would not have been
warranted, had the evidence of AW2, which could be deciphered from the records furnished before
us, been brought to the notice of the Court. In the report, it was stated that it could not be confirmed
that the appellant was suffering from schizophrenia. We may note that the statements of the doctors
were recorded after 16 years of the occurrence. In fact, they had also found it difficult to remember
the nature of the treatment given to the appellant. In any case, that is a material which actually will
go in favour of the appellant as the factum of treatment is not in dispute, particularly when it is
corroborated by the evidence of AW2 on more than one occasion.

27. We may also add that this report merely records the statements of the doctors who have not
been examined before the Court. Suffice it to say, that the evidence of the Government doctor as
DW1 who withstood cross- examination ought to have been accepted. The mere fact that the
appellant subsequently became fit to face the trial is sufficient enough to render an order of acquittal
as it is indicative of his prior insanity. We do feel that both the Trial Court and the High Court were
influenced by the nature of the act while ignoring the condition of the appellant and the fact that the
burden on the accused is one of preponderance of probability. We have also been informed that the
appellant has recovered fully and mixed well with the society.

28. For the aforesaid reasons, we are unable to give our imprimatur to the conviction rendered
against the appellant as he is certainly entitled to the benefit conferred under Section 84 of the IPC.

29. The order dated 25.07.2006 of the trial court of conviction and sentence of the appellant
punishable under Section 302 of the IPC and the judgment and order dated 02.06.2008 of the High
Court affirming the same are set aside.

30. The appellant is acquitted of all the charges charged with. The bail bonds of the accused shall
stand discharged. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.

………………………J. (B. R. GAVAI) ………………………J. (M. M. SUNDRESH) New Delhi, 12th January,
2023 ITEM NO.104/1 COURT NO.8 SECTION II-A S U P R E M E C O U R T O F I N D I A
RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS Criminal Appeal No(s). 2010/2010 PRAKASH NAYI @ SEN

10

Prakash Nayi @ Sen vs The State Of Goa on 12 January, 2023

Appellant(s) VERSUS STATE OF GOA Respondent(s) Date : 12-01-2023 This appeal was called on
for hearing today. CORAM :

HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE B.R. GAVAI HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE M.M. SUNDRESH
For Appellant(s) Mr. Aftab Ali Khan, AOR (SCLSC) Mr. M.Z. Chaudhary, Adv.

Mr. Shahbaz, Adv.

Mr. Arvind Kr. Kanva, Adv.

Mr. Sayyed Imtiyaz Ali, Adv.

Ms. Amna Darakshan, Adv.

Mr. Ali Safeer Farooqi, Adv.

For Respondent(s) UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following O R D E
R The appeal is allowed in terms of the signed reportable judgment. Pending
application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.

The concluding paragraph of the judgment reads as under :

“The appellant is acquitted of all the charges charged with. The bail bonds of the
accused shall stand discharged. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed
of. ” (Geeta Ahuja) (Anju Kapoor) Assistant Registrar-cum-PS Court Master (signed
reportable judgment containing the reasons is placed on the file) # signed order
dated 12.1.2023 along with ROP has already been uploaded and sent to the concerned
Branch.

(cid:12)                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2010 OF 2010

PRAKASH NAYI @ SEN                                   APPELLANT(S)

VERSUS

STATE OF GOA                                         RESPONDENT(S)

O R D E R

11

Prakash Nayi @ Sen vs The State Of Goa on 12 January, 2023

For the reasons to be recorded separately, the

appeal is allowed.

The order dated 25.07.2006 of the trial Court

of conviction and sentence of the appellant punishable under Section 302 of the
Indian Penal Code and the judgment and order dated 02.06.2008 of the High Court
affirming the same are set aside.

The appellant is acquitted of all the charges charged with. The bail bonds of the
accused shall stand discharged.

Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.

............... J.

( B.R. GAVAI ) ............... J.

( M.M. SUNDRESH )
NEW DELHI
12th JANUARY, 2023
(cid:12)ITEM NO.104                     COURT NO.8                       SECTION II-A

S U P R E M E C O U R T O F             I N D I A
RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

Criminal Appeal    No(s).      2010/2010

PRAKASH NAYI @ SEN                                               Appellant(s)

VERSUS

STATE OF GOA                                                   Respondent(s)

Date : 12-01-2023 This appeal was called on for hearing today.

CORAM :

HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE B.R. GAVAI HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE M.M. SUNDRESH
For Appellant(s) Mr. Aftab Ali Khan, AOR (SCLSC) Mr. M.Z. Chaudhary, Adv.

Mr. Shahbaz, Adv.

Mr. Arvind Kr. Kanva, Adv.

12

Prakash Nayi @ Sen vs The State Of Goa on 12 January, 2023

Mr. Sayyed Imtiyaz Ali, Adv.

Ms. Amna Darakshan, Adv.

Mr. Ali Safeer Farooqi, Adv.

For Respondent(s) UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following O R D E
R For the reasons to be recorded separately, the appeal is allowed.

The order dated 25.07.2006 of the trial Court of conviction and sentence of the
appellant punishable under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code and the judgment
and order dated 02.06.2008 of the High Court affirming the same are set aside.

The appellant is acquitted of all the charges charged with. The bail bonds of the
accused shall stand discharged.

Pending      application(s),      if   any,    shall   stand
disposed of.

(Geeta Ahuja)                                 (Anju Kapoor)
Assistant Registrar-cum-PS                     Court Master
(Signed Order is placed on the file)

13