Pramod Singla vs Union Of India on 10 April, 2023

Pramod Singla vs Union Of India on 10 April, 2023

Author: Krishna Murari

Bench: V. Ramasubramanian, Krishna Murari

REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.                    OF 2023
(arising out of Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 10798 Of 2022

PRAMOD SINGLA                                           … APPELLANT(S)

VERSUS

UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                  … RESPONDENT(S)

JUDGMENT

KRISHNA MURARI, J.

Leave Granted.

2. The present Appeal is directed against the impugned judgment and final order dated 03.11.2022
passed by the High Court of Delhi at New Delhi, (hereinafter referred to as “High Court”) in Writ
Petition (Crl.) No. 1205 of 2022 whereby the appellant’s plea to quash the detention order against
him on grounds of delay in considering his representation was denied. FACTS

3. Briefly, the facts relevant to the present appeal are that an Intelligence was received by the
Respondent that a syndicate comprising of certain Chinese, Taiwanese, and South Korean nationals
in association with some Indian Nationals were in the practice of smuggling gold into India through
Air Cargo by concealing gold in transformers of electroplating/ reworking machines etc..

4. One such cargo was being imported to India in the name of one M/s Healthy Future Leaders Pvt.
Ltd. and was likely to arrive at Delhi Cargo Complex in the New Delhi Airport.

5. On 18.11.2021 and 19.11.2021, acting on the said intelligence, the purported consignment was
examined by the officers of Respondent No.4 and 80.126 kgs of 24 carat foreign origin gold was
recovered from the said consignment in the form of ‘E’ and ‘I’ shaped plates with a market value of
Rs.39,31,38,219/-.

1

Pramod Singla vs Union Of India on 10 April, 2023

6. The appellant being a suspect, his shop was checked by DRI officials and 7 pieces of gold weighing
5.409 KGs with a market value of Rs.2,64,44,680/-was recovered from his premises.

7. The Respondent authority also conducted searches at four different places of the abovementioned
syndicate and arrested 4 foreign nationals on grounds of finding incriminating evidence against
them.

8. On 20.11.2021, the appellant along with other members of the syndicate was arrested by the
officers of respondent no.4 authority, whereupon they were produced before the Ld. CMM, Patiala
House Courts, New Delhi and were subsequently remanded to judicial custody.

9. The appellant then sought for bail before the learned CMM, and vide order dated 13.12.2021 he
was granted bail.

10. Vide four separate order dated 21.12.2021, all four foreign nationals accused in the said crime
were also granted bail by the Ld. CMM, and further, vide order dated 21.12.2021, the CMM also
granted bail to the co-accused Neeraj Varshney of Indian Origin.

11. Subsequent to the appellant’s release on bail, DRI filed an application in the High Court for
incorporating an additional condition in the bail order directing the appellant to appear in the office
of DRI every Monday at 11:00 am, and the same was granted.

12. On 19.01.2022, the DRI sent a proposal to respondent No.2 to issue an order of detention under
the COFEPOSA Act against the appellant, and subsequently respondent No.2 detaining authority
passed the impugned detention order as against the appellant on 01.02.2022. The appellant was
then arrested on 04.02.2022 by the DRI.

13. On 24.02.2022 a reference was made to the Central Advisory Board, Delhi High Court, and
subsequently, a representation was sent by the appellant to the Respondent No.2 detaining
authority on 02.03.2022 which came to be rejected on 15.03.2022.

14. In the meanwhile, on 10.03.2022, the appellant sent a representation letter to the Central
Government, and subsequently on 04.04.2022, he made another representation to the Advisory
Board.

15. The hearing before the Advisory board was concluded on 18.04.2022, and on 09.05.2022, the
Central Government, on advice from the advisory board after a delay of 60 days rejected the
representation.

16. The appellant then filed a writ in the High Court seeking to quash the detention order against
him, which came to be dismissed vide impugned order dated 03.11.2022.

17. This Court subsequently, vide order dated 05.01.2023, released the appellant from custody as
interim relief due to the demise of his father, and later, due to the expiry of the impugned detention

2

order against the appellant, he was released from detention.

Pramod Singla vs Union Of India on 10 April, 2023

ARGUMENTS ADVANCED BY THE APPELLANT

18. The Learned Counsel for the appellant contended that:

I. As per Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India, a representation made by the
detenue in cases of preventive detention must be considered at the earliest, and an
inordinate delay in considering the representation is grounds enough for the
detention order to be set aside.

II. While relying on a catena of judgments rendered by this Court, it was argued that
the Central Government is not under any compulsion to wait for the recommendation
of the Advisory Board and must act independently and without delay in deciding the
representation of the detenue.

III. Further, the Ld. Counsel for the appellant contends that the decisions of this
Court in the case of K.M. Abdulla Kunhi & B.L. Abdul Khader v. Union Of India &
Ors. 1 and Ankit Ashok Jalan vs Union Of India & Ors. 2 Judgment, both of which are
Constitution Bench judgments, which state that the central Government must wait
for the decision of the Advisory Board, are in direct contravention with Constitution
Bench judgments of this Court in Pankaj Kumar Chakraborty And Ors. v. State of
West Bengal3 and the Jayanarayan Sukul v State Of West Bengal4, and due to the
apparent conflict, the issue needs to be referred to a Larger Bench.

IV. It was also contended that the documents supplied to the appellant herein as
grounds for his preventive detention were illegible and 1 (1991) 1 SCC 476 2 (2020) 16
SCC 127 3 (1969) 3 SCC 400 4 (1970) 1 SCC 219 in Chinese language, and hence on
this ground also the impugned detention order as against the appellant must be
quashed.

ARGUMENTS ADVANCED BY THE RESPONDENTS

19. Learned ASG, Mr. K.M Natraj appearing on behalf of the respondents contends that:

I. There is no incongruity between the Pankaj case (supra) and the Ashok Jalan case
(supra) as contended by the appellant. The decisions relied upon by the appellant are
in context of the Preventive Detention Act, whereas, the Ashok Jalan case (supra) and
Adullah Kuni case (supra) are in context of the COFEPOSA Act, and if the Pankaj
case (supra) is seen in the context of COFEPOSA Act, due to their being a distinction
between the detaining authority and the central Government in the COFEPOSA Act,
there exists no friction between the two Constitutional Bench judgments.

3

Pramod Singla vs Union Of India on 10 April, 2023

II. As per the Ashok Jalan Case (supra), due to the detaining authority and the central
Government being independent of each other under COFEPOSA Act, the mandate to
wait for the decision of the Advisory Board exists on the central Government, and
hence the delay of 60 days is not grounds enough for the detention order to be
quashed.

ISSUES

20. In light of the abovementioned arguments raised by the Learned Counsels for the parties,
following three issues arise for our consideration.

I. Whether there exists an incongruity between the Pankaj Kumar case (supra) and the Abdullah
Kunhi Case (supra) , and if such a friction exists should the point of law be referred to a Larger
Bench? II. If there exists no friction between the two Constitutional judgments of this Court, can the
impugned detention order be quashed on grounds of the 60-day delay in consideration of the
representation made by the appellant?

III. Whether the illegible documents written in Chinese submitted to the appellant herein are
grounds enough for quashing the impugned detention order?

ANALYSIS

21. Before we deal with the issues framed, we find it important to note that preventive detention
laws in India are a colonial legacy, and have a great potential to be abused and misused. Laws that
have the ability to confer arbitrary powers to the state, must in all circumstances, be very critically
examined, and must be used only in the rarest of rare cases. In cases of preventive detention, where
the detenue is held in arrest not for a crime he has committed, but for a potential crime he may
commit, the Courts must always give every benefit of doubt in favour of the detenue, and even the
slightest of errors in procedural compliances must result in favour of the detenue.

ISSUE 1- Whether there exists an incongruity between the Pankaj Kumar case and the Abdullah
Kunhi Case and if such a friction exists should the point of law be referred to a Larger Bench?

22. For the purpose of deciding this question, we must first elaborate on the rights accrued to a
detenue against his preventive detention in terms of his representation. The detenue, in cases of
preventive detention under the COFEPOSA Act, has the right to submit a representation to the
detaining authority, the Government, and the Advisory Board. These representations then, as per
Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India, must be decided at the earliest opportunity possible. If the
representation is accepted either by the Government or the detaining officer, the detenue is
released, however, if the representation is rejected, then the detention period is continued.

23. In the case at hand, the appellant herein, who is under preventive detention, submitted a
representation to the Central Government, the detaining authority and the Advisory Board. It is the
case of the appellant that while the detaining authority considered the representation of the

4

Pramod Singla vs Union Of India on 10 April, 2023

appellant authority in an expeditious manner, however, the Government took 60 days to consider
the same. This delay of 60 days, as per the appellant, is fatal to the case of the prosecution, and
constitutes sufficient grounds for quashing the impugned detention order.

24. The Government, however, claims that the delay of 60 days is completely fair, as the same was
caused because the Central Government was waiting for the advice of the Advisory Board before
deciding on the resolution. In light of this conflict, the overarching issue that needs to be answered
is whether the central Government is bound to wait for the decision of the Advisory Board before
coming to its decision or not. To answer this, we must look at the relevant case laws that define the
rights and duties of the Government, the detaining authority and the detenue in such circumstance.

25. In the Pankaj Kumar case (Supra), the petitioners therein filed a writ petition in the Supreme
Court seeking for a quashing of a detention order passed against them under the Preventive
Detention Act,1950, on grounds that the Government failed to consider the representation made by
them and merely passed it on to the Advisory Board. After careful consideration, a Constitution
Bench of this Court held that the Government must act Independently from the Advisory Board, and
that there exists no mandate on the Government to wait for the decision of the Advisory Board. The
relevant paragraphs of the said judgment are being extracted herein:

“It is true that clause (5) does not in positive language provide as to whom the
representation is to be made and by whom, when made, it is to be considered. But the
expressions “as soon as may be” and “the earliest opportunity” in that clause clearly
indicate that the grounds are to be served and the opportunity to make a
representation are provided for to enable the detenu to show that his detention is
unwarranted and since no other authority who should consider such representation
is mentioned it can only be the detaining authority to whom it is to be made which
has to consider it. Though clause (5) does not in express terms say so it follows from
its provisions that it is the detaining authority which has to give to the detenu the
earliest opportunity to make a representation and to consider it when so made
whether its order is wrongful or contrary to the law enabling it to detain him. The
illustrations given in Abdul Karim case [Abdul Karim v. State of W.B., (1969) 1 SCC
433] show that clause (5) of Article 22 not only contains the obligation of the
appropriate Government to furnish the grounds and to give the earliest opportunity
to make a representation but also by necessary implication the obligation to consider
that representation. Such an obligation is evidently provided for to give an
opportunity to the detenu to show and a corresponding opportunity to the
appropriate Government to consider any objections against the order which the
detenu may raise so that no person is, through error or otherwise, wrongly arrested
and detained. If it was intended that such a representation need not be considered by
the Government where an Advisory Board is constituted and that representation in
such cases is to be considered by the Board and not by the appropriate Government,
clause (5) would not have directed the detaining authority to afford the earliest
opportunity to the detenu. In that case the words would more appropriately have
been that the authority should obtain the opinion of the Board after giving an

5

Pramod Singla vs Union Of India on 10 April, 2023

opportunity to the detenu to make a representation and communicate the same to the
Board. But what would happen in cases where the detention is for less than 3 months
and there is no necessity of having the opinion of the Board? If counsel's contention
were to be right the representation in such cases would not have to be considered
either by the appropriate Government or by the Board and the right of representation
and the corresponding obligation of the appropriate Government to give the earliest
opportunity to make such representation would be rendered nugatory. In imposing
the obligation to afford the opportunity to make a representation, clause (5) does not
make any distinction between orders of detention for only 3 months or less and those
for a longer duration. The obligation applies to both kinds of orders. The clause does
not say that the representation is to be considered by the appropriate Government in
the former class of cases and by the Board in the latter class of cases. In our view it is
clear from clauses (4) and (5) of Article 22 that there is a dual obligation on the
appropriate Government and a dual right in favour of the detenu, namely, (1) to have
his representation irrespective of the length of detention considered by the
appropriate Government and (2) to have once again that representation in the light of
the circumstances of the case considered by the Board before it gives its opinion. If in
the light of that representation the Board finds that there is no sufficient cause for
detention the Government has to revoke the order of detention and set at liberty the
detenu. Thus, whereas the Government considers the representation to ascertain
whether the order is in conformity with its power under the relevant law, the Board
considers such representation from the point of view of arriving at its opinion
whether there is sufficient cause for detention. The obligation of the appropriate
Government to afford to the detenu the opportunity to make a representation and to
consider that representation is distinct from the Government's obligation to
constitute a Board and to communicate the representation amongst other materials
to the Board to enable it to form its opinion and to obtain such opinion.

This conclusion is strengthened by the other provisions of the Act. In conformity with
clauses (4) and (5) of Article 22, Section 7 of the Act enjoins upon the detaining
authority to furnish to the detenu grounds of detention within five days from the date
of his detention and to afford to the detenu the earliest opportunity to make his
representation to the appropriate Government. Sections 8 and 9 enjoin upon the
appropriate Government to constitute an Advisory Board and to place within 30 days
from the date of the detention the grounds for detention, the detenu's representation
and also the report of the officer where the order of detention is made by an officer
and not by the Government. The obligation under Section 7 is quite distinct from that
under Sections 8 and 9. If the representation was for the consideration not by the
Government but by the Board only as contended, there was no necessity to provide
that it should be addressed to the Government and not directly to the Board. The
Government could not have been intended to be only a transmitting authority nor
could it have been contemplated that it should sit tight on that representation and
remit it to the Board after it is constituted. The peremptory language in clause (5) of
Article 22 and Section 7 of the Act would not have been necessary if the Board and

6

Pramod Singla vs Union Of India on 10 April, 2023

not the Government had to consider the representation. Section 13 also furnishes an
answer to the argument of the counsel for the State. Under that section the State
Government and the Central Government are empowered to revoke or modify an
order of detention. That power is evidently provided for to enable the Government to
take appropriate action where on a representation made to it, it finds that the order
in question should be modified or even revoked. Obviously, the intention of
Parliament could not have been that the appropriate Government should pass an
order under Section 13 without considering the representation which has under
Section 7 been addressed to it.

For the reasons aforesaid we are in agreement with the decision in Abdul Karim case
[Abdul Karim v. State of W.B., (1969) 1 SCC 433] . Consequently, the petitioners had
a Constitutional right and there was on the State Government a corresponding
Constitutional obligation to consider their representations irrespective of whether
they were made before or after their cases were referred to the Advisory Board and
that not having been done the order of detention against them cannot be sustained.
In this view it is not necessary for us to examine the other objections raised against
these orders. The petition is therefore allowed, the orders of detention against
Petitioners 15 and 36 are set aside and we direct that they should be set at liberty
forthwith.”

26. Further, in the Jayanarayan Sukul Case (Supra), the same issue was considered by another
Constitution Bench of this Court, wherein it went on to reiterate the principles in the Pankaj Kumar
Case (Supra), and held that the central Government must act independently of the Advisory Board,
and can decide the representation made by the detenue without hearing from the Advisory Board.
For the purpose of convenience, the relevant paragraph of the said judgment is being reproduced
herein:

“In the present case, the State of West Bengal is guilty of infraction of the
Constitutional provisions not only by inordinate delay of the consideration of the
representation but also by putting of the consideration till after the receipt of the
opinion of the Advisory Board. As we have already observed there is no explanation
for this inordinate delay. The Superintendent who made the enquiry did not affirm
an affidavit. The State has given no information as to why this long delay occurred.
The inescapable conclusion in the present case is that the appropriate authority failed
to discharge its Constitutional obligation by inactivity and lack of independent
judgment.”

27. In the Harardhan Saha Case (Supra), yet another Constitution Bench of this Court considered
the distinction between the consideration of the representation made by the detenue in cases of
preventive detention, and it was stated that if the representation was made before the matter is
referred to the Advisory Board, the detaining authority must consider such representation, but if the
representation is made after the matter is referred to the Advisory Board, the detaining authority
would first consider it and then send it to the Advisory Board. The relevant paragraph from the said

7

judgment is being reproduced hereunder:

Pramod Singla vs Union Of India on 10 April, 2023

“The representation of a detenu is to be considered. There is an obligation on the
State to consider the representation. The Advisory Board has adequate power to
examine the entire material. The Board can also call for more materials. The Board
may call the detenu at his request. The Constitution of the Board shows that it is to
consist of Judges or persons qualified to be Judges of the High Court. The
Constitution of the Board observes the fundamental of fair play and principles of
natural justice. It is not the requirement of principles of natural justice that there
must be an oral hearing. Section 8 of the Act which casts an obligation on the State to
consider the representation affords the detenu all the rights which are guaranteed by
Article 22(5). The Government considers the representation to ascertain essentially
whether the order is in conformity with the power under the law. The Board, on the
other hand, considers whether in the light of the representation there is sufficient
cause for detention.

Principles of natural justice are an element in considering the reasonableness of a
restriction where Article 19 is applicable. At the stage of consideration of
representation by the State Government, the obligation of the State Government is
such as Article 22(5) implies. Section 8 of the Act is in complete conformity with
Article 22(5) because this section follows the provisions of the Constitution. If the
representation of the detenu is received before the matter is referred to the Advisory
Board, the detaining authority considers the representation. If a representation is
made after the matter has been referred to the Advisory Board, the detaining
authority will consider it before it will send representation to the Advisory Board.”

28. Subsequently, in the case of Francis Coralie Mullin v. W.C. Khambra & Ors.5, a Division Bench
of this Court considered the principles 5 (1980) 2 SCC 275 laid down in the judgment of
Jayanarayan Sukul (Supra), and while it agreed with the principles of the above mentioned case, it
however made an observation stating that when it was said that the Government must decide on the
representation before forwarding it to the advisory board, the emphasis was not on time, but on the
onus of the Government to decide the representation Independently. This essentially meant that the
Government must act independently of the Advisory Board, the relevant paragraphs from the said
judgment are being extracted herein:

“We have no doubt in our minds about the role of the Court in cases of preventive
detention : it has to be one of eternal vigilance. No freedom is higher than personal
freedom and no duty higher than to maintain it unimpaired. The Court's writ is the
ultimate insurance against illegal detention. The Constitution enjoins conformance
with the provisions of Article 22 and the Court exacts compliance. Article 22(5) vests
in the detenu the right to be provided with an opportunity to make a representation.
Here the Law Reports tell a story and teach a lesson. It is that the principal enemy of
the detenu and his right to make a representation is neither high-handedness nor
mean-mindedness but the casual indifference, the mindless insensibility, the routine

8

Pramod Singla vs Union Of India on 10 April, 2023

and the red tape of the bureaucratic machine. The four principles enunciated by the
Court in Jayanarayan Sukul v. State of W.B. [Jayanarayan Sukul v. State of W.B.,
(1970) 1 SCC 219 : 1970 SCC (Cri) 92] as well as other principles enunciated in other
cases, an analysis will show, are aimed at shielding personal freedom against
indifference, insensibility, routine and red tape and thus to secure to the detenu the
right to make an effective representation. We agree : (1) the detaining authority must
provide the detenu a very early opportunity to make a representation, (2) the
detaining authority must consider the representation as soon as possible, and this,
preferably, must be before the representation is forwarded to the Advisory Board, (3)
the representation must be forwarded to the Advisory Board before the Board makes
its report, and (4) the consideration by the detaining authority of the representation
must be entirely independent of the hearing by the Board or its report, expedition
being essential at every stage. We, however, hasten to add that the time-

imperative can never be absolute or obsessive. The Court's observations are not to be so understood.
There has to be lee-way, depending on the necessities (we refrain from using the word
“circumstances”) of the case. One may well imagine a case where a detenu does not make a
representation before the Board makes its report making it impossible for the detaining authority
either to consider it or to forward it to the Board in time or a case where a detenu makes a
representation to the detaining authority so shortly before the Advisory Board takes up the reference
that the detaining authority cannot consider the representation before then but may merely forward
it to the Board without himself considering it. Several such situations may arise compelling
departure from the time-imperative. But no allowance can be made for lethargic indifference. No
allowance can be made for needless procrastination. But, allowance must surely be made for
necessary consultation where legal intricacies and factual ramifications are involved. The burden of
explaining the necessity for the slightest departure from the time-imperative is on the detaining
authority.

We have already expressed our agreement with the four principles enunciated in Jayanarayan Sukul
v. State of W.B. [Jayanarayan Sukul v. State of W.B., (1970) 1 SCC 219 : 1970 SCC (Cri) 92] We
would make one observation. When it was said there that the Government should come to its
decision on the representation before the Government forwarded the representation to the Advisory
Board, the emphasis was not on the point of time but on the requirement that the Government
should consider the representation independently of the Board.”

29. However, in the case of Abdulla Kunhi (Supra), where the preventive detention of the petitioner
therein under the COFEPOSA Act was challenged on the same disputed ground, a Constitutional
Bench of this Court, while considering both the issues of when the representation is submitted
before the matter is referred to the Advisory Board and after the mater has been referred to the
advisory board, for both the circumstances, had held that the Government must wait for the decision
of the Advisory Board before making its decision on the representation. The relevant paragraph of
the abovementioned judgment is being extracted hereunder:

9

Pramod Singla vs Union Of India on 10 April, 2023

“We agree with the observations in Frances Coralie Mullin case [(1980) 2 SCC 275 :
1980 SCC (Cri) 419] . The time imperative for consideration of representation can
never be absolute or obsessive. It depends upon the necessities and the time at which
the representation is made. The representation may be received before the case is
referred to the Advisory Board, but there may not be time to dispose of the
representation before referring the case to the Advisory Board. In that situation the
representation must also be forwarded to the Advisory Board along with the case of
the detenu. The representation may be received after the case of the detenu is
referred to the Board. Even in this situation the representation should be forwarded
to the Advisory Board provided the Board has not concluded the proceedings. In both
the situations there is no question of consideration of the representation before the
receipt of report of the Advisory Board. Nor it could be said that the Government has
delayed consideration of the representation, unnecessarily awaiting the report of the
Board. It is proper for the Government in such situations to await the report of the
Board. If the Board finds no material for detention on the merits and reports
accordingly, the Government is bound to revoke the order of detention. Secondly,
even if the Board expresses the view that there is sufficient cause for detention, the
Government after considering the representation could revoke the detention. The
Board has to submit its report within eleven weeks from the date of detention. The
Advisory Board may hear the detenu at his request. The Constitution of the Board
shows that it consists of eminent persons who are Judges or persons qualified to be
Judges of the High Court. It is therefore, proper that the Government considers the
representation in the aforesaid two situations only after the receipt of the report of
the Board. If the representation is received by the Government after the Advisory
Board has made its report, there could then of course be no question of sending the
representation to the Advisory Board. It will have to be dealt with and disposed of by
the Government as early as possible.”

30. While at a first glance, it may seem like there is friction between the two sets of judgments,
however, a deeper inspection would prove otherwise. To understand the two sets of judgments, we
must first look at the relevant provisions under which these judgments were passed.

31. The Pankaj Kumar Case (Supra) judgment was passed in the context of the Preventive Detention
Act, 1960, and the Abdullah Kunhi Case (Supra) was passed in the context of the COFEPOSA Act.
Section 3 of the two acts providing for preventive detention, for a ready reference, are being
reproduced hereunder in a table chart:

COFEPOSA ACT, 1974                       PREVENTIVE          DETENTION
ACT, 1950
Section 3. Power to make orders

detaining certain persons. Section 3. Power to Make Orders Detaining Certain Persons.

(1) The Central Government or the (1) The Central Government or the State Government or any
officer of State Government may-

10

Pramod Singla vs Union Of India on 10 April, 2023

the Central Government, not below the rank of a Joint Secretary to that (a) if satisfied with respect
to any Government, specially empowered person that with a view to preventing for the purposes of
this section by him from acting in any manner that Government, or any officer of prejudicial to- the
State Government, not below the (i) the defence of India, the relations rank of a Secretary to that of
India with foreign persons, or the Government, specially empowered security of India, or for the
purposes of this section by (ii) the security of the State or the that Government, may, if satisfied,
maintenance of public order, or with respect to any person (including (iii) the maintenance of
supplies and a foreigner), that, with a view to services essential to the community;

preventing him from acting in any or manner prejudicial to the conservation or augmentation of (b)
if satisfied with respect to any foreign exchange or with a view to person who is a foreigner within
the preventing him from— meaning of the Foreigners Act,

(i) smuggling goods, or 1946-(31 of 1946), that with a view

(ii) abetting the smuggling of goods, to regulating his continued presence or in India or with a view
to making

(iii) engaging in transporting or arrangements for his expulsion from concealing or keeping
smuggled India it is necessary so to do, make goods, or an order directing that such person

(iv) dealing in smuggled goods be detained.

otherwise than by engaging in (2) Any of the following officers, transporting or concealing or
keeping namely :

smuggled goods, or (a) District Magistrates,

(v) harbouring persons engaged in (b) Additional District Magistrates smuggling goods or in
abetting the specially empowered in this behalf smuggling of goods, it is necessary by the State
Government, so to do, make an order directing that such person be detained: 2 [Provided (c) the
Commissioner of Police for that no order of detention shall be Bombay, Calcutta, Madras or made
on any of the grounds specified Hyderabad, in this sub-section on which an order (d) Collectors in
the territories which of detention may be made under immediately before the 1st section 3 of the
Prevention of Illicit November, 1956, were comprised in Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and the State of
Hyderabad, may if Psychotropic Substances Act, 1988 satisfied as provided in sub-clauses or under
section 3 of the Jammu and (ii) and (iii) of Cl. (a) of subsection Kashmir Prevention of Illicit Traffic
(1), exercise the power conferred by in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic the said subsection.
Substances Ordinance, 1988 (J&K (3) When any order is made under Ordinance 1 of 1988).] this
section by any officer mentioned (2) When any order of detention is in sub-section (2) he shall
forthwith made by a State Government or by report the fact to the State an officer empowered by a
State Government to which he is Government, the State Government subordinate together with the
shall, within ten days, forward to the grounds on which the order has been Central Government a
report in made and such other particulars as in respect of the order. his opinion have a bearing on

11

Pramod Singla vs Union Of India on 10 April, 2023

the (3) For the purposes of clause (5) of matter, and no such order made after article 22 of the
Constitution, the the commencement of Preventive communication to a person detained Detention
(Second Amendment) Act, in pursuance of a detention order of 1952 (61 of 1952), shall remain in the
grounds on which the order has force for more than twelve days after been made shall be made as
soon as the making thereof unless in the may be after the detention, but meantime it has been
approved by ordinarily not later than five days, the State Government. and in exceptional
circumstances and for reasons to be recorded in writing, (4) When any order is made or not later
than fifteen days, from the approved by the State Government date of detention under this section,
the State Government shall, as soon as may be, report the fact to the Central Government together
with the grounds on which the order has been made and such other particulars as in the opinion of
the State Government has a bearing on the necessity for the order.

32. As can be seen from the provisions of the abovementioned Acts, the detention order under both
laws can be passed either by the Government, or by the specially empowered officer. However,
under Section 3 of the Preventive Detention Act, the specially empowered officer, within 12 days of
the detention, has to seek for an approval from the Government for continued detention, and only if
the Government approves the same can the detention be continued. This process of seeking an
approval from the Government is essentially a transfer of power from the empowered officer to the
Government, making the Government the detaining authority after the initial lapse of 12 days. In the
COFEPOSA Act however, no such approval is required from the Government, and hence the
detaining authority and the Government remain to be two separate bodies independent of each
other. This difference between the COFEPOSA Act and the other preventive detention laws has been
upheld by this Court in the case of Kamlesh Kumar Ishwardas Patel vs Union Of India & Ors.6, the
relevant extract of the abovesaid judgment is being reproduced hereunder:

“The second premise that the Central Government becomes the detaining authority
since there is deemed approval by the Government of the order made by the officer
specially empowered in that regard from the time of its issue, runs counter to the
scheme of the COFEPOSA Act and the PIT NDPS Act which differs from that of other
preventive detention laws, namely, the National Security Act, 1980, the Maintenance
of Internal Security Act, 1971, and the Preventive Detention Act, 1950.”

33. If we read the Pankaj Kumar judgment (Supra) in light of this distinction between the specially
empowered officer and the Government in the COFEPOSA Act, we find that there exists no friction
between the Pankaj Kumar Judgment (Supra) and the Abdullah Kunhi Judgement (Supra), since
the Pankaj Kumar Judgement, while mandating the central Government to not wait for the decision
of the Advisory Board, only does so because the central Government is the detaining officer in the
Preventive Detention Act. In simpler terms, this would mean that the mandate to not wait for the
decision of the Advisory Board is effectively not for the central Government, but only for the
detaining officer.

6 (1995) 4 SCC 51

12

Pramod Singla vs Union Of India on 10 April, 2023

34. In the COFEPOSA Act, since the detaining authority is separate from the Government, both, the
Pankaj Kumar Judgment (supra) and the Abdullah Kunhi Judgment (supra) would apply, but in
different spheres. The Pankaj Kumar Judgment (supra), since it was rendered in the context of the
Government being the detaining authority, would be applicable only to the detaining
authority/specially empowered officer under the COFEPOSA Act. The Abdullah Kunhi Judgment
(supra) however, since it was rendered in the context of the COFEPOSA Act, the mandate
thereunder would squarely apply only to the Government, and not the detaining authority. In
simpler terms, this would mean that the mandate to not wait for the Advisory Board would be
applicable only to the detaining authority. The Government, however, as per the Abdullah Kunhi
Case (supra), must wait for the decision of the Advisory Board. Since these two judgments exist
symbiotically and apply to two separate authorities within the COFEPOSA Act, there exists no
friction between the judgments, and hence there is no necessity for this point of law to be referred to
a Larger Bench since the same is already settled. This application of both the judgments in two
separate spheres within the same act has been clarified in the Ashok Jalan Judgment (supra), the
relevant extract from the said judgment is being extracted hereunder:

“We are conscious that the view that we are taking, may lead to some incongruity and
there could be clear dichotomy when the representations are made simultaneously to
such specially empowered officer who had passed the order of detention and to the
appropriate Government. If we go by the principle in para 16 in K.M. Abdulla Kunhi
[K.M. Abdulla Kunhi v. Union of India, (1991) 1 SCC 476 : 1991 SCC (Cri) 613] it
would be proper for the appropriate Government to wait till the report was received
from the Advisory Board, while at the same time the specially empowered officer who
had acted as the detaining authority would be obliged to consider the representation
with utmost expedition. At times a single representation is prepared with copies to
the detaining authority, namely, the specially empowered officer and to the
appropriate Government as well as to the Advisory Board. In such situations there
will be incongruity as stated above, which may be required to be corrected at some
stage. However, such difficulty or inconsistency cannot be the basis for holding that a
specially empowered officer while acting as a detaining authority would also be
governed by the same principles as laid down in para 16 of K.M. Abdulla Kunhi [K.M.
Abdulla Kunhi v. Union of India, (1991) 1 SCC 476 : 1991 SCC (Cri) 613] .”

35. In light of the abovementioned discussions, it can be clearly seen that any apparent conflict, as
contended by the appellant, stands resolved, and both sets of judgments operate symbiotically and
harmoniously within the said Act, without there existing any tension between them. The mandate to
wait for the decision of the Advisory Board, as per the Pankaj Kumar Judgment(Supra), would apply
to the central Government, however, the detaining authority, being independent of the Government,
can pass its decision without the decision of he Advisory Board. Since no conflict exists, the need to
refer the point of law to a Larger Bench also ceases, and hence we hold issue No.1 in favour of the
Respondents.

ISSUE II- If there exists no friction between the two Constitutional judgments of this Court, can the
impugned detention order be quashed on grounds of the 60-day delay in consideration of the

13

representation made by the appellant?

Pramod Singla vs Union Of India on 10 April, 2023

36. In the present case at hand, the appellant-detenue, availing his rights sent a representation to
both, the specially empowered officer and the Government. The detaining authority in the present
case decided on the representation expeditiously and without waiting for the decision of the
Advisory Board, and hence, did not violate the Pankaj Kumar Judgment (supra) .

37. The Government in the present case at hand, did decide to wait for the decision of the Advisory
Board. This was also done in accordance with the decision of the Abdullah Kunhi case (supra), since
the Government, being a separate authority, is bound to wait for the decision of the Advisory Board.

38. In light of the abovementioned discussions, it can be seen that both, the detaining authority, and
the Government, have worked precisely within the procedure established by law, and hence the
impugned detention order is not liable to be struck down on this ground. We therefore hold Issue II
in favour of the respondent.

ISSUE III- Whether the illegible documents written in Chinese submitted to the appellant herein are
grounds enough for quashing the impugned detention order?

39. In cases where illegible documents have been supplied to the detenue, a grave prejudice is
caused to the detenue in availing his right to send a representation to the relevant authorities,
because the detenue, while submitting his representation, does not have clarity on the grounds of
his or her detention. In such a circumstance, the relief under Article 22(5) of the Constitution of
India and the relevant statutory provisions allowing for submitting a representation are vitiated,
since no man can defend himself against an unknown threat.

40. In the case of Harikisan v. The State Of Maharashtra & Ors. 7, this Court held that in cases of
preventive detention, as per the principles enshrined under Article 22(5) of the Constitution Of
India, the detaining authority must explain the grounds of detention to the detenue, and must
provide the material in support of the same and in the language understood by the detenue. The
relevant Paragraph of the said judgment is being reproduced herein:

“…The grounds in support of the order served on the appellant ran into fourteen
typed pages and referred to his activities over a period of thirteen years, beside
referring to a large number of Court proceedings concerning him and other persons
who were 7 (1962) Supp. 2 SCR 918 alleged to be his associates. Mere oral
explanation of a complicated order of the nature made against the appellant without
supplying him the translation in script and language which he understood would, in
our judgment, amount to denial of the right of being communicated the grounds and
of being afforded the opportunity of making a representation against the order…”

41. It has been brought to our notice that a co-detenue, one Mr. Neeraj Varshney has already been
granted relief, and his detention order has been quashed by the High Court on grounds of illegible
Chinese documents supplied to him as his grounds for detention. It is important to note that the

14

Pramod Singla vs Union Of India on 10 April, 2023

circumstances of the appellant herein, as far as the present detention is concerned, is identical to the
case of the co-detenue who’s detention order was quashed.

42. At the sake of repetition, we find it important to state that in cases of preventive detention, every
procedural irregularity, keeping in mind the principles of Article 21 and Article 22(5) of the
Constitution of India, must be accrued in favour of the detenue. In the present case at hand, the
appellant detenue herein has been supplied with illegible documents in a foreign language. It is also
important to note that these are the very same documents that the authorities have relied upon to
detain the appellant herein.

43. Further, the principle of parity is squarely applicable in this case, since another co-detenue with
identical circumstances, has already been granted the relief of quashing the detention order against
him. In the case of Gian Chand v. Union Of India & Anr. 8, this Court while deciding on a quashing
of a detention order, categorically held that in cases where a similarly placed co-detenue has already
been granted the relief of a quashing of the detention order, the principle of parity must apply, and
the same relief should be extended to other similarly placed detenues. In light of the
abovementioned discussion, we hold Issue III in favour of the appellant. CONCLUSION

44. As has been mentioned above, preventive detention laws in India are a colonial legacy, and as
such, are extremely powerful laws that have the ability to confer arbitrary power to the state. In such
a circumstance, where there is a possibility of an unfettered discretion of power by the Government,
this Court must analyze cases arising from such laws with extreme caution and excruciating detail,
to ensure that there are checks and balances on the power of the Government. Every procedural
rigidity, must be followed in entirety by the Government in cases of preventive detention, and every
lapse in procedure must give rise to a benefit to the case of the detenue. The Courts, in
circumstances of preventive detention, are conferred with the duty that has been given the utmost
importance by the Constitution, which is the 8 (Crl.) 39 of 2011 protection of individual and civil
liberties. This act of protecting civil liberties, is not just the saving of rights of individuals in person
and the society at large, but is also an act of preserving our Constitutional ethos, which is a product
of a series of struggles against the arbitrary power of the British state.

45. In light of the abovementioned discussion, while the appellant has already been released on
grounds of expiry of the detention period, for the sake of clarity on the point of law, we hold that the
impugned detention order is liable to be set aside, and the present appeal is accordingly allowed.

…...…...…....….......................…,J.

(KRISHNA MURARI) ……...….…....….......................…,J.

(V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN) NEW DELHI;

10TH APRIL, 2023

15