Pratibha Manchanda vs The State Of Haryana on 7 July, 2023

Pratibha Manchanda vs The State Of Haryana on 7 July, 2023

Author: Surya Kant

Bench: C.T. Ravikumar, Surya Kant

2023 INSC 612

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO 1793 OF 2023
[Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.8146 2023]
[Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Crl.) D.No.20936 of 2022]

Pratibha Manchanda & Anr.                                  … Appellant(s)
VERSUS
State of Haryana & Anr.                             … Respondent(s)

JUDGMENT

Surya Kant, J.

1. Application seeking permission to file the SLP is allowed. Leave Granted.

2. The instant appeal arises from a judgment of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at
Chandigarh (hereinafter, ‘High Court’) dated 31.05.2022, whereby the High Court allowed the
petition filed under Section 438 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter, ‘Cr.P.C’) and
granted anticipatory bail to Respondent No. 2 in FIR No. 113 of 2022, dated 16.03.2022, registered
at PS Badshahpur, district Gurugram, under Sections 406, 420, 467, 468, 471 and 120−B of the
Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter, ‘IPC’).

A. FACTS

3. The abovementioned FIR was lodged by the Appellants against Respondent No. 2 and other co−
accused individuals, namely, Shel Narang, Bhim Singh and Vinod. According to the contents of the

1

Pratibha Manchanda vs The State Of Haryana on 7 July, 2023

FIR, the Appellants are senior citizens who were owners and had possession over the land bearing
rect. No. 55, Killa No. 3/1 (7−9), 4/1 (7−13), measuring 15 Kanal 2 Marla, situated within the
revenue estate of Village Begampur Khatola, Tehsil Kadipur, District Gurugram (hereinafter,
‘Subject Land’) for over a period of 30 years. The Appellants claim that they never sold the Subject
Land to anyone nor have they ever executed any power of attorney (hereinafter, ‘GPA’) in favor of
any third party. The area has, in their version of events, always been unequivocally under their
possession and has never been ceded in any form or fashion to people outside the family.

4. On 28.02.2022, Appellant No. 2 went to Patwar Bhawan, Gurugram to obtain revenue papers for
the Subject Land. He discovered there only that a person named Bhim Singh Rathi had approached
the halqa patwari to sanction mutation of the aforementioned land. The application for mutation
was, as per the Appellants, based on a forged and fabricated sale deed bearing vasika No. 11493
dated 24.02.2022 (hereinafter, ‘2022 Sale Deed’). After looking into the matter further, Appellant
No. 2 learned that the said sale deed was registered in the office of Sub−Registrar Kadipur, District
Gurugram and was executed by Respondent No. 2. The execution in question was based on yet
another, purportedly, forged and fabricated GPA bearing Vasika No. 13907 dated 18.09.1996
(hereinafter, ‘1996 GPA’), registered in the office of Sub−Registrar−V, South East Delhi.

5. The Appellants, as alluded to earlier, have adopted the stance that they never executed or
registered any GPA in favor of Respondent No. 2, nor are they even acquainted with him in any form
or fashion. Instead, both the 1996 GPA and the 2022 Sale Deed were completely fraudulent
documents created by Respondent No. 2 and the remaining co−accused named in the FIR, in
collusion with other officials at the Sub−Registrar's office. These actions were carried out in
complete subterfuge and without any involvement of the Appellants.

6. The Appellants claim that they are in possession of the original sale deed for the Subject Land,
and a true copy of it was attached to the complaint. Upon examining the 2022 Sale Deed, it was
apparent to them that the accused had failed to provide a PAN Number, which is mandatorily
required for a valid sale deed. Furthermore, there was no mention of the 1% amount of Tax
Deducted at Source (hereinafter, ‘TDS’) being deposited, which also forms part of the requirements
for execution and registration of a sale deed.

7. The complaint also mentioned the current market value of the Appellants' land, measuring 15
Kanal 2 Marla, as being approximately not less than Rs. 50 crores. However, in the 2022 Sale Deed,
the sale consideration was shown as an abjectly low and meager amount of Rs. 6,60,62,500/−,
which was significantly below its actual asking price. Moreover, the Appellants had not received
even this miniscule amount even if the 2022 Sale Deed was hypothetically considered to be valid.
Thus, this document was clearly created by Respondent No. 2 and the co−accused in collusion with
the witnesses, the scribe, and officials of the Sub−Registrar Tehsil Kadipur, District Gurugram, with
the unholy intention to wisk the property away from the the complainants and place it under the
possession of the accused.

8. Accordingly, the First Information Report was registered at Police Station, Badshahpur,
Gurugram, and an investigation was initiated. Respondent No. 2, fearing arrest if he were asked to

2

Pratibha Manchanda vs The State Of Haryana on 7 July, 2023

appear before the Investigating Officer, filed an application for Anticipatory Bail before the
Additional Sessions Judge, Gurugram.

9. The Additional Sessions Judge, Gurugram, dismissed Respondent No. 2's application for
anticipatory bail in an order dated 23.05.2022, while observing that:

i. Respondent No. 2 was accused of allegedly forging a GPA and executing the 2022
Sale Deed. The original 1996 GPA was still to be recovered by the police. Several
questions pertaining to the whereabouts of the 1996 GPA, the execution of the sale
deed, the payment of sale consideration, sanctioning of the mutation, and the
Appellants, were all to be ascertained; ii. The allegations against Respondent No. 2
were serious, and filing a civil suit did not absolve them of criminal liability.
Anticipatory bail was to be granted only in exceptional circumstances, as a person
under pre−arrest bail may not disclose all the relevant facts under questioning, due to
the safeguard provided under Section 438 of the Cr.P.C. was necessary for a thorough
investigation, given all the outstanding points of inquiry that remained pending.

10. Aggrieved, Respondent No. 2 filed an application for Anticipatory Bail before the High Court.
The High Court, vide impugned order dated 31.05.2022, allowed the application and granted him
Anticipatory Bail. The High Court, inter alia, observed that:

i. The dispute involves the validity of the 1996 GPA and the misappropriation of the
purported sale consideration. Civil suits have been filed regarding the ownership and
possession of the property already and a handwriting expert's report was crucial in
determining the authenticity of the signatures;

ii. The High Court acknowledged the pendency of ongoing civil suits and suggested
that the validity of the 1996 GPA's execution could be determined by the civil court,
and did not need to be a determinative factor in the proceedings for anticpatory bail;

iii. Prima facie, it seemed that the involvement of the criminal justice system,
initiated by the Appellants, might be an attempt to settle certain transactions and
resolve ongoing disputes between them. In this background, to ensure that justice
was done for both the Appellants and Respondent No. 2, directions were issued for
them to provide their specimen signatures. The handwriting expert was tasked with
comparing the writings and signatures to assess their similarity.”

11. The High Court ordered that no arrest of Respondent No. 2 would be carried out
as long as he provided personal and surety bonds of Rs. 2 lakhs each to the
satisfaction of the investigating officer.

While extending these protections, Respondent No. 2 was also instructed to cooperate with the
investigation whenever required and to give an undertaking to avoid tampering with prosecution
evidence, or influence any of the witnesses. Furthermore, a deposit of of Rs. 1.50 Crores was to be

3

Pratibha Manchanda vs The State Of Haryana on 7 July, 2023

subimtted before the concerned Magistrate which would serve as victim compensation and be
disbursed based on the outcome of the trial.

12. The Appellants being aggrieved at the grant of anticipatory bail, are before us.

B. CONTENTIONS

13. Shri Saket Sikri, learned counsel for the Appellants, vehemently contended that the High Court
acted on the erroneous assumption that the alleged 1996 GPA in favor of Respondent No. 2 is
genuine. The original copy of 1996 GPA has not been recovered by the police till date, and hence,
custodial interrogation is required. Furthermore, the High Court failed to consider that despite the
1996 GPA being executed in favour of Respondent No. 2, he applied for its certified copy only in
February 2022, i.e., 26 years later, whereas he should have possessed the original already if his
claim is to be bona fide. The present case is one where Respondent No. 2, in collusion with other
accused persons, has carried out an elaborate fraud against the Appellants, who are vulnerable
owing to their age and the NRI status. Additionally, the signatures used by Appellant No. 2 during
the period between 1990−2000 are dissimilar, unalike and non−identical from those inscribed on
the alleged GPA dated 18.09.1996. In addition, the consideration of the alleged sale deed − Rs. 6.60
crores − is far less than the market value of the Subject Land, which is stated to be Rs. 50 crores.

14. Ms. Bansuri Swaraj, learned Additional Advocate General appearing on behalf of Respondent
No. 1 – State of Haryana, strongly contested the grant of anticipatory bail to Respondent No. 2 and
supported the stand taken by the Appellants. It was argued that a strong prima facie case has been
made out against Respondent No. 2, and that his custodial interrogation is vital to the objective of
unearthing the larger conspiracy.

15. Shri Maninder Singh, learned Senior Counsel representing Respondent No. 2, vigorously
defended High Court’s view and asserted that each and every allegation, contention, and submission
made by the Appellants was factually and legally incorrect. Learned Senior Counsel argued that
Respondent No.2 had originally purchased the land in question from the Appellants in the year
1996. However, at that time, there was a third−party lease existing on the land. In order to address
this, the Appellants executed 1996 GPA, which was duly registered at the office of the Sub−Registrar,
Kalkaji, Delhi. This GPA has not been disputed in any court of law and has not been challenged by
the Appellants up to the time the civil suits were filed, clearly showing that the contestation of its
validity was merely an afterthought. Respondent No. 2 had full authorization through the 1996 GPA
to execute a registered deed of conveyance for the property in question and receive consideration for
it. On 24.02.2022, Respondent No. 2 sold the land through the exercise of power vested in him by
virtue of the 1996 GPA. However, the purchasers have not been included as parties before this
Court. The authenticity of the GPA had been verified according to the report of the Sub Registrar,
Kalkaji, dated 13.02.2022 and the sale of the land only took place after the receipt of the verification
report. It was only after this that the Appellants began threatening Respondent No. 2 and the
purchasers, and subsequently filed the civil suits contesting the validity of the GPA. Furthermore,
the High Court has granted anticipatory bail to Respondent No. 2 subject to strict conditions such as
providing specimen signatures to the Investigating Officer and depositing Rs. 1.50 crores. The police

4

Pratibha Manchanda vs The State Of Haryana on 7 July, 2023

have also obtained records from the Sub Registrar's office and Respondent No. 2 has complied with
all the conditions imposed on him by the High Court.

C. ANALYSIS

16. It goes without saying that the alleged offences of forging documents for transferring ownership
of land worth crores of rupees are grave in nature. Hence, while it is extremely important to protect
the personal liberty of a person, it is equally incumbent upon us to analyze the seriousness of the
offence and determine if there is a need for custodial interrogation.

17. In Siddharam Satlingappa Mhetre v. State of Maharashtra1, this Court carefully considered the
principles established by the Constitution Bench 1 (2011) 1 SCC 694.

in Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia v. State of Punjab2 case. After a thorough deliberation, this court arrived
at the following conclusion:

"112. The following factors and parameters can be taken into consideration while
dealing with anticipatory bail:

(i) The nature and gravity of the accusation and the exact role of the accused must be
properly comprehended before arrest is made;

(ii) The antecedents of the applicant including the fact as to whether the accused has
previously undergone imprisonment on conviction by a court in respect of any
cognizable offence;

(iii) The possibility of the applicant to flee from justice;

(iv)The possibility of the accused's likelihood to repeat similar or other offences;

(v) Where the accusations have been made only with the object of injuring or
humiliating the applicant by arresting him or her;

(vi)Impact of grant of anticipatory bail, particularly in cases of large magnitude
affecting a very large number of people.

xxx                xxx             xxx”

2 (1980) 2 SCC 565.

5

Pratibha Manchanda vs The State Of Haryana on 7 July, 2023

18. In Sushila Aggarwal v. State (NCT of Delhi)3, the Constitution Bench reaffirmed
that when considering applications for anticipatory bail, courts should consider
factors such as the nature and gravity of the offences, the role attributed to the
applicant, and the specific facts of the case.

19. The relief of Anticipatory Bail is aimed at safeguarding individual rights. While it
serves as a crucial tool to prevent the misuse of the power of arrest and protects
innocent individuals from harassment, it also presents challenges in maintaining a
delicate balance between individual rights and the interests of justice. The tight rope
we must walk lies in striking a balance between safeguarding individual rights and
protecting public interest. While the right to liberty and presumption 3 (2018) 7 SCC
731.

of innocence are vital, the court must also consider the gravity of the offence, the impact on society,
and the need for a fair and free investigation. The court's discretion in weighing these interests in
the facts and circumstances of each individual case becomes crucial to ensure a just outcome.

20. Adverting to some of the undisputed facts in this case, it is clear that the 1996 GPA has not yet
seen the light of the day. No indication regarding the location of the original document has been
placed before us. In light of Respondent No. 2’s own contention, what transpired in 1996 was the
sale of the Subject Land through the GPA. Upon reviewing a copy of the alleged 1996 GPA presented
to the court, the Appellants relinquished all crucial rights pertaining to the Subject Land. These
rights include possession of the land, handling water, sewer, electricity, power connections, and
other services related to the property, paying lease payments and other dues, making additions or
modifications to the existing structure with required permissions, renting out the land, issuing
receipts, and managing tenant−related matters. Furthermore, the Appellants granted authority for
selling, disposing, or transferring the land, entering into agreements, and receiving consideration on
behalf of the principal. However, regardless of obtaining all the rights over the Subject Land,
Respondent No. 2 does not appear to have ever informed the Revenue/local authorities that he had
purportedly ‘purchased’ the Subject Land through a GPA. The ownership of the land always
remained in the name of the Appellants in the revenue record and no application for change of
mutation, etc. was moved by the 2nd Respondent. We are informed that at a very belated stage, after
the execution of the alleged 1996 GPA, a portion of the Subject Land was acquired by the
Government and compensation in this regard was paid to the Appellants. Respondent No. 2 neither
objected to the payment of such compensation nor asserted his title over the land, which he
normally would have done had he possessed any rights over it. It would be incongrous to accept
transfer of ownership rights in an immovable property merely on execution of a power of attorney.

21. We must keep in mind that the Subject Land is a prime property situated in the National Capital
Region. Even in the year 1996, it’s value must have been quite significant. The 2 nd Respondent has
so far not been able to show payment of any consideration to the Appellants in the year 1996. The
original GPA, as we have noted on multiple ocassions, is conspicuous by its absence. A certified copy
of this GPA is said to have been relied upon to execute the disputed sale deed. We fail to understand
or comprehend as to how a bona fide purchaser could pay crores of rupees as sale consideration to a

6

Pratibha Manchanda vs The State Of Haryana on 7 July, 2023

person who neither possesses documents showing ownership and title nor has original GPA of the
true owner(s) of the property being sold. The fact that the sale deed was allegedly executed without
mentioning the PAN Number or without deducting TDS, underlines the dubious nature of this
transaction. We are equally intrigued at the behaviour of the Registering Authorities and their
acceptance of the conveyance deed in the absence of these formalities being completed. The Sub−
Registrar and his officials were obligated to verify the ownership rights before registration of the sale
deed. As per the Appellants’ claim, the prior original sale deeds of the land are still in their
possession. The fact that the vendee agreed to pay without obtaining the original records as of now
casts a shadow over the legitimacy of the transaction.

22. It warrants mention here that the Appellants are elderly couple. Being NRIs, the majority of
their time is spent abroad. They have stated that they were not in India at the time of execution of
disputed sale deed. The Appellants’ claim that the market value of the land is not less than Rs. 50
crores, although not got verified yet by a valuation expert, does not appear to be far off the mark.
There is a serious allegation of under−valuation of the land at the time of execution of the allegedly
fraudulent sale deed. The contention that the consideration of Rs.6.60 crores is much less than the
market value of the Subject Land, thus, also requires a deeper probe.

23. We are not oblivious of the fact that Respondent No. 2 is said to have applied for the certified
copy of the 1996 GPA in February, 2022 after a period of 26 years since its execution. It is also
unclear why, given that when the Subject Land is situated in Gurugram District, the GPA in relation
to the property was registered in Kalkaji, New Delhi. It raises some suspicion regarding the
genuineness of the GPA. There is, thus, overwhelming and clear cut prima facie evidence to indicate
that the version of events provided by Respondent No. 2, the buyers of the property, and the Sub
Registrar, should be viewed with scepticism. These parties, prima facie, appear to be acting in
concert with each other and might be hands in glove, with the ulterior motive of duping the absentee
land−owners. This angle requires thorough consideration by the investigating authorities. The
Appellants have seemingly fallen prey to a well−orchestrated conspiracy hatched to rob them of
their highly valuable property. In such cases where the victims of a crime, on account of their old age
and geographical distance, are unable to secure justice on their own, it falls upon Courts and the
State to carry out their solemn duty to ward off injustice and restore the faith of one and all in the
rule of law.

24. All these material facts which go to the root of the matter were unfortunately not brought to the
notice of the High Court. Had there been proper assistance, the High Court also would have given a
free hand to the investigating agency to investigate the role of Respondent No. 2, the vendees, the
Sub Registrar and other officials of the Registering Authority, so as to uncover the collusion,
connivance and conspiracy, if any, engineered to commit fraud at the expense of the Appellants.

25. Land scams in India have been a persistent issue, involving fraudulent practices and illegal
activities related to land acquisition, ownership, and transactions. Scammers often create fake land
titles, forge sale deeds, or manipulate land records to show false ownership or an encumbrance−free
status. Organized criminal networks often plan and execute these intricate scams, exploiting
vulnerable individuals and communities, and resorting to intimidation or threats to force them to

7

Pratibha Manchanda vs The State Of Haryana on 7 July, 2023

vacate their properties. These land scams not only result in financial losses for individuals and
investors but also disrupt development projects, erode public trust, and hinder socio−economic
progress.

26. While we do not wish to comment further on this issue, we believe it is necessary to foil any trace
of organised crime perpetrated by land mafia, through an unimpaired and unobstructed
investigation.

27. It is inarguable that the cancellation of bail should be done only for substantial and compelling
reasons, however, setting aside an erroneous bail order is altogether different from cancelling bail.
This Court does not intend to interfere with the judicial discretion exercised by the High Court in
granting bail to an accused as a standard practice. However, it is essential to ensure that all the
material facts are brought on record and thereafter only the discretionary jurisdiction is exercised in
accordance with the fundamental principles of anticipatory bail laid down in various decisions over
time by this Court.

28. It is immaterial that the genuineness of the 1996 GPA is already sub−judice before the Civil
Court in the civil suits pending between the parties. The appellants, owing to their age and
residential status, cannot be expected to await indefinitely for the outcome of these civil
proceedings. Regardless, the pendency of these cases does not estop the issues of forgery and
fabrication being considered in the course of criminal investigation. The facts of the case speak for
themselves and an element of criminality cannot be ruled out at this stage. Whether or not the
alleged offences were committed by Respondent No. 2 and his co−accused in active collusion with
each other can be effectively determined by a free, fair, unhampered and dispassionate
investigation. In the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, custodial interrogation of not only
Respondent No. 2 but all other suspects is, therefore, imperative to unearth the truth. Joining the
investigation with a protective umbrella provided by pre−arrest bail will render the exercise of
eliciting the truth ineffective in such like case. We are, as mentioned, also skeptical, suspicious and
incredulous about the verification process of the 1996 GPA carried out by the Sub− Registrar,
Kalkaji, New Delhi. Hence, the conduct of the officials of Sub−Registrar Office, Kalkaji, New Delhi is
also required to be examined to take the investigation to its logical conclusion.

29. It is clarified that the observations made hereinabove are prima facie in nature and shall not be
taken as final conclusions.

D. CONCLUSION

30. In light of above discussion and without expressing any views on the merits of the case, the
appeal is allowed and the impugned order dated 31 st May, 2022 passed by the High Court granting
pre−arrest bail to Respondent No. 2 is hereby set aside.

31. Given the facts and circumstances of this case, we expand the scope of inquiry in these
proceedings and direct the Commissioner of Police, Gurugram to constitute a Special Investigation
Team (SIT) to be headed by an officer not below the rank of Dy. Superintendent of Police along with

8

Pratibha Manchanda vs The State Of Haryana on 7 July, 2023

two Inspectors as its members. The SIT shall take over the investigation forthwith. The SIT shall
have the liberty to subject Respondent No. 2, the vendee(s), the Sub Registrar/officials, or other
suspects to custodial interrogation to arrive at a definite conclusion, strictly in accordance with law.

32. In case the vendees, the officers/officials of the Registering Authority have secured anticipatory
bail from Sessions Court/High Court, the SIT shall be at liberty to seek suitable modifications to
such orders so that no impediment is caused in carrying out a fair and free investigation.

33. No interlocutory/interim order passed by the Civil Court shall obstruct the ongoing
investigation. The Civil Court shall not, from this point forth, pass any such order in pending civil
suits which may hamper the ongoing investigation.

34. The SIT shall conclude the investigation as early as possible and not later than two months from
the date of this order.

35. The Commissioner of Police, Gurugram shall be personally responsible for monitoring the day to
day investigation.

36. The authorities of NCT of Delhi shall extend full cooperation in the matter of verification of the
genuineness of the GPA alleged to have been registered in the office of Sub Registrar, Kalkaji, New
Delhi in the year 1996.

…………………………..J. [Surya Kant] …………………………..J. [C.T. Ravikumar] New Delhi;

July 07, 2023

9