Prem Singh vs State Of Nct Delhi on 2 January, 2023

Prem Singh vs State Of Nct Delhi on 2 January, 2023

Author: Dinesh Maheshwari

Bench: Sudhanshu Dhulia, Dinesh Maheshwari

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 01 OF 2023
(ARISING OUT OF SLP(CRIMINAL) NO. 2958 OF 2019)
PREM SINGH                                                                                   ….APPELLANT(S)

VERSUS

STATE OF NCT OF DELHI                                                                     ….RESPONDENT(S)

JUDGMENT

DINESH MAHESHWARI, J.

T a b l e   o f   C o n t e n t s   P r e l i m i n a r y   a n d   b r i e f   o u t l i n e
............................................................................................ 2 Relevant factual and background aspects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5   P r o s e c u t i o n
Evidence............................................................................................................... 7 Stand of the
appellant ........................................................................................................... 21 Trial Court found the
appellant guilty and awarded life imprisonment ............................ 22 High Court dismissed the
appeal filed by the appellant ................................................... 26 Rival Submissions
........................................................................................................... 29 The scope and width of this
appeal ................................................................................. 38 The principles relating to
c i r c u m s t a n t i a l   e v i d e n c e ;   b u r d e n   o f   e x p l a n a t i o n ;   h o s t i l e   w i t n e s s ;   a n d   m o t i v e
....................................................................................................... 39 Application of the relevant
principles to the facts of this case ................................................. 46 Plea of mental incapacity of the
a p p e l l a n t   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5 2
Conclusion...................................................................................................................... 62 Preliminary
and brief outline Leave granted.

2. This appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated 29.02.2016, as passed by the High
Court of Delhi at New Delhi in Criminal Appeal No. 879 of 2013, whereby the High Court has
dismissed the appeal against the judgment of conviction and order of sentence, respectively dated
03.09.2011 and 08.09.2011, as passed by the Court of Additional Sessions Judge-IV, Rohini (Outer),

1

Prem Singh vs State Of Nct Delhi on 2 January, 2023

Delhi in Sessions Case No. 238 of 2009, whereby the appellant was held guilty of offences
punishable under Sections 302 and 201 of the Indian Penal Code, 18601 and was awarded varying
punishments, including that of imprisonment for life for the offence under Section 302 IPC.

3. Before dealing with the matter in necessary details, we may draw a brief outline to indicate the
contours of the forthcoming discussion. 3.1. The allegations against the appellant had been that on
03.05.2009, he took his two sons, aged about 9 years and 6 years, to Haiderpur Canal, strangulated
them, and threw the dead bodies into the canal; and thereafter, attempted to project as if it were a
case of accidental drowning. It was also alleged that the appellant was a drunkard, who doubted the
chastity of his wife and suspected that the children were not his sons. 1 ‘IPC’, for short.

3.2. In trial, two of the prosecution witnesses, PW-5 Bishan Singh (brother of the appellant) and
PW-9 Sunita Yadav (wife of the appellant) did not support the prosecution case as regards conduct
and behaviour of the appellant. However, the Trial Court held that all the essential and material
facts were duly established in the evidence adduced by the prosecution, including that the deceased
children were last seen in the company of the appellant, who took them to canal and later on
informed the staff at the Haiderpur Water Plant and at the Petrol Pump as also to the police that
they accidentally fell into the canal; that the cause of death of both the children had been asphyxia as
a result of manual strangulation; and that the appellant was a drunkard who doubted the chastity of
his wife and thought that he was not the father of the deceased children. The Trial Court, therefore,
convicted the appellant of the offences under Sections 302 and 201 IPC and awarded the
punishments accordingly. 3.3. In appeal, it was essentially contended on behalf of the appellant that
there were missing links in the chain of events, particularly when the allegations of the appellant
doubting the chastity of his wife were not proved and hence, there was no reason for which the
appellant would have killed his own sons. Per contra, it was submitted on behalf of the respondent-
State that the children were lastly seen in the company of the appellant and it was clearly established
that they died due to manual strangulation and not on account of drowning, as falsely suggested by
the appellant, who otherwise failed to discharge the burden, in terms of Section 106 of Indian
Evidence Act, 18722, of explaining the circumstances leading to the death of the children by
strangulation. The High Court again minutely analysed the evidence on record and, while rejecting
the contentions urged on behalf of the appellant, dismissed the appeal and affirmed the findings and
conclusions of the Trial Court.

3.4. In challenge to the concurrent findings leading to conviction and sentencing of the appellant, it
has essentially been contended on his behalf that when the story of strained relationship between
the appellant and his wife has not been supported by the material witnesses including the wife of the
appellant, there was no reason or motive for the appellant to kill his own sons; and the alleged want
of explanation on the part of the accused- appellant cannot be a ground for conviction in the present
case. It has also been contended that there had been a fundamental defect in the trial when the Trial
Court omitted to examine the capacity of the appellant in terms of Section 329 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 19733 while ignoring the material evidence on record to the effect that the
appellant was not a person of sound mental disposition, for he was admitted to a rehabilitation
centre for de-addiction and was discharged against the advice of the centre. The facts regarding
treatment of the appellant for mental illness post-conviction have also been referred to in this

2

Prem Singh vs State Of Nct Delhi on 2 January, 2023

regard. On the other hand, it has been contended on behalf of the respondent-State that when 2
Hereinafter also referred to as ‘the Evidence Act’. 3 ‘CrPC’, for short.

the deceased were lastly seen in the company of the appellant, the burden was heavy upon him to
explain the cause of their unnatural death, which he had failed to discharge; rather he gave false
information about accidental drowning of the children. It has also been submitted that the plea of
unsoundness of mind, as taken before this Court, remains untenable for the same having not been
raised in trial or even in appeal before the High Court. It is submitted that even if the appellant had
been admitted to and treated in the psychiatry ward after conviction, it would not take his case of
such unsoundness of mind at the time of commission of the crime that he could be absolved or
exonerated.

Relevant factual and background aspects

4. With reference to the outline as above and looking to the questions arising for determination in
this appeal, the relevant factual and background aspects could be noticed, in brief, as follows:

4.1. The prosecution case, based on circumstantial evidence, had been that the
appellant took his two sons Jitesh and Sunny, aged about 9 years and 6 years
respectively, to Haiderpur Canal at Haiderpur Water Plant, Paschim Vihar, Delhi
under the pretext of having fun and after reaching the said place and getting
opportunity, he strangulated them one by one and threw the dead bodies into the
canal. The prosecution case further had been that the appellant attempted to project
as if the children accidentally fell into the canal and in that effort, he jumped into the
canal and, after swimming for some distance, came out and then, went to the nearby
office of Water Treatment Plant to inform the staff present there about his sons
having accidentally fallen into the canal; and thereafter, he also went to a nearby
Petrol Pump and narrated the same story to one of the employees and made a call at
100 number to the police. According to the prosecution, after reaching of the police,
the appellant narrated the same version.

4.2. However, after recovery of the dead bodies and their post-mortem examination,
it was revealed that the children did not die because of drowning but the cause of
death had been asphyxia as a result of manual strangulation. In the given
circumstances, suspicion turned towards the appellant, for he was the person lastly in
the company of the deceased children. It was alleged that during interrogation, the
appellant confessed to the crime while stating that he doubted the chastity of his wife
and suspected that the children were not his sons.

4.3. After conducting investigation in the First Information Report 4 registered in
this matter bearing No. 253 of 2009, Police Station Prashant Vihar, charge-sheet was
filed against the appellant for the offences punishable under Sections 302 and 201
IPC. After the case was committed to the Court of Sessions and the necessary charges
were framed, the appellant pleaded not guilty and claimed trial.

3

Prem Singh vs State Of Nct Delhi on 2 January, 2023

4 ‘FIR’, for short.

Prosecution Evidence

5. In trial, the prosecution examined as many as 18 witnesses. The peculiar feature of the case had
been that while two of the witnesses, PW- 7 Mahender Kumar Yadav, uncle of the wife of the
appellant, and PW-8 Rajender Yadav, another uncle of the wife of the appellant, attempted to
suggest that the appellant was a drunkard who used to give beating to his wife and suspected her
character but, PW-5 Bishan Singh, brother of appellant, as also PW-9 Sunita Yadav, wife of the
appellant, did not support this version. On the contrary, wife of the appellant specifically maintained
that she had always been having good and cordial relations with her husband. Another set of
evidence in this case had been in relation to the addiction of the appellant to alcohol and his
admission to, and discharge from, rehabilitation centre. In this regard, the testimonies of PW-2
Puran Singh, cousin of the appellant, and of PW-3 Jagbir, manager of rehabilitation centre assume
relevance in view of emphasis laid in this appeal on mental disposition of the appellant. Yet another
set of evidence had been of three witnesses, PW-1 Naresh Kaushik, delivery boy at the Petrol Pump,
PW-4 Mahesh Kumar Sharma and PW-6 Komal Ram, the personnel in-charge at the Water
Treatment Plant, who testified to the facts about the appellant visiting them immediately after the
incident while suggesting that his sons had accidentally fallen into the canal. PW-14 Dr. V.K. Jha
had been the medical officer who conducted post-mortem over the dead bodies and maintained his
opinion that the cause of death in relation to each of the children was asphyxia as a result of manual
strangulation. The other witnesses had been the personnel who conducted the investigation or
carried out the tasks related thereto.

6. Though elaboration on the entire prosecution evidence is not necessary for the purpose of the
present appeal but, having regard to the contentions urged, we may take note of the relevant
depositions concerning material factors namely, the appellant’s addiction to alcohol and his
admission to, and discharge from, the rehabilitation centre; the appellant’s conduct towards his
wife; the appellant’s version immediately after the event leading to the demise of his two sons; and
the medical opinion after post-mortem of the dead bodies of the victim children. 6.1. As regards
addiction of the appellant and the matters related with his admission to, and discharge from, the
rehabilitation centre, the relevant part of the testimonies of PW-2 Puran Singh, cousin of the
appellant and PW-3 Jagbir, the manager of rehabilitation centre would read as under5: -

“PW 2 Sh. Puran Singh Yadav S/o Sh. Bharat Singh Yadav, aged about 63 years, R/o
DU 72 Vishakha Enclave, Pitampura Delhi. On S.A. …..About 15/20 days prior to the
present incident I came to know that Prem Sing is admitted at Chetna Deaddiction
Centre in Auchandi Village due to his habit of consume liquor. I visited the said
deaddiction centre and found him admitted over there. I tried to contact the doctor
over there but the officials of said centre informed me that the doctor will come on
Wednesday but on wednesday the said doctor did not arrive and they informed me on
telephone that doctor will come on Friday. When I made a telephonic call at the said
deaddiction centre on friday then I came to know that my uncle had got accused
Prem Singh discharged from 5 Most of the extractions herein are verbatim from the

4

copies placed on the record of this appeal.

Prem Singh vs State Of Nct Delhi on 2 January, 2023

the said centre. I raised an objection to the officials of said deaddiction centre as to why they had
discharged Prem Singh as his condition was not normal.

After 2 or 3 days of his discharge the present incident took place as far as I remember it was Sunday
night. Had Prem Singh not been discharged from the said deaddiction centre the present incident
could have been avoided.

At this stage Ld. APP seeks permission to put some leading question to the witness. Heard. Allowed.

Q I put it to you that Prem Singh used to quarrel with his wife Sunita and used to regularly beat and
abuse his wife Sunita and his both the deceased sons. Prem Singh is a man of violent nature? A. I am
unaware about the said facts as I was not a regular visiter in the house of Prem Singh. I never stated
so in my statement recorded by the police and the IO had mentioned the said facts in my statement
on his own.

xxxxx by Ms. Sadhna Bhatia, Amicus Curie Ld. Counsel for the accused.

IO never recorded my statement. IO never made any inquiry from me regarding this case. What ever
I have deposed before the court today is true. I had never seen accused beating his wife or abusing
his children as I reside separatly from their family and do not interfere in their house. It is wrong to
suggest that I am deposing falsely.” *** *** *** “PW3 Statement of Sh. Jagbir S/o Sh. Sukhbir Singh,
aged 40 years, R/o H. No. 205, village – Auchandi, Delhi – 39. On S.A. I am working as manager of
Chetna Foundation (Regd.) Drugh De-addiction and Rehabilitation Centre, Village Auchandi, Delhi-
39 for last five years.

In our said centre accused Prem Singh present in the court today (correctly identified) was admitted
on 20.11.08 for de-addiction of his habit of consuming ahlcohol. He was got admitted by his father
Girdhari Singh and his wife Sunita. He remained admitted at our said centre till 29.04.09. During
the said period his counseling was done and after that he used to behave like an ordinary prudent
man. During his said stay of about of 5 months at our centre he never went to his home. His wife
Sunita, Sister Baladevi, father Girdhari Lal and Cousin Puran Singh came at our centre to meet him.
He used to talk telephonically with his wife Sunita, father Girdhari and other persons from the
telephone no. installed at our centre i.e, 27742360 and 27741540. The behaviour of the Prem Singh
was normal during his said stay and he was never given any medicine for mental illness because
neither any mental illness was observed in him nor his family members gave us any previous history
of his suffering from any mental illness. He was only having addiction to liquor as told to us by his
family members.

….. ……. ……….

On 29.04.2009 Girdhari Singh along with one other person got Prem Singh discharge from our
centre against our advice as I had advised him to complete the course of 7-9 months. IO recorded

5

Prem Singh vs State Of Nct Delhi on 2 January, 2023

my statement. Documents which I had handed over to the IO i.e., certificate is Ex. PW3/B and the
photocopy of his complete file of 8 pages is collectively Ex. PW 3/C all the documents signed by me
at point A. Original documents produced by the witness seen and returned.

xxxxx by Ms. Sadhna Bhatia, Amicus Curie, Ld. Counsel for the accused.

Accused was mentally fit and sound during his stay at our centre and he was admitted only for
de-addiction of his habit of consuming liquor.” 6.2. As noticed, PW-7 Mahender Kumar Yadav and
PW-8 Rajender Yadav, both uncles of the wife of the appellant, asserted that the appellant was not
having good relations with his wife, was taken to the habit of consuming liquor excessively, and was
suspecting the character of his wife. However, PW-5 Bishan Singh, brother of the appellant and
PW-9 Sunita Yadav, wife of the appellant did not support the version of PW-7 and PW-

8. We may take note of the relevant parts of the statements of PW-7, PW- 8, PW-5 and PW-9, in that
order, as under: -

“PW7- Statement of Mahender Kumar Yadav, Aged-52 years S/O Late Sh. Ram
Kishan Yadav R/O WZ-350 Village Shakurpur Delhi. On S.A. My niece Sunita Yadav
had been married to accused Prem Singh in the year 1996 and after marriage she
starts residing at H.NO-225 Haider Pur Delhi. Accused Prem Singh present in the
court today used to comment on the chastity of my niece Sunita Yadav. Accused used
to taking liquor and giving beating to Sunita. Accused used to blame on my niece that
she was not having good character. Two male issues were borned after the wed-lock.
She was also told by his father in an effort to rectify accused Prem Singh to join
Nasha Mukti Kendr, Auchandi Gav. On advise of her father accused was admitted to
the above centre for his treatment by my niece but on 29.04.2004 accused’s father
has relieved his son from the Nasha Mukti Kendr Centre.

Regarding both the issue accused Prem Singh used to comment that they were not
belongs to me and used to quarreled with my niece and stated that they belongs to
someone else. Once accused Prem Singh attempted to kill both the child by giving
them electric shock but with the pursuation of my niece and showing her humbleness
she was able to save both the child. Thereafter, Sunita came to our house and
remained in our house for about 5-6 months and thereafter Prem Singh has taken my
daughter to his house. Accused Prem Singh after coming from the Nasha Mukti
Kendr remains quiet for 2-3 days but later on he continued his same behavior i.e,
blaming on my niece and talk vulger with her. He also stated that your calling some
persons in your house and indulging in bad activities (galat kaam) like sexual assault.
He also used to quarrel with my daughter.

On 03.05.2009 Sunita came to my house and stated that accused Prem Singh
quarreling with her. I went to his house and tried to consolidate their matter but
could not succeed, ultimately I returned to my house. On the same day at about 11:00
am I received a phone call by the police that both the children of my niece Sunita

6

Prem Singh vs State Of Nct Delhi on 2 January, 2023

were died by drowning in the canal near Haider Pur Water treatment plant. I suspect
that both the children have not been drowned as their own but they were killed by
their father accused Prem Singh……. At the time of recovery of the dead body accused
Prem Singh was claiming that both the children have been drowned in the canal on
their own but later on after his arrest he admitted that he has committed murder of
his both the children. Police recorded the disclosure statement of accused Prem Singh
in my presence same is EXPW-7/D signed by me at pt A. xxxxxx advocate by Ms.
Sadhna Bhatia (Amicus Curie) for the accused.

We have not made any complaint regarding the above said behavior to the police. My
statement was recorded at the PP Prashant Vihar. We have not called Panchayat in
regard to the quarrel between my niece and Prem Singh. Vol. We had gone to the
house of accused for number of times for reconsider the matter but accused could not
give any heed. My niece Sunita told me about the attempt of accused to kill his both
the children by way of electric shock but I had not seen personally. We have not made
any complaint for the above incident to the police. I had not seen personally any
beating by accused to his wife. The house of accused is about 5 km from my house.
On 03.05.2009 I went to canal at about 07:00 pm. When I saw accused near the
canal and also seen his children’s body. I did not report the matter to the police
regarding conduct of accused qua my niece and the children. I had not seen the
occurance. It is incorrect to suggest that I am deposing falsely being the maternal
uncle of Sunita or that accused used to love Sunita and the children or that he did not
commit the alleged offence or that being relative of Sunita I had deposed falsely in
the court.” *** *** *** “PW8- Statement of Rajender Yadav, aged 43 years S/O Sh.
Jawahar Singh R/O WZ-342 Village Shakur Pur Delhi. On SA I am running a shop in
the name of M/s. Astha Enterprises at Sector-7 Rohini Delhi. Sunita W/O accused
Prem Singh is my niece who has been married with accused for about 12-13 years
before. Initially, accused Prem Singh was working as a transporter but later on he left
this work and become unemployed and he used to take liquor often. My niece used to
tell whenever she visited our house that accused used to abusing her and also
demanding money and also gave beating her. We sometime help her in cash. 2-3
years after the marriage Sunita’s both son Jitesh and Sunny live with us in our house
for about 2 years. Because of the habit of acute drinking of accused he was once sent
to Nasha Mukti Kendr by his wife Sunita but later on the family members of accused
released him against the wishes of Sunita. On the day of release accused Prem Singh
has given severe beatings to his wife Sunita and both his children and in turn Sunita
came to our house leaving children at the house of accused at Haider Pur. We
received a phone call for PS Prashant Vihar on 03.05.2009 that they have informed
by Prem Singh that his 2 children has drown in the Haider Pur Canal while they were
playing near the canal in front of him. We went to the PS, I and Mahender Singh son
of my uncle late Sh. Ram Kishan and in the PS we saw that Prem Singh was
apprehended by the police and we were having strong suspicion that Prem Singh has
drown his both the children as he was suspicion over the character of Sunita. During
drunken condition accused also gave beatings to his both the sons and his behavior

7

Prem Singh vs State Of Nct Delhi on 2 January, 2023

towards his children was abnormal as he withdraw both the children Jitesh and
Sunny from the school…… xxxxxx By Ms. Sadhna Bhatia (Amicus Curie) for the
accused Prem Singh.

My statement was recorded by the police in PS on 03.05.2009 in the evening. It is
correct that my statement was recorded on 13.06.2009 after he was pointed out the
date of statement recorded U/S 161 CRPc. I had stated to the police in my statement
that Jitesh and Sunny were lived in our house before their death for about 2 years.
Confronted from statement EX PW-8/DA where it is not so recorded. I have stated to
the police that after returning from the Naksh Mukti Kendr accused has given
beatings to his both sons.

Confronted from statement EX PW-8/DA where it is not so recorded. We have not made any
complaint to the police regarding beating of my niece and her children. It is wrong to suggest that
accused was not affectionate to his children and not suspicion on the character of my niece. It is
correct that my niece only informed about beating whenever she visited our house. It is correct that
my niece and her sons were not beaten in my presence. It is wrong to suggest that I am deposing
falsely.” *** *** *** “PW5 -Statement of Bishan Singh S/O Sh. Girdhari Singh (recalled for further
examination since deferred dt. 06.09.2010) ON SA The name of son of my brother Prem Singh is
Jitesh and Sunny. At the time of incident my brother Prem Singh was unemployed. His habits were
normal but he used to take liquor. Previously he was having transport business and having 2 trucks
but 4-5 year before he has sold his trucks and thereafter he was running poultary mills and he
indulged in the business only for one year and thereafter he become unemployed. There was tension
between my brother and his wife and during those days he was taking drinks open. Some time we
listen hitted conversation between my brother and his wife. I do not know the real cause of their
strange relation. He was having normal relations with his children also. My brother Prem Singh was
once admitted in Nasha Mukti Kendr at Auchandi and he remained there for about one year. He was
released by my father Sh. Girdhari Singh from the Nasha Mukti Kendr on the assurance of Prem
Singh to amend his habits and leave the habit of intoxication and also his condition was
deteriorating….. I do not know what had happened with the children of Prem Singh. I listen from
police person that my both nephew were drowned in the Yamuna Canal. I was also went to hospital
and after postmortem at BJRM Hospital. The dead body of my nephew Jitesh and Sunny was
handed over to the relatives vide receipt EX PW-2/B signed by me at pt C. Police had recorded my
statement at PP Prashant Vihar but I do not know the date when my statement was recorded.

At this stage, Ld. APP submits that he wants to cross examine the witness as he is resiling from his
previous statement. Heard. Allowed Xxxxxx by Ld. APP for the State.

I do not remember that my statement EX PW-5/A was recorded on 13.06.2009 or not. It is wrong to
suggest that I have stated in my statement that my brother Prem Singh during quarrel and in the
rage he used to abusing and beating his wife. Confronted from “A” to “A1” of my statement EX
PW-5/A where it is so recorded. I have not stated to the police that my brother was suspicious over
the character of his wife and the suspicion was because of the reason that whenever his wife come
from the house of Mahender Singh, his maternal uncle situated at Shakur Pur Village, she was

8

Prem Singh vs State Of Nct Delhi on 2 January, 2023

brought by some boys of tenant of Mahender Singh. He was also not having affection like a father
towards his both the sons and during quarrel he used to pin pointing that the sons were not belongs
to him. Prem Singh was not controlled neither by me not his father. Confronted from “B” to “B1” of
my statement EX PW-5/A where it is so recorded. It is correct that my brother was released from the
Nasha Mukti Kendr on 29.04.2009. it is correct that on receiving the information from Rohini Court
police staff on 03.05.2009 they informed that they got an information for my brother Prem Singh
that when both his son Jitender and Sunny were present at Haider pur Canal and they were running
and playing in front of him they were drowned in the canal and flown (Beh Gaye) in the canal. I have
not stated to the police that oftenly my brother cursing the character of his wife and abusing and
beating her and was having haterisim against his both the sons. Confronted from “C” to “C1” of my
statement EX PW-5/A where it is so recorded. I have not stated to the police that the cause of
suspicion over character of wife and for taking revenge from his wife he has committed murder of
his both son Jitesh and Sunny and thereafter informed to the police that they were drowned in the
canal when they were playing. Confronted from “D” to “D1” of my statement EX PW-5/A where it is
so recorded. It is wrong to suggest that accused is my brother as such I am not giving the fair
statement which I have got recorded during the police investigation. It is wrong to suggest that due
to passage time my anger cool down or that I am deposing in favour of accused Prem Singh. It is
wrong to suggest that I strategically concealed the fact of haterism of my brother towards his wife
because of her character and concequently his ill behavior towards his sons and ultimately causes
the death of his sons.

xxxxxx By Ms. Sadhna Bhatia (Amicus Curie) for the accused Prem Singh.

No complaint was lodged to the police when the quarrel erupts between accused and his wife.
Accused was having affection and love towards his both the sons.” *** *** *** “PW9- Statement of
Sunita Yadav, aged-35 years W/O Sh Prem Singh R/O H. NO-225 Village Haider Pur Delhi.

On SA I have been married with accused Prem Singh in the year 1996. After marriage I have been
blessed with 2 sons. I used to run my house with the money earned by husband as well as some
money given by my father from the rent premises. I am 12th passed. Before marriage, I used to
reside with my maternal uncle Mahender Kumar Yadav since the age of three years. My real parents
were living in UP in a village Lohara Sarai, Distt. Bagpat. The residence of my maternal uncle is at
H.N -WZ/350, Shakurpur village, Delhi. My husband used to live me happily after marriage. I have
no complaint with my husband. On the day of incident, I went to the house of my maternal uncle as
my Nani was ill leaving my both the sons with their father/accused. There were no other reason for
leaving my matrimonial house. I do not know what happened with the children. Later on, I received
a phone call from Prashant Vihar police station and stated that my both the sons have expired. I
have not given statement to the police. Police has not recorded my statement nor police inquired
from me. I do not want to say anything else in regard to this case.

At this stage Ld. APP wants to cross examine the witness as she is supressing the truth and is
resiling from her earlier statements recorded by the police.

Heard. Allowed.

9

Prem Singh vs State Of Nct Delhi on 2 January, 2023

xxxx by LD. APP for the State I have not signed my statement on 4.5.2006. It is wrong to suggest
that police has recorded my statement on 4.5.2006 and the same is marked PW9/A signed by me at
point A. It is correct that as the condition of my husband was not well as such he was admitted 4/5
months before the incident to Nasha Mukti Kender. Vol. Stated that my husband was not taking
liquor at all and the doctors of Nasha Mukti Kender stated that they will treated my husband from a
good doctor. I have not stated to the police that after my husband was released from Nasha Mukti
Kender by my father in law, we live peacefully for 2/3 days thereafter but on 3.5.2009 at about 11.00
a.m my husband has given beatings to me as a result of which I had gone to the house of my
maternal uncle leaving my both the sons with him and later on I came to know that my both the
sons had drown in Haiderpur canal. (confronted with portion A to A-1 of my statement mark PW9/A
where it is so recorded). It is wrong to suggest that police have also recorded my statement and the
same is mark PW9/B and I have stated in the statement that after marriage I came to know that
accused Prem Singh was in a habit of taking liquor. (Confronted from portion A to A-1 of statement
mark PW9/B where it is so recorded). It is correct that initially my husband was in the business of
transport and he was having two trucks but later on, both the trucks were sold out and he become
unemployed. It is wrong to suggest that he was taking liquor during his unemployment. (confronted
from portion B to B-1 of mark PW9/B wherein it is so recorded). It is wrong to suggest that accused
used to abusing and beating me (Confronted with portion C to C of mark PW9/B wherein it is so
recorded). It is wrong to suggest that two and half years before the incident, because of beating and
ill behaviour of accused Prem Singh, I alongwith my both sons went to the house of my maternal
uncle and living in their house or that accused Prem Singh used to put filthy and dignatory
allegations on me and stated to me ‘characterless’ (Idher Udher Ke Adamiyo se Muh Marvati Firthi
Hai) (confronted with portion C to C-1 of Statement mark PW9/B wherein it is so recorded. It is
wrong to suggest that I have stated to the police officials that accused stated that both our children
were not from him and were due to my illicit relationship. It is wrong to suggest that due to this
reason I was much perturbed because of his such behaviour or that my husband do not have
affection with my both the sons and hate them. (confronted with portion D to D-1 of statement mark
PW9/B wherein it is so recorded). It is wrong to suggest that after releasing my husband from Nasha
Mukti Kender he has taunted me that I used to call different boys and committed wrong act/sexual
act with them and both the sons are not his sons and threatened to kill them or that he has gave
beatings to me and thrown me from his house and when I requested him to take both the sons with
me, he refused and stated that I will kill them as they were both illegal child. (Confronted with
portion E to E-1 of my statement mark PW9/B where in it is so recorded).

On the same night, police has informed me on telephone that my both the sons has drown in the
Haiderpur canal and have also stated that this fact was stated by the accused himself. I have also not
stated to the police that I have suspicion over my husband that he has killed both my child and
falsely stated to the police that they were drown themselves. (Confronted with portion F to F-2 of my
statement mark PW9/B wherein it is so recorded). It is wrong to suggest that I have been won over
by the accused or that he being my husband I am not deposing the true facts of the case or that I
have been compromised or that I was emotionally blackmail by the accused to depose in his favour.
It is wrong to suggest that the signatures belongs to me on mark PW9/A and voluntarily I have given
statement to the police officials. It is wrong to suggest that accused has never suspicion on my
character or that to faded this issue I am deposing falsely. It is wrong to suggest that I am deposing

10

falsely.

Prem Singh vs State Of Nct Delhi on 2 January, 2023

Xxxxxx By Ms. Sadhna Bhatia (Amicus Curie) for the accused Prem Singh.

It is correct that my husband loved my both the sons and I was never beaten or abused by my
husband. It is correct that my husband has never been commenting on my character and never told
me characterless. It is correct that my relation with my husband were remained cordial after
marriage.” 6.3. The fact that after the event in question, the appellant visited the office of Haiderpur
Water Plant as also the nearby Petrol Pump and suggested that his sons had accidentally fallen into
the canal had not been of much dispute. These facts were duly established in the testimony of PW- 4
Mahesh Kumar Sharma and PW-6 Komal Ram related with Haiderpur Water Plant as also by PW-1
Naresh Kaushik, the delivery boy at Indian Oil Petrol Pump. In fact, PW-1 also testified to the facts
that the appellant made a call from his petrol pump to number 100 to police and that the police
officers visited the petrol pump and collected relevant evidence including the bill of telephone used
by the appellant. For ready reference, we may only take note of the testimony of PW-1 Naresh
Kaushik as follows: -

“PW 1 Sh. Naresh Kaushik S/o Ram kumar Kaushik R/o VPO Vill Kiwana Tehsil
Sambhalkha Disstt. Panipat, Haryana On S.A. On 3.05.2009 was working as delivery
boy at Indian Oil Petrol pump in the name of Ridge view Shalimar Bagh, Opposite
Haider pur water plant. On that day at about 8:15 p.m. I was on duty there accused
prem singh present in the court today (correctly identified) came at said petrol pump
and told me that, he had come along with his two sons for walking near Hadarpur
Canal and while his both the sons were playing near the canal they fell down in the
canal and drowned in his presence. He also told me that he tried to save his sons by
jumping in the canal and swimming to some distance but he was unable to save them.
He requested me to permit him to make a call at no. 100. I permitted him to inform
the police by dialing no. 100 from the phone which was installed at the office of my
said petrolpump bearing no. 27492035. In my presence he again narrated the same
facts to the police on telephone. On 06.05.2007 some police officials alongwith
accused whose name I came to know Prem Singh arrived at my petrol pump and I
informed the police that he is the person who had made the telephonic call to police
on 03.05.2009 at 8.15 p.m from my petrol pump. On that day IO recorded my
statement.

On 11.07.09 IO inspector Partap Singh arrived at my petrol pump and he asked me to
provide the bill of telephone no. 27492035. The said telephone no. is in the name of
Sh. Narender Kumar Mahajan (owner of the said petrol pump). I handed over the
photocopy of the bill of said telephone no. from 01.02.09 to 31.03.2009. The said bill
was taken in police possession vide seizure memo Ex. PW1/A signed by me and the
photocopy of the said bill is marked PW1/A signed by me at point A. xxxxx by Ms.
Sadhna Bhatia, Amicus Curie Ld. Counsel for the accused.

11

Prem Singh vs State Of Nct Delhi on 2 January, 2023

Accused Prem Singh came to petrol pump on 03.05.2009 at about 8.15 p.m. and
remained their for about 5 minutes. My first statement was recorded on 06.05.2009
at the petrol pump. No other witness was examined at petrol pump on that day.” 6.4.
The fact that the dead bodies of both the children carried various injuries including
those on neck and the medical opinion that they died due to asphyxia as a result of
manual strangulation came to be duly established in the testimony of PW-14 Dr. V.K.
Jha and the post-mortem reports Ex. P-

14/A and Ex. P-14/C. The statement of PW-14 could also be usefully reproduced as under: -

“PW-14. Statement of Dr. V.K. Jha, Medical Officer, BJRM Hospital, Jahangipuri,
Delhi.

on SA On 4.5.09 I conducted the postmortem of the dead body of Jitesh s/o Prem
Singh aged about 9 years sent by SI Sunil Kumar of PS Prashant Vihar with the
alleged history of found dead in Haiderpur Water Plant.

I observed following external injuries on the dead body of the deceased.

1. Two scratch abrasion over front of neck 1 cm. X .5 cm each.

2. Right hand has washer man appearance.

3. Both feet were wet and smeared with sand particles.

4. Lower lip was contused.

On internal examination of neck, the neck tissue was bruised on front end side. Bruising was also
observed in the midline over thyroid cartilage. After postmortem examination I opined cause of
death as asphyxia as a result of manual strangulation. All the signs were ante-mortem in nature and
neck injury was sufficient to cause death in ordinary course of nature. Time since death was
approximately 19 hours. My detailed PM report is Ex. PW14/A which bears my signatures at point
A. Blood and viscera of the deceased was preserved in common salt to rule out common poisoning.

At this stage, I have seen the viscera report which is Ex. PW14/B in which no common poison have
been detected. After perusal of the viscera report and PM report I am of the final opinion the cause
of death is asphyxia as a result of manual strangulation inflicted by other party.

On 4.05.09 I also conducted the postmortem of the dead body of Sunny s/o Prem Singh aged about
6 years sent by SI Sunil Kumar of PS Prashant Vihar with the alleged history of found dead in
Haiderpur Water Plant.

I observed following external injuries on the dead body of the deceased.

12

1. Left hand has washerman appearance.

Prem Singh vs State Of Nct Delhi on 2 January, 2023

2. Both feet were wet and smeared with sand particles.

3. Three scratch abrasion of size 1cm x0.5 cm on front two in numbers and on left side one in
number.

On internal examination of neck, the neck tissue was bruised on front end sides and laceration over
thyroid cartilage. After postmortem examination I opined cause of death as asphyxia as a result of
manual strangulation. All the signs were ante-mortem in nature and neck injury was sufficient to
cause death in ordinary course of nature. Time since death was approximately 19 hours. My detailed
PM report is Ex. PW14/C which bears my signatures at point A. Blood and viscera of the deceased
was preserved in common salt to rule out common poisoning.

At this stage, I have seen the viscera report which is Ex. PW14/B in which no common poison have
been detected. After perusal of the viscera report and PM report I am of the final opinion the cause
of death is asphyxia as a result of manual strangulation inflicted by other party.

xxxxx By Ms. Sudhna Bhatia amicus curiae for accused. It is incorrect to suggest that I have not
conducted the postmortem of dead body of Jitesh and Sunny. It is incorrect to suggest that I have
signed the report and manipulated the same at the instance of police.” 6.5. The other prosecution
witnesses had essentially been the police personnel related with the process of investigation. Of
these witnesses, PW-18 SI Sunil Kumar asserted that upon receiving the information about
drowning of the children, he reached the water treatment plant where the dead bodies were taken
out from the canal and were identified by the appellant. He further stated to have sent the dead
bodies for post-mortem examination. He also testified to the facts regarding recording of the
statements of other witnesses including mother of the deceased and, after registration of the case,
having handed over investigation to PW-17 Inspector Pratap Singh. The witness further asserted
that the appellant made a disclosure statement and memos and site plans were prepared as per his
statement. The cross-examination of this witness PW-18 Sunil Kumar reads as under: -

“On 3.5.2009, I reached at the spot at Haiderpur Canal alongwith constable Het Ram
around 7.45 p.m. When we reached there, Prem Singh alongwith 1-2 persons were
present there. Inspector Sudhir reached at the spot at about 8.30p.m and crime team
officials reached at the spot after sometime and remained there for about 1 hour. I
recorded the statement of witnesses namely Rajender Yadav and Sunita on
03-04/05/09 at police post Rohini. It is incorrect to suggest that doctor has given the
opinion about the cause of death at my instance.

It is wrong to suggest that no disclosure statement was made by the accused. It is
further wrong to suggest that I recorded statement of witnesses not as per their true
version. It is wrong to suggest that I am deposing falsely or that accused is innocent
and has been falsely implicated in this case or that I did not conduct the investigation
and did not prepare the documents are prepared by me. It is wrong to suggest that

13

Prem Singh vs State Of Nct Delhi on 2 January, 2023

accused was apprehended on 03.5.2009 and illegally detained in the PS and later on
he was falsely implicated in this case. It is further wrong to suggest that I am
deposing falsely.” 6.6. The Investigating Officer PW-17 Inspector Pratap Singh
testified to various processes undertaken in the course of investigation. His cross-

examination reads as under: -

“On 06.05.09 I reached the spot i.e., Haiderpur Water Treatment Plant at about 3-4
am along with complainant and SI Sunil and other staff and remained there about
one hour. We were in uniform. Accused was pointed out at a distance of 20 meters.
Voltd. At that time we were hiding behind the bushes and were not visible to the
accused. We immediately overpowered the accused. Firstly I apprehended the
accused. All the writing work was done while sitting on the bus stand. It is correct
that place of apprehension of the accused is thorough fair. We asked three/four
passer by to join the investigation but they refused. I did not give any notice to them
and no action was taken against them. Voltd. I have no time to issue notice to public
persons as accused was in our custody. All the memos were prepared either by me or
under my supervision by the police staff available at the spot. Ex. PW7/D was not in
my handwriting. It is wrong to suggest that accused was apprehended on 03.05.09
from the Haiderpur water treatment plant. It wrong to suggest that no disclosure
statement was made by the accused. It is wrong to suggest that all the proceedings
were conducted while sitting in the police station. It is wrong to suggest that the
accused is innocent who is falsely implicated in this case or that he did not commit
the alleged offence or that I did not conduct investigation properly.” Stand of the
appellant

7. In his examination under Section 313 CrPC, the circumstances appearing from the evidence led by
the prosecution were put to the appellant. It is noticed that the appellant either denied the
circumstances and allegations put to him or stated his want of knowledge as regards statements of
the witnesses who supported the prosecution case. As regards his admission to the rehabilitation
centre and discharge, the appellant stated that such facts were a matter of record. Finally, his
assertion had been that he was innocent and the witnesses had deposed falsely against him.
However, he declined to lead any evidence in defence. Trial Court found the appellant guilty and
awarded life imprisonment

8. After having heard the parties and having examined the record in its totality, the Trial Court
found the prosecution case amply established by cogent and convincing chain of circumstances,
pointing only to the guilt of the appellant, who caused the death of victim children by strangulation
and also caused the evidence to disappear by throwing the dead bodies into the canal. The appellant
was, therefore, convicted of the offences under Section 302 and 201 IPC and was sentenced
accordingly. 8.1. The Trial Court summarised the chain of circumstances bringing home the guilt of
the appellant and held as under: -

14

Prem Singh vs State Of Nct Delhi on 2 January, 2023

“37. In the present case, admittedly, there cannot be any eye witness to the occurance
and the prosecution has put forward the circumstances and circumstantial evidence
to bring home the guilt of the accused which certainly cannot be ignored. The
prosecution has placed on record certain circumstances to bring home guilt of the
accused regarding murdering of his sons which are as follows:

(a) Accused Prem Singh and his deceased sons namely Jitesh and Sunny were lastly
admittedly together with him till they were alive

(b) Motive and opportunity for the accused Prem Singh to commit murder of his
sons.

(c) Conduct of the accused

(d) Medical Evidence

38. (a) Accused Prem Singh and his deceased sons Jitesh and Sunny were lastly
admittedly together with him till they were alive: As already discussed at length, it is
established and proved on the record that the accused Prem Singh who admittedly,
was the father of the deceased Jitesh and Sunny were lastly together in their house
after his wife Sunita had gone to her maternal uncle’s house leaving the custody of
both the said children with the accused Prem Singh and the accused himself has
admitted that thereafter, he took both the children Jitesh and Sunny to Haiderpur
Canal for a walk and to enjoy and the accused has stated that while both the children
were playing, they fell down in the Canal and got drowned and though he tried to
save them by jumping into the canal but he did not succeed, hance as such it is
nowhere in dispute that the accused and the deceased children were admittedly
together lastly till they died.

(b) Motive & Opportunity for the accused Prem Singh to commit said offence: The accused Prem
Singh was certainly having ample opportunity to strangulate his children as it was about 7.45 p.m on
that day when he took them to the Canal and admittedly, none else was present there. It is also
shown from the testimonies of the prosecution witnesses as already discussed at length that the
accused had doubt over the character of his wife Sunita and had preconceived notion that Jitesh and
Sunny were not his sons and so, he had developed a grudge against his wife and children and finding
an appropriate opportunity as his wife was not in the house, he took them to Haiderpur Canal with
the motive to eliminate them and asked the children to attend call of nature after which when his
elder son come first, he strangulated him and thrown his dead body in the Canal and then his other
son come whom also he strangulated and then had thrown his dead body in the Canal and
thereafter, he himself jumped into the Canal to pretend that he had made efforts to save them which
in fact has not yielded him any benefit.

(c) Conduct of the accused : The conduct of the accused Prem Singh has already been discussed at
length that firstly he took both his sons to the Haiderpur Canal where he manually strangulated

15

Prem Singh vs State Of Nct Delhi on 2 January, 2023

them and threw their dead bodies in the Canal and then he himself jumped into the Canal and swam
for a considerable distance and came out, so that he could tell the others that he had made genuine
efforts to save them but in vain which has been falsified as already discussed. It is also proved on the
record that he himself narrated so to the officials of Water Treatment Plant and then to the
employee of the nearby Petrol Pump from where he also telephonically informed the police officials
and then told the same story to the police officials. In fact, it was after the postmortem examinations
of both the children, that it was crystal clear that they had not died of drowning but of manual
strangulation prior to their drownings which injuries were sufficient in ordinary course of nature to
cause their deaths and after trying to mislead police officials, he joined investigation to show his
bonafide which has proved futile for the accused.

(d) Medical Evidence : As per record, though the accused Prem Singh has stated that both the
children had died of drowning and had seen them drowning, yet their postmortem examinations
reports have falsified his version which have been duly proved on records by Dr.V.K.Jha who has
categorically deposed that both the children were firstly manually strangulated which injuries were
antemortem in nature and were sufficient in ordinary course of nature to cause their deaths and the
deaths of both the deceased were the result of such strangulation and not of drowning which have
entirely falsified the version of the accused that his sons had died due to drowning and it is proved
that they did not die of drowning but of manual strangulation.

39. Considering the totality of the facts and circumstances, on the basis of the evidence adduced by
the prosecution, as placed on the record and in view of above discussion, Court is of the considered
opinion that the witness examined by the prosecution are cogent, convincing and have inspired the
confidence of the court in so far as they have come forward with true picture of the occurance and
sufficient corroboration is available on the record to ocular testimonies of the prosecution witnesses
through documentary evidence and as such no artificiality or exaggeration is observed in the case of
the prosecution. The court is of the considered opinion that :-

(1) There is sufficient evidence on the record as lead by the prosecution regarding
occurance and that the accused Prem Singh had murdered his sons Jitesh and Sunny
which has nowhere been rebutted or shown to be false or manipulated and it is duly
proved that he was lastly present with both the children and had strangulating them
after which he threw their dead bodies in the Canal and accordingly there is sufficient
evidence on record from which the inference of guilt is sought to be drawn against the
accused Prem Singh which has been cogently and firmly established on record.

(2) Prosecution has also proved that the circumstances have unerringly pointed
towards the guilt of the accused Prem Singh regarding committing murders of Jitesh
and Sunny at the relevant date, time and place after which he also caused the
evidence to disappear by throwing their dead bodies in the Canal at which point of
time, he intended to screen himself from Legal Punishment and gave information in
this regard which he himself knew and believed to be false.

16

Prem Singh vs State Of Nct Delhi on 2 January, 2023

(3) The prosecution has also proved circumstances, which taken cumulatively, form a
chain so complete that there is no doubt at all, if the accused Prem Singh had not
murdered his sons namely Jitesh and Sunny at the relevant date, time and place.

40. (a) In view of foregoing discussion, the court is of the considered opinion that as per material
placed on the record, the witnesses examined by the prosecution are cogent, convincing and inspire
confidence of the court in as far as they have come forward with true and clear picture of the
occurance and infact and sufficient corroboration is available on record on all material aspects to the
ocular versions of the witnesses not only from each other but even from the documentary evidence
which has led sufficient support to the witness alongwith medical evidence wherein Dr. V.K.Jha has
categorically opined and prayed that both the children Jitesh and Sunny had not died due to
drowning but died due to the manual strangulation which injuries were antemortem in nature which
were sufficient in ordinary course of nature to cause their deaths which have nowhere been shown to
be false or manipulated and the testimonies of prosecution witnesses do not suffer any inherent or
grave infirmities which go to the root of the matter and shake their basic versions.

(b) Accordingly, considering the above, in the given circumstances and on the basis of the material
as placed on the record, the only irresistible conclusion that can be drawn is that the accused Prem
Singh had murdered both this sons namely Jitesh and Sunny by manually strangulated them and
caused their deaths which injuries have been proved to be antemortem and sufficient in ordinary
course of nature to cause their deaths and it is also proved on the record that after murdering them,
he had thrown their dead bodies in the canal, so that the evidence regarding commission of his
offence of murdering his sons is destroyed with intention to save and screen himself from the legal
punishment. Since prosecution has succeeded in bringing home guilt of the accused on record
beyond reasonable doubt, accordingly, accused Prem Singh is convicted for committing offences as
punishable under section 302/201 IPC. Let he be heard on the point of sentence.” 8.2. The Trial
Court further heard the parties on the question of sentence. The submissions on behalf of the
appellant in this hearing had been for leniency in view of the facts that he had no criminal
antecedents and had been undergoing trial since the year 2009; and further that he had a family to
support and was the sole bread earner. The Trial Court, in its order dated 08.09.2011, after taking
note of all the facts and circumstances of the case and the nature of crime committed by the
appellant, considered it appropriate to award the necessary punishments and, accordingly,
sentenced him to rigorous imprisonment for life with fine of Rs. 10,000/- and default stipulation for
the offence punishable under Section 302 IPC; and to rigorous imprisonment for a period of 3 years
with fine of Rs. 2000/- and default stipulation for the offence punishable under Section 201 IPC,
with concurrent running of punishments.

High Court dismissed the appeal filed by the appellant

9. In challenge to the conviction before the High Court, it was essentially contended on behalf of the
appellant that all the independent witnesses did not support the prosecution case and there were
missing links in the chain of events, particularly when the allegations of strained relationship of the
appellant and his wife as also the allegations of the appellant doubting the chastity of his wife having
fallen to the ground. It was contended that in the given circumstances, there were no reason for

17

Prem Singh vs State Of Nct Delhi on 2 January, 2023

which the appellant would have killed his own children. Per contra, it was submitted on behalf of the
respondent-State that the scientific evidence clearly established the fact that the children died
because of manual strangulation and not on account of drowning; and when they were lastly seen in
the company of the appellant, burden was heavy on him to explain the whereabouts of his children
as also the manner in which they came to be strangulated. It was contended that rather than
discharging this burden, the appellant gave false information about accidental drowning of the
children, as clearly established by independent witnesses. 9.1. The High Court again analysed the
entire evidence on record and, while rejecting the contentions that the appellant was falsely
implicated or that there were material discrepancies in the prosecution case, dismissed the appeal
by its impugned judgment and order dated 29.02.2016 while observing, inter alia, as under: -

“52. Having discussed the testimonies of material witnesses in detail in the
paragraphs aforegoing, we may note that PW-4, Mahesh Kumar Sharma and PW-6,
Komal Ram are material witnesses. Both the witnesses have testified that they were
on duty at Haidarpur Water Treatment Plant on the fateful day, i.e. on 03.05.2009.
Both have also testified that the appellant had first approached Mahesh Kumar and
informed him that he had come to the canal along with his two sons who were playing
near the canal, they fell down and drowned. As per the testimony of Mahesh Kumar,
appellant had met him at about 7:45 p.m. and Mahesh Kumar had passed over this
information regarding recovery of dead bodies at number 100. On the truthfulness of
this statement, there has been no cross-examination on behalf of the appellant.
PW-6, Komal Ram has also testified on the lines of PW-4. A very important factor
which is to be noticed at this stage is that there is no cross-examination by the
appellant regarding his not having gone to canal along with sons and having not
informed PW-4 and PW-6 regarding the drowning of his sons who were with him and
had drowned while playing.

53. Naresh Kaushik, PW-1 has testified that on 03.05.2009 when he was working as a
delivery boy at Indian Oil Petrol Pump, Shalimar Bagh opposite Haiderpur Water
Plant at about 8:25 p.m., the appellant came to him and told him that he was walking
near Haiderpur Canal with his sons and while his both the sons were playing, they fell
down in the canal and drowned despite his having tried to save them by jumping in
the canal. Appellant requested him to allow him to make a call at 100 number. In his
presence, on telephone number 27492035, the appellant narrated the above facts to
the police officials. On 06.05.2009, he had identified the appellant in the presence of
the police officials as the person who had made a call at 100 number on 03.05.2009
at 8:15 p.m. Bill of telephone number 27492035 Ex.PW1/A and the testimony of
PW-1 stand established that a phone call was made by the appellant at 100 number.

54. PW-1, Naresh Kaushik had also identified the appellant who had made phone call
from his phone. We may, at this stage, also note that although the wife of the
appellant had turned hostile, but as far as the children last seen in the company of the
appellant is concerned, it stands established by the testimony of PW-9, Sunity Yadav,
wife of the appellant. She testified that “on the day of incident, I went to the house of

18

Prem Singh vs State Of Nct Delhi on 2 January, 2023

my maternal uncle as my Nani was ill leaving my both the sons with their
father/accused”.

55. In view of the testimonies of PWs-1, 4, 6 and 9, in our view, it stands firmly
established that the children were with their father as per the testimony of PW-9. As
per the testimonies of PWs-1, 4 and 6, the appellant had himself informed them that
his children had come with him at the canal and while playing, they have got
drowned. The testimonies of PWs-1, 4 and 6 on this aspect has remained unrebutted.

56. Dr. V.K. Jha, PW-14, has testified that cause of death is asphyxia as a result of
manual strangulation and all the injuries were ante-mortem in nature and neck
injury on their persons was sufficient to cause their death in the ordinary course of
nature. The evidence of Dr. Jha clearly points out that the children did not die due to
drowning but on account of manual strangulation. Neither the appellant has been
able to make any dent in the examination of this witness nor there is any reason for
us to disbelieve the testimony of Dr. V.K. Jha.

57. The motive stands established. Upon reading of the testimony of PW-7, Mahender
Kumar Yadav, the deceased were the sons of his niece Sunita. He has testified that
the appellant used to comment on the chastity of her niece Sunita and accused her of
bad character. He was in the habit of drinking liquor and beating Sunita.

This witness has also testified that the appellant used to comment that the children did not belong to
him but to someone else and, in fact, had attempted to kill the children in the park by giving them
electric shock. However, the children were saved by their mother. In the past, Sunita had remained
in the house of PW-7 for 5-6 months, however, she joined the company of her husband but he
continued to misbehave with her and used to talk inappropriately and accuse her of indulging in
sexual activities. Even on 03.05.2009, as per the testimony of PW-7, the mother of the deceased had
come to his house and informed him that appellant was quarrelling with her. He had tried to
reconcile the matter, but could not succeed. On the same day, he received a phone call by the police
that both the children of his niece had died by drowning in the canal. PW-7 has further testified that
he had suspected that both the children had not drowned on their own but they were killed by the
appellant.

58. PW-8, Rajender Yadav has also testified that his niece was married to the appellant and
whenever Sunita came to their house, she complained that appellant used to abuse her and beat her
as well as the children. On learning the news about death of both the children, this witness also
testified that he had strong suspicion that appellant had drowned his children on the issue of
character of Sunita.

59. In view of the testimonies of PW-7 and PW-8, motive stands clearly established that the
appellant used to beat his wife and children under the influence of liquor. He suspected that the
children did not belong to him but belong to someone else. The appellant informed PW-1, PW-4 and
PW-6 that the children had drowned, whereas as per the testimony of PW-14, Dr. V.K. Jha, external

19

Prem Singh vs State Of Nct Delhi on 2 January, 2023

injuries were found on the dead bodies and the cause of death was manual strangulation. Thus, in
our view, the conduct of the appellant also points towards his guilt.

60. In the light of the testimonies discussed above, the submission of learned counsel for the
appellant that the appellant has been falsely implicated or that there are material discrepancies in
their testimonies or the fact that the wife of the appellant has turned hostile thus there is no ground
to convict the appellant, are all without any force. The Trial Court has passed a well-reasoned order
taking into consideration the testimonies of all the material witnesses which have been discussed
hereinabove.

61. We find that there is no merit in the present appeal and the same is accordingly dismissed.”
Rival Submissions

10. Assailing the judgment and order aforesaid, learned counsel for the appellant has put forward a
variety of submissions to argue that conviction of the appellant remains unsustainable. The learned
counsel has contended that the chain of circumstances in this case is not complete, particularly
when the allegations of strained relationship of the appellant and his wife have not been proved and
in any case, the prosecution has failed to establish motive for the appellant to murder his own
children; that the appellant was incapable of understanding the nature of his act when admittedly he
was in the habit of consuming liquor, was admitted to rehabilitation centre, and his discharge was
taken against the advice of the centre; that the Trial Court failed in its duty to examine the mental
capacity of the appellant in terms of Section 329 CrPC and hence, the entire trial stood vitiated; and
that in any case, mens rea could not be imputed on the appellant, who deserves to be given benefit of
doubt or at least the benefit of the Exceptions to Section 300 IPC.

10.1. In the first place, learned counsel for the appellant has contended that in case of circumstantial
evidence, there ought to be a complete chain of circumstances pointing towards nothing else but
guilt of the accused; and in such cases, motive is of critical importance. In the present case,
according to the learned counsel, the motive set up by the prosecution about the alleged strained
relationship of the appellant with his wife was not a motive strong enough for the appellant to
commit the murder of his children and, in any event, wife of the appellant, PW-9, did not support
the case of the prosecution regarding such allegations. The learned counsel would, therefore,
contend that an important link in the chain of circumstances, i.e., motive, having not been
established, the appellant deserves to be acquitted.

10.2. The main plank of the submissions on behalf of the appellant had been with reference to his
alleged addiction to liquor and his admission to the rehabilitation centre. Learned counsel for the
appellant would argue, particularly with reference to the statements of PW-2 Puran Singh, cousin of
the appellant, and PW-3 Jagbir, manager of rehabilitation centre, that the appellant was
undoubtedly undergoing treatment for his addiction to liquor and was discharged against advice
prematurely; and, the evidence on record, read as a whole, lead to the position that the appellant
could not have been treated as a person capable of understanding the nature of his act. According to
the learned counsel, even if the evidence of PW-2 and PW-3 may not be sufficient to give the benefit
of Section 84 IPC, it definitely gives rise to a doubt with regard to the mental capacity of the

20

Prem Singh vs State Of Nct Delhi on 2 January, 2023

appellant. In this regard, the learned counsel has also referred to the additional documents placed
on record to the effect that even post-conviction, the appellant has been treated for his mental
condition; he was distinguished as a psychiatric case; and was admitted to the Central Jail Hospital
for treatment.

10.3. With reference to the aforesaid factors concerning the mental capacity of the appellant, learned
counsel would submit that the entire trial in the present case stands vitiated, for the Trial Court
having omitted to examine the capacity of the accused-appellant in terms of Section 329 CrPC.
Learned counsel has also referred to the decision of Gujarat High Court in the case of State of
Gujarat v. Manjuben: 2019 SCC OnLine Guj 6937 and has submitted that, in the present case,
looking to the background factors concerning mental capacity of the appellant appearing in
evidence, it was the duty of the Trial Court to examine if he was of unsound mind and consequently
incapable of making his defence. 10.3.1. Learned counsel has further argued that when the
prosecution and the investigating agency came across the evidence in relation to the mental
condition of the appellant, it was their duty to have him medically examined and to place the
evidence before the Trial Court. This having not been done, the infirmity, according to the learned
counsel, ought to result in acquittal of the appellant. In this regard, the learned counsel has also
referred to a decision of Bombay High Court in the case of Ajay Ram Pandit v. State of Maharashtra:
2022 SCC OnLine Bom 3920. 10.3.2. Learned counsel for the appellant has further submitted that
although in the present case neither the public prosecutor nor the defence counsel raised the issue of
mental capacity of the appellant, the Trial Court was under an obligation to ascertain his mental
capacity, particularly in view of the prima facie evidence available before it. According to the learned
counsel, it was the duty of the Trial Court to have made such an assessment and for that purpose,
conclusive evidence was not required and presence of some doubt itself was sufficient. The
necessary enquiry having not been made, the trial stands vitiated and consequently, the benefit
ought to be extended to the accused-appellant. The learned counsel has also referred to the decision
in A.R. Antulay v. R.S. Nayak:

(1988) 2 SCC 602 to submit that the act of the Court should not harm a litigant. The
learned counsel has even referred to a decision of the Supreme Court of the State of
Delaware in Eric Dolby v. State of Delaware decided on 02.03.2012 to submit that
therein the accused was permitted to raise the defence of competence even though it
was not as such raised by the counsel and has submitted that the Trial Court ought to
have ordered examination of the accused with regard to the propensity/capacity.

10.3.3. Learned counsel has extended his submissions to the effect that since the evidence of PW-2
and PW-3 gave rise to a doubt in relation to the mental capacity of the appellant, the Trial Court
ought to have given an opportunity to the appellant to explain the circumstances of such
normality/abnormality at the time of his examination under Section 313 CrPC because these aspects
had a bearing on his capacity and ultimately on his defence. The learned counsel has submitted with
reference to an observation of this Court in the case of Rahul v. State of Delhi, Ministry of Home
Affairs and Anr.: 2022 SCC OnLine SC 1532, that a Judge is not expected to be a passive umpire but
is supposed to actively participate in the trial, and to question the witnesses to reach to a correct
conclusion. The learned counsel would submit that, in the present case, the witnesses examined to

21

Prem Singh vs State Of Nct Delhi on 2 January, 2023

establish the guilt were not cross-examined on the relevant factors, particularly as regards mental
capacity of the appellant, which ought to have been ensured by the Trial Court.

10.4. In the last limb of submissions, learned counsel for the appellant has submitted that even if it
be taken that the evidence on record did not establish conclusively the mental incapacity of the
appellant, it indeed raised a reasonable doubt as regards existence of all the ingredients of Section
300 IPC, including mens rea and hence, the appellant was entitled to be extended the benefit of
doubt. The learned counsel would also submit in the alternative that the conviction, if at all, ought to
have been under Section 304 IPC. In this regard, the learned counsel has referred to a decision of
Calcutta High Court in the case of King-Emperor v. Tincouri Dhopi: 1922 SCC OnLine Cal 90 to
submit that therein the mental state of the appellant, who was a habitual ganja smoker, was taken
into consideration and accordingly, capital sentence was converted to transportation for life to meet
the ends of justice. 10.5. Therefore, according to the learned counsel for the appellant, in view of
serious infirmity in the trial, benefit of doubt deserves to be given to the appellant and in the
alternative, the conviction deserves to be converted to one under Section 304 IPC and sentence
deserves to be reduced to the period of imprisonment already undergone.

11. While refuting the submissions made on behalf of the appellant, learned counsel for the
respondent-State has argued that the circumstantial evidence on record undoubtedly lead to the
conclusion of guilt of the appellant and no case for interference is made out. 11.1. Learned counsel
for the respondent-State has emphatically submitted that the fundamental fact remains rather
undeniable that the appellant was last person in the company of the deceased children and is amply
established by the deposition of PW-1, the attendant at the petrol pump, and PW-4 and PW-6, the
personnel on duty at the water treatment plant. This apart, the fact that the children were in the
company of the appellant is established even in the testimony of PW-9, wife of the appellant.
Learned counsel would submit that there is nothing on record to suggest the presence of any other
person with the deceased children at the time and place of occurrence; and the appellant has not
shown his presence at any other place or his having parted with the company of the deceased.
Learned counsel has further argued that the medical evidence of PW-14 leaves nothing to doubt that
the cause of death of the victim children had been asphyxia as a result of manual strangulation.
Thus, according to the learned counsel, in the given set of circumstances, when the death of the
victim children was homicidal in nature and the appellant rather attempted to project a false
narrative that they fell into the canal accidentally, the concurrent findings of his conviction cannot
be said to be suffering from any infirmity.

11.2. Learned counsel has referred to Section 106 of the Indian Evidence Act and a decision of this
Court in the case of Sabitri Samantaray v. State of Odisha: 2022 SCC OnLine SC 673 to submit that
in the present case, the appellant having failed to explain the circumstances which were within his
special knowledge, particularly after the prosecution had clearly established the basic facts about the
deceased being lastly in the company of the appellant and that their death was homicidal in nature
with manual strangulation, the want of explanation of the appellant definitely provides a strong link
in the chain of events.

22

Prem Singh vs State Of Nct Delhi on 2 January, 2023

11.3. As regards motive, learned counsel for the respondent-State has particularly referred to the
testimonies of PW-7 and PW-8 to submit that the facts were clearly established that the relationship
between the appellant and his wife was strained; and the reason for such strained relations was the
appellant’s constant suspicion over the character of his wife and in turn, his doubts on the paternity
of the victim boys. Thus, according to the learned counsel, a case of strong motive for killing of the
victim children is also established where the appellant suspected them to not be his sons. 11.4. As
regards the plea of unsoundness of mind of the appellant, learned counsel for the respondent-State
has submitted that such a plea was never raised in the defence or in evidence or in appeal or even in
the petition filed before this Court. Learned counsel has further submitted that as a matter of legal
principle, if previous history of accused person’s insanity is revealed, the investigating officer is duty
bound to subject him to medical examination and to submit the evidence to the Court; and failure to
do so may amount to serious infirmity which may lead to benefit of doubt to the accused but, in such
cases, the onus of producing evidence with respect to the conduct and mental condition is on the
accused and the Court is not expected to presume to the contrary. While relying upon a decision of
this Court in the case of Bapu alias Gujraj Singh v. State of Rajasthan: (2007) 8 SCC 66, learned
counsel has submitted that the plea of unsoundness of mind qua the appellant is untenable not just
owing to the fact that no such plea or evidence was placed during the trial or even before the High
Court but also because the appellant had no previous history of insanity as such. In this regard,
learned counsel has referred to the testimony of PW-3, the manager of rehabilitation centre to the
effect that during the period of admission, the appellant’s behaviour was like an ordinary prudent
man and he was never administered any medicine for mental illness, for no such illness having been
observed nor any previous history having been given by his family members.

11.5. Learned counsel for the respondent-State has also submitted that the plea of unsoundness of
mind, if at all, could only be raised by the defence to rule out the forming of mens rea but a case of
purported subsequent mental illness cannot be raised to invoke the exceptions of Section 300 IPC.
Thus, according to the learned counsel, reference to the treatment of the appellant post-conviction
in psychiatry ward because of the complaints of abnormal behaviour is of no avail to the appellant.
Learned counsel has referred to decisions of this Court in Shrikant Anandrao Bhosale v. State of
Maharashtra: (2002) 7 SCC 748 and Dahyabhai Chhaganbhai Thakkar v. State of Gujarat: AIR 1964
SC 1563.

11.6. Learned counsel for the respondent-State has further submitted that the suggestions to the
effect that the appellant might be having requisite knowledge but was lacking an intention to
commit the crime remains untenable for the reasons, inter alia, that the appellant meticulously
planned the crime by taking his children to the canal at a time when he was vested with their sole
custody in the absence of his wife; he mercilessly strangulated the children one by one and if at all
an opportunity of realisation were to be visualised, at least after killing the first child he had ample
time and opportunity to restrain himself and not to kill the other one. This apart, according to the
learned counsel, after gruesome killing of the two children, the appellant enacted an elaborate ploy
by interacting with the persons in the vicinity and attempted to create a false narrative of drowning
of the children. In the given set of facts, according to the learned counsel, the appellant’s case does
not fall under any of the exceptions contained in Section 300 IPC and hence, the concurrent findings
against him call for no interference.

23

The scope and width of this appeal

Prem Singh vs State Of Nct Delhi on 2 January, 2023

12. As noticed, the Trial Court and the High Court have concurrently recorded the findings in this
case that the prosecution has been able to establish the chain of circumstances leading to the only
conclusion that the appellant is guilty of the offences of murder of his sons and causing
disappearance of evidence. Though the parameters of examining the matters in an appeal by special
leave under Article 136 of the Constitution of India have been laid down repeatedly by this Court in
several of the decisions but, having regard to the submissions made in this case, we may usefully
reiterate the observations in the case of Pappu v. The State of Uttar Pradesh: 2022 SCC OnLine SC
176 wherein, after referring to Articles 134 and 136 of the Constitution of India and Section 2 of the
Supreme Court (Enlargement of Criminal Appellate Jurisdiction) Act, 1970 as also with a detailed
reference to the relevant decisions, this Court has summed up the subtle distinction in the scope of a
regular appeal and an appeal by special leave in the following words: -

“20.…. In such an appeal by special leave, where the Trial Court and the High Court
have concurrently returned the findings of fact after appreciation of evidence, each
and every finding of fact cannot be contested nor such an appeal could be dealt with
as if another forum for reappreciation of evidence. Of course, if the assessment by the
Trial Court and the High Court could be said to be vitiated by any error of law or
procedure or misreading of evidence or in disregard to the norms of judicial process
leading to serious prejudice or injustice, this Court may, and in appropriate cases
would, interfere in order to prevent grave or serious miscarriage of justice but, such a
course is adopted only in rare and exceptional cases of manifest illegality. Tersely put,
it is not a matter of regular appeal. This Court would not interfere with the
concurrent findings of fact based on pure appreciation of evidence nor it is the scope
of these appeals that this Court would enter into reappreciation of evidence so as to
take a view different than that taken by the Trial Court and approved by the High
Court.” 12.1. Keeping the principles aforesaid in view, we may examine if the
concurrent findings call for any interference in this case while reiterating that
wholesome reappreciation of evidence is not within the scope of this appeal, even
though we have scanned through the entire evidence in order to appropriately deal
with the contentions urged before us.

The principles relating to circumstantial evidence; burden of explanation; hostile witness; and
motive

13. Learned counsel for the appellant has argued that there had been several shortcomings in the
prosecution case and that the relied upon factors, including the medical evidence and the so-called
falsity of explanation of the appellant, are not sufficient to arrive at a finding of guilt against the
appellant, particularly when the allegations relating to motive have not been established. While
dealing with such submissions, we may usefully take note of the basic principles applicable to the
case. 13.1. The principles explained and enunciated in the case of Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v. State
of Maharashtra: (1984) 4 SCC 116 remain a guiding light for the Courts in regard to the proof of a
case based on circumstantial evidence. Therein, this Court referred to the celebrated decision in

24

Prem Singh vs State Of Nct Delhi on 2 January, 2023

Hanumant v. State of Madhya Pradesh: AIR 1952 SC 343 and deduced five golden principles of
proving a case based on circumstantial evidence in the following terms: -

“152 ............It may be useful to extract what Mahajan, J. has laid down in Hanumant
case:

“It is well to remember that in cases where the evidence is of a circumstantial nature,
the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should in the first
instance be fully established, and all the facts so established should be consistent only
with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused. Again, the circumstances should be of
a conclusive nature and tendency and they should be such as to exclude every
hypothesis but the one proposed to be proved. In other words, there must be a chain
of evidence so far complete as not to leave any reasonable ground for a conclusion
consistent with the innocence of the accused and it must be such as to show that
within all human probability the act musthave been done by the accused.”

153. A close analysis of this decision would show that the following conditions must
be fulfilled before a case against an accused can be said to be fully established:

(1) the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should be
fully established.

It may be noted here that this Court indicated that the circumstances concerned “must or should”
and not “may be” established. There is not only a grammatical but a legal distinction between “may
be proved” and “must be or should be proved” as was held by this Court in Shivaji Sahabrao Bobade
v. State of Maharashtra6 where the observations were made:

6 (1973) 2 SCC 793.

“Certainly, it is a primary principle that the accused must be and not merely may be guilty before a
court can convict and the mental distance between ‘may be’ and ‘must be’ is long and divides vague
conjectures from sure conclusions.” (2) the facts so established should be consistent only with the
hypothesis of the guilt of the accused, that is to say, they should not be explainable on any other
hypothesis except that the accused is guilty, (3) the circumstances should be of a conclusive nature
and tendency, (4) they should exclude every possible hypothesis except the one to be proved, and (5)
there must be a chain of evidence so complete as not to leave any reasonable ground for the
conclusion consistent with the innocence of the accused and must show that in all human
probability the act must have been done by the accused.

154. These five golden principles, if we may say so, constitute the panchsheel of the proof of a case
based on circumstantial evidence.” 13.1.1. It is also pertinent to notice that in the said case of Sharad
Birdhichand Sarda, this Court also enunciated the principles for using the false explanation or false
defence as an additional link to complete the chain of circumstances in the following terms: -

25

Prem Singh vs State Of Nct Delhi on 2 January, 2023

“158. It may be necessary here to notice a very forceful argument submitted by the
Additional Solicitor General relying on a decision of this Court in Deonandan Mishra
v. State of Bihar7 to supplement his argument that if the defence case is false it would
constitute an additional link so as to fortify the prosecution case……..

159. It will be seen that this Court while taking into account the absence of
explanation or a false explanation did hold that it will amount to be an additional link
to complete the chain but these observations must be read in the light of what this
Court said earlier 7 AIR 1955 SC 801: (1955) 2 SCR 570, 582.

viz. before a false explanation can be used as additional link, the following essential conditions must
be satisfied:

(1) various links in the chain of evidence led by the prosecution have been
satisfactorily proved, (2) the said circumstance points to the guilt of the accused with
reasonable definiteness, and (3) the circumstance is in proximity to the time and
situation.

160. If these conditions are fulfilled only then a court can use a false explanation or a false defence
as an additional link to lend an assurance to the court and not otherwise.……..”

14. Moving on to the other applicable provisions and principles, we may usefully take note of Section
106 of the Evidence Act, casting burden of proving a fact especially within knowledge of any person,
and a few relevant decisions in regard to its operation qua an accused. 14.1. Section 106 of the
Evidence Act reads as under: -

“106. Burden of proving fact especially within knowledge. — When any fact is
especially within the knowledge of any person, the burden of proving that fact is upon
him.” 14.2. In the case of Trimukh Maroti Kirkan v. State of Maharashtra:

(2006) 10 SCC 681, the accused was charged of the murder of his wife;

there had been allegations of ill-treatment of the deceased-wife by the accused-husband; and though
the victim had been killed by strangulation, the information given to her parents as also to all in the
village was that she had died on account of snakebite. After taking note of the facts of the case, this
Court exposited on the principles governing the assessment of circumstantial evidence, the
operation of Section 106 of the Evidence Act, and the effect of want of necessary explanation or
giving of false explanation by the accused, inter alia, in the following passages: -

“14. If an offence takes place inside the privacy of a house and in such circumstances
where the assailants have all the opportunity to plan and commit the offence at the
time and in circumstances of their choice, it will be extremely difficult for the
prosecution to lead evidence to establish the guilt of the accused if the strict principle
of circumstantial evidence, as noticed above, is insisted upon by the courts. A judge

26

Prem Singh vs State Of Nct Delhi on 2 January, 2023

does not preside over a criminal trial merely to see that no innocent man is punished.
A judge also presides to see that a guilty man does not escape. Both are public duties.
(See Stirland v. Director of Public Prosecutions 8 — quoted with approval by Arijit
Pasayat, J. in State of Punjab v. Karnail Singh9.) The law does not enjoin a duty on
the prosecution to lead evidence of such character which is almost impossible to be
led or at any rate extremely difficult to be led. The duty on the prosecution is to lead
such evidence which it is capable of leading, having regard to the facts and
circumstances of the case. Here it is necessary to keep in mind Section 106 of the
Evidence Act which says that when any fact is especially within the knowledge of any
person, the burden of proving that fact is upon him…….

15. Where an offence like murder is committed in secrecy inside a house, the initial burden to
establish the case would undoubtedly be upon the prosecution, but the nature and amount of
evidence to be led by it to establish the charge cannot be of the same degree as is required in other
cases of circumstantial evidence. The burden would be of a comparatively lighter character. In view
of Section 106 of the Evidence Act there will be a corresponding burden on the inmates of the house
to give a cogent explanation as to how the crime was committed. The inmates of the house cannot
get away by simply keeping quiet and offering no explanation on the supposed premise that the
burden to establish its case lies entirely upon the prosecution and there is no duty at all on an
accused to offer any explanation.

*** *** ***

21. In a case based on circumstantial evidence where no eyewitness account is available, there is
another principle of law which must be kept in mind. The principle is that when an incriminating
circumstance is put to the accused and the said accused either offers no explanation or offers an
explanation which is found to be untrue, then the same becomes an additional link in 8 1944 AC
315: (1944) 2 All ER 13 (HL).

9 (2003) 11 SCC 271: 2004 SCC (Cri) 135.

the chain of circumstances to make it complete. This view has been taken in a catena of decisions of
this Court.” 14.3. The case of Sudru v. State of Chhattisgarh: (2019) 8 SCC 333 had been the one
where the appellant was charged of the murder of his son in his house; and the principal prosecution
witnesses, including wife of the appellant, turned hostile to the prosecution but, the facts did come
out of their testimony that the deceased was left alone in the company of the appellant and the next
day, the deceased was found dead. Taking note of the salient features of the case and operation of
the requirements of Section 106 of the Evidence Act, this Court observed, as regards consideration
of the relevant part of evidence of a hostile witness and the effect of failure on the part of the accused
to discharge his burden, as follows: -

“6. No doubt, in the present case all the witnesses who are related to the accused and
the deceased have turned hostile. PW 1 Janki Bai, wife of the appellant and the
mother of the deceased has also turned hostile. However, by now it is settled

27

Prem Singh vs State Of Nct Delhi on 2 January, 2023

principle of law, that such part of the evidence of a hostile witness which is found to
be credible could be taken into consideration and it is not necessary to discard the
entire evidence...

*** *** *** “8. In this view of the matter, after the prosecution has established the
aforesaid fact, the burden would shift upon the appellant under Section 106 of the
Evidence Act. Once the prosecution proves, that it is the deceased and the appellant,
who were alone in that room and on the next day morning the dead body of the
deceased was found, the onus shifts on the appellant to explain, as to what has
happened in that night and as to how the death of the deceased has occurred.

14.4. Apart from the above, we may also usefully take note of the recent decision of
this Court in the case of Sabitri Samantaray (supra). Therein, with reference to
Section 106 of the Evidence Act, a 3-Judge Bench of this Court noted that if the
accused had a different intention, the facts are especially within his knowledge which
he must prove; and if, in a case based on circumstantial evidence, the accused evades
response to an incriminating question or offers a response which is not true, such a
response, in itself, would become an additional link in the chain of events.

The relevant part of the enunciation by this Court reads as under: -

“19. Thus, although Section 106 is in no way aimed at relieving the prosecution from
its burden to establish the guilt of an accused, it applies to cases where chain of
events has been successfully established by the prosecution, from which a reasonable
inference is made out against the accused. Moreover, in a case based on
circumstantial evidence, whenever an incriminating question is posed to the accused
and he or she either evades response, or offers a response which is not true, then such
a response in itself becomes an additional link in the chain of events.”

15. As regards the relevancy of motive in a case based on circumstantial evidence, the weight of
authorities is on principles that if motive is proved, that would supply another link in the chain of
circumstantial evidence but, absence of motive cannot be a ground to reject the prosecution case,
though such an absence of motive is a factor that weighs in favour of the accused. In Anwar Ali and
Anr. v. State of Himachal Pradesh: (2020) 10 SCC 166, this Court has referred to and relied upon the
principles enunciated in previous decisions and has laid down as under: -

“24. Now so far as the submission on behalf of the accused that in the present case
the prosecution has failed to establish and prove the motive and therefore the
accused deserves acquittal is concerned, it is true that the absence of proving the
motive cannot be a ground to reject the prosecution case. It is also true and as held by
this Court in Suresh Chandra Bahri v. State of Bihar10 that if motive is proved that
would supply a link in the chain of circumstantial evidence but the absence thereof
cannot be a ground to reject the prosecution case. However, at the same time, as
observed by this Court in Babu 11 , absence of motive in a case depending on

28

Prem Singh vs State Of Nct Delhi on 2 January, 2023

circumstantial evidence is a factor that weighs in favour of the accused. In paras 25
and 26, it is observed and held as under:-

“25. In State of U.P. v. Kishanpal12, this Court examined the importance of motive in
cases of circumstantial evidence and observed:

‘38. … the motive is a thing which is primarily known to the accused themselves and
it is not possible for the prosecution to explain what actually promoted or excited
them to commit the particular crime.

39. The motive may be considered as a circumstance which is relevant for assessing
the evidence but if the evidence is clear and unambiguous and the circumstances
prove the guilt of the accused, the same is not weakened even if the motive is not a
very strong one……...’

26. This Court has also held that the absence of motive in a case depending on
circumstantial evidence is a factor that weighs in favour of the accused. (Vide
Pannayar v. State of T.N.13).”” Application of the relevant principles to the facts of
this case

16. Keeping the aforesaid principles in view, when we examine the facts of this case and the
concurrent findings of the Trial Court and the High Court, we find no substance in the contentions
urged by learned counsel for the appellant.

16.1. It is amply established on record that the deceased children, aged 9 years and 6 years
respectively, died an unnatural death and though the bodies were retrieved from canal, it had not
been a case of their drowning 10 1995 Supp (1) SCC 80: 1995 SCC (Cri) 60.

11 (2010) 9 SCC 189: (2010) 3 SCC (Cri) 1179.

12 (2008) 16 SCC 73: (2010) 4 SCC (Cri) 182.

13 (2009) 9 SCC 152: (2009) 3 SCC (Civ) 638: (2010) 2 SCC (Cri) 1480. but, as specifically proved by
the post-mortem reports and the testimony of PW-14 Dr. V.K. Jha, the cause of their death had been
asphyxia as a result of manual strangulation. There is nothing on record to disbelieve the testimony
of PW-14 Dr. V.K. Jha. The only line of cross-examination of this witness had been as if he did not
carry out post-mortem examination of the dead bodies of the victim children and that he
manipulated the report at the instance of police. We are unable to find any substance or logic in this
line of cross-examination. The fact that the dead bodies of the victim children were indeed retrieved
from canal is hardly a matter of doubt and has indeed been established in the testimony of PW-18 SI
Sunil Kumar, PW-17 Inspector Pratap Singh as also other private witnesses, including the relatives
of the appellant and his wife. It had been too far-stretched to suggest that the medical officer did not
examine the dead bodies of the victim children, as sent to him by the investigating officer or his
having manipulated the report. The evidence available on record, taken as a whole, leaves nothing to

29

Prem Singh vs State Of Nct Delhi on 2 January, 2023

doubt that the victim children had been subjected to manual strangulation which resulted in their
death. Obviously, their dead bodies were thereafter thrown in the canal to project as if it were a case
of drowning.

16.2. The fact that the deceased children, when alive, were lastly in the company of the appellant
alone is also not of much doubt or debate. In this regard, even before looking at any other evidence,
suffice it to notice that PW-9 Sunita Yadav, wife of the appellant, who otherwise did not support the
prosecution case, clearly stated the crucial fact that on the day of incident, the children were left by
her with the appellant. She indeed stated that ‘on the day of incident, I went to the house of my
maternal uncle as my Nani was ill leaving my both the sons with their father/accused’. She later on
received the call from the police station about demise of her sons. Therefore, it remains rather
undeniable that the deceased children were lastly in the company of the appellant alone.

16.3. In regard to the chain of circumstances in the present case, the statements of three
independent witnesses PW-1 Naresh Kaushik, delivery boy at the Petrol Pump as also PW-4 Mahesh
Kumar Sharma and PW-6 Komal Ram, the personnel in-charge at the Water Treatment Plant
assume significance, who testified to the facts that the appellant did visit them immediately after the
incident and specifically stated before them that his sons had accidentally fallen into the canal.
There is nothing on record to disbelieve the testimony of these witnesses. We have reproduced
hereinbefore the statement of PW-1 Naresh Kaushik and it is noticeable that there had not been
anything in his cross-examination which could create any doubt on his narration. Similar had been
the position as regards the testimony of PW-4 and PW-6. In fact, PW-4 Mahesh Kumar Sharma was
not cross-examined at all; and the cross-examination of PW-6 had also essentially been of a
suggestion as if the accused-appellant did not meet him on the given day. When the statements of
independent witnesses PW- 1, PW-4 and PW-6 are read together with the statement of PW-9, wife of
the appellant, not only the circumstance of the deceased children being lastly in the company of the
accused-appellant is established but, further to that, it is also established that the appellant
attempted to create a false narrative of accidental drowning of the children. This false narrative, in
the facts of the present case, becomes another strong link in the chain of circumstances.

16.4. When the facts established by the evidence on record and the surrounding factors are put
together, the chain of circumstances had unfailingly been that the deceased children were lastly seen
alive in the company of the appellant; they died because of manual strangulation and obviously,
their death was homicidal in nature; their dead bodies were recovered from the canal; and the
appellant attempted to project that they had accidentally fallen into the canal. In the given set of
circumstances, when the deceased children were in the company of the appellant, who was none else
but their father and when their death was caused by manual strangulation, the burden, perforce,
was heavy upon the appellant to clarify the facts leading to the demise of his sons, which would be
presumed to be specially within his knowledge. Thus, the principles of Section 106 of the Evidence
Act operate heavily against the appellant. 16.4.1. It is, of course, the duty of prosecution to lead the
primary evidence of proving its case beyond reasonable doubt but, when necessary evidence had
indeed been led, the corresponding burden was heavy on the appellant in terms of Section 106 of the
Evidence Act to explain as to what had happened at the time of incident and as to how the death of
the deceased occurred. There had not been any explanation on the part of the appellant and, as

30

Prem Singh vs State Of Nct Delhi on 2 January, 2023

noticed, immediately after the incident, he attempted to create a false narrative of accidental
drowning of the children. There had not been any specific response from the appellant in his
statement under Section 313 CrPC either.

17. Taking all the facts and factors together, the chain of circumstances leading only to the
hypothesis of the guilt of the appellant has been duly visualised and analysed by the Trial Court as
also by the High Court. That being the position, learned counsel for the appellant has endeavoured
to submit that an important link in the chain of circumstances, i.e., motive, has not been established
and in that regard, reliance has particularly been placed on the statement of the wife of the appellant
PW-9 Sunita Yadav, who did not support the prosecution allegations about strained relationship of
the appellant and herself.

17.1. As noticed, motive, when proved, supplies additional link in the chain of circumstantial
evidence but, absence thereof cannot, by itself, be a ground to reject the prosecution case; although
absence of motive in a case based on circumstantial evidence is a factor that weighs in favour of the
accused.

17.2. The question of motive in the present case, in our view, cannot be examined only with
reference to the testimony of the wife of the appellant who has, even while admitting that she left the
children in the company of the appellant and thereafter heard only about their demise, chosen not to
support the accusations against the appellant. However, her testimony is contradicted by at least
three prosecution witnesses with two of them, PW- 7 Mahender Kumar Yadav and PW-8 Rajender
Yadav being her uncles, who maintained that there were strained relations of the appellant and his
wife and that the appellant doubted the character of his wife as also the paternity of the children.
Even PW-5 Bishan Singh, brother of the appellant, though attempted to depose against the
prosecution case but indeed testified to the fact that there had been strains in the relationship of the
appellant and his wife. The submission that strained relationship of appellant with his wife may not
provide sufficient motive for killing the children cannot be accepted for the reason that the motive
projected in the present case had been that the appellant doubted the paternity of the deceased
children and suspected that they were not his sons. 17.3. We are clearly of the view that when the
evidence on record unambiguously proves the guilt of the accused-appellant, the factor relating to
motive cannot displace or weaken the conclusions naturally flowing from the evidence. Moreover,
the present case cannot be said to be of want of motive altogether. Differently put, in our view, when
all the facts and circumstances are taken together, the present one is not a case where there had
been any missing link in the chain of circumstances, leading only to the conclusion of the guilt of the
appellant.

18. As noticed, the Trial Court and the High Court have concurrently recorded the findings that the
prosecution has been able to establish the chain of circumstances leading to the conclusion that the
appellant is guilty of the offence of murder of the victim children, his sons, as also the offence of
causing disappearance of evidence. There appears no infirmity in the findings so recorded.

Plea of mental incapacity of the appellant

31

Prem Singh vs State Of Nct Delhi on 2 January, 2023

19. The chain of circumstances against the appellant being complete and strong, learned counsel for
the appellant has endeavoured to make out a case of alleged unsoundness of mind of the
accused-appellant and has developed a few contentions in that regard that the intent of committing
crime cannot be imputed on the appellant looking to his mental instability; and that the entire trial
stood vitiated for want of compliance of Section 329 CrPC.

19.1. Sections 84 IPC, 86 IPC, 329 CrPC and 105 Evidence Act with its illustration (a), carrying
relevance in relation to the submissions so made, could be usefully reproduced as under: -

Sections 84 and 86 IPC “84. Act of a person of unsound mind.—Nothing is an offence
which is done by a person who, at the time of doing it, by reason of unsoundness of
mind, is incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that he is doing what is either
wrong or contrary to law.” “86. Offence requiring a particular intent or knowledge
committed by one who is intoxicated. —In cases where an act done is not an offence
unless done with a particular knowledge or intent, a person who does the act in a
state of intoxication shall be liable to be dealt with as if he had the same knowledge as
he would have had if he had not been intoxicated, unless the thing which intoxicated
him was administered to him without his knowledge or against his will.” Section 329
CrPC “329. Procedure in case of person of unsound mind tried before Court.—(1) If at
the trial of any person before a Magistrate or Court of Session, it appears to the
Magistrate or Court that such person is of unsound mind and consequently incapable
of making his defence, the Magistrate or Court shall, in the first instance, try the fact
of such unsoundness and incapacity, and if the Magistrate or Court, after considering
such medical and other evidence as may be produced before him or it, is satisfied of
the fact, he or it shall record a finding to that effect and shall postpone further
proceedings in the case.

14(1-A) If during trial, the Magistrate or Court of Sessions finds the accused to be of
unsound mind, he or it shall refer such person to a psychiatrist or clinical
psychologist for care and treatment, and the psychiatrist or clinical psychologist, as
the case may be shall report to the Magistrate or Court whether the accused is
suffering from unsoundness of mind:

Provided that if the accused is aggrieved by the information given by the psychiatric
or clinical psychologist, as the case may be, to the Magistrate, he may prefer an
appeal before the Medical Board which shall consist of—

(a) head of psychiatry unit in the nearest government hospital; and

(b) a faculty member in psychiatry in the nearest medical college.

15 (2) If such Magistrate or Court is informed that the person referred to in sub-section (1-A) is a
person of unsound mind, the Magistrate or Court shall further determine whether unsoundness of
mind renders the accused incapable of entering defence and if the accused is found so incapable, the

32

Prem Singh vs State Of Nct Delhi on 2 January, 2023

Magistrate or Court shall record a finding to that effect and shall examine the record of evidence
produced by the prosecution and after hearing the advocate of the accused but without questioning
the accused, if the Magistrate or Court finds that no prima facie case is made out against the
accused, he or it shall, instead of postponing the trial, 14 Inserted by the Code of Criminal Procedure
(Amendment) Act, 2008, Act No. 5 of 2009 (w.e.f. 31.12.2009).

15 Substituted by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2008, Act No. 5 of 2009 (w.e.f.
31.12.2009).

discharge the accused and deal with him in the manner provided under Section 330:

Provided that if the Magistrate or Court finds that a prima facie case is made out
against the accused in respect of whom a finding of unsoundness of mind is arrived
at, he shall postpone the trial for such period, as in the opinion of the psychiatrist or
clinical psychologist, is required for the treatment of the accused.

(3) If the Magistrate or Court finds that a prima facie case is made out against the
accused and he is incapable of entering defence by reason of mental retardation, he
or it shall not hold the trial and order the accused to be dealt with in accordance with
Section 330.” Section 105 Evidence Act “105. Burden of proving that case of accused
comes within exceptions.—When a person is accused of any offence, the burden of
proving the existence of circumstances bringing the case within any of the General
Exceptions in the Indian Penal Code, (45 of 1860), or within any special exception or
proviso contained in any other part of the same Code, or in any law defining the
offence, is upon him, and the Court shall presume the absence of such circumstances.

Illustrations

(a) A, accused of murder, alleges that, by reason of unsoundness of mind, he did not
know the nature of the act.

The burden of proof is on A. *** *** **”

20. As noticed, in regard to the mental status of the appellant, two-fold submissions have been made
in the present appeal. One concerning his mental incapacity at the time of commission of crime and
second, as regards the legality and validity of trial where the investigating agency and the
prosecution did not project the factors relating to mental incapacity of the appellant and the Trial
Court did not adopt the procedure envisaged by Section 329 CrPC. These submissions are founded
on the facts that the appellant was addicted to alcohol and was admitted to the rehabilitation centre
for de-addiction. It has also been underscored that the family members of the appellant got him
discharged from the rehabilitation centre against advice and without letting him complete the
course for rehabilitation to its expected duration. The submissions carry several shortcomings and
could only be rejected in the facts of the present case.

33

Prem Singh vs State Of Nct Delhi on 2 January, 2023

21. It remains trite that the burden of proving the existence of circumstances so as to bring the case
within the purview of Section 84 IPC lies on the accused in terms of Section 105 of the Evidence Act;
and where the accused is charged of murder, the burden to prove that as a result of unsoundness of
mind, the accused was incapable of knowing the consequences of his acts is on the defence, as duly
exemplified by illustration (a) to the said Section 105 of the Evidence Act. As noticed, the mandate of
law is that the Court shall presume absence of the circumstances so as to take the case within any of
the General Exceptions in the Indian Penal Code, 1860. The principles of burden of proof in the
context of plea of unsoundness of mind had been stated by this Court in the case of Dahyabhai
Chhaganbhai Thakkar (supra) in the following terms: -

“7. The doctrine of burden of proof in the context of the plea of insanity may be stated
in the following propositions: (1) The prosecution must prove beyond reasonable
doubt that the accused had committed the offence with the requisite mens rea, and
the burden of proving that always rests on the prosecution from the beginning to the
end of the trial. (2) There is a rebuttable presumption that the accused was not
insane, when he committed the crime, in the sense laid down by Section 84 of the
Indian Penal Code: the accused may rebut it by placing before the court all the
relevant evidence oral, documentary or circumstantial, but the burden of proof upon
him is no higher than that rests upon a party to civil proceedings. (3) Even if the
accused was not able to establish conclusively that he was insane at the time he
committed the offence, the evidence placed before the court by the accused or by the
prosecution may raise a reasonable doubt in the mind of the court as regards one or
more of the ingredients of the offence, including mens rea of the accused and in that
case the court would be entitled to acquit the accused on the ground that the general
burden of proof resting on the prosecution was not discharged.”

22. As noticed, the prosecution has proved beyond reasonable doubt that the accused has committed
the offences of murdering the children and causing disappearance of evidence. The other
surrounding factors also show that prosecution has proved the requisite mens rea with reference to
the manner of commission of crimes and projecting false narratives by the appellant. In the given
set of facts and circumstances, on the submission as made as regards unsoundness of mind, the
question in the present case is as to whether the accused-appellant has been able to establish that he
was insane at the time of committing the offence or anything has been projected on record for which
even a reasonable doubt could be entertained as regards mens rea? The answer to this question, in
our view, could only be in the negative.

23. The evidence on record, taken as a whole, at the most shows that the appellant was addicted to
alcohol and was admitted to the rehabilitation centre for de-addiction. However, there is absolutely
nothing on record to show that the appellant was medically treated as a person of unsound mind or
was legally required to be taken as a person of unsound mind. Contrary to the suggestions made on
behalf of the appellant, the testimony of PW-3 Jagbir, manager of rehabilitation centre, had been
clear and specific that during his stay in the centre, no mental illness was observed in the appellant
nor was he treated for any mental illness. PW-3 stated in categorical terms that the behaviour of the
appellant ‘was normal during his said stay and he was never given any medicine for mental illness

34

Prem Singh vs State Of Nct Delhi on 2 January, 2023

because neither any mental illness was observed in him nor his family members gave us any
previous history of his suffering from any mental illness.’ In his cross-examination, this witness
further removed any doubt in regard to the mental status of the appellant while maintaining that the
appellant ‘was mentally fit and sound during his stay at our centre and he was admitted only for
de-addiction of his habit of consuming liquor.’ Hence, the appellant’s had only been a case of
addiction to alcohol. The manager, PW-3, of course, suggested the opinion that the appellant ought
to have undergone the course for a period of 7-9 months and that the family members got him
discharged against advice but, this statement cannot be read to mean that the appellant was to be
treated as a person of unsound mind. In fact, the appellant remained admitted to the rehabilitation
centre from 20.11.2008 to 29.04.2009, i.e., for a period of over 5 months and, as noticed above, he
was never found suffering from any mental illness so as to be regarded as a person of unsound mind.

24. It is also noticed that the plea of unsoundness of mind and, therefore, the benefit of Section 84
IPC, was never taken in the trial nor any evidence was led in this regard. Significantly, not even a
remote suggestion was made to any witness examined for the prosecution about the alleged mental
incapacity of the appellant. In his examination under Section 313 CrPC, the response of the
appellant to the questions relating to his admission to the rehabilitation centre and the related facts
had been that those aspects were ‘a matter of record’. In the given set of facts and circumstances, we
are unable to find anything on record for which the benefit of Section 84 IPC could even be remotely
extended to the appellant.

25. Similarly, the submissions that when the state of mind/mental condition of appellant was
brought on record, the Trial Court ought to have ordered an evaluation to rule out any doubt,
remain rather bereft of logic. 25.1. In the relied upon passage in the decision of Gujarat High Court
cited on behalf of the appellant in case of Manjuben (supra), the Court had explained the basics
relating to the operation of Section 329 CrPC and its distinction from Section 84 IPC in following
terms: -

“43. *** *** ***

23. Section 329 of the Cr.P.C. on the other hand, provides for a procedure in case of a person of
unsound mind tried before the Court. Section makes it clear that in a trial before the Magistrate or
Court of Sessions, if the accused appears to be of unsound mind and consequently incapable of
making his defence, then the Court shall, in the first instance, try the fact of such unsoundness of
mind and incapacity and if satisfied in this regard, shall record a finding to that effect and shall
postpone the further proceedings. This Section is similar to Section 328 of the Cr.P.C. with
this-difference that the latter relates to an enquiry before a Magistrate, while this Section relates to
the trial before the Magistrate or Court of Sessions. However, both the Sections relate to
unsoundness of mind at the time of inquiry or trial that the accused is of unsound mind. A
Magistrate cannot act on his own opinion. He must have before him a statement of medical officer,
who must be examined. Where the Court decides that the accused is of unsound mind and
consequently incapable of making his defence, the trial is to be postponed. As provided in Section
330 of the Cr.P.C. such a person may be released on sufficient security being given that he shall be
properly taken care of and shall be prevented from doing injury to himself or to any other person or

35

Prem Singh vs State Of Nct Delhi on 2 January, 2023

for his appearance when required before the Magistrate or the Court. The Court or the Magistrate is
also entitled to direct the accused to be detained in safe custody in such a place and manner as it
may think fit if it is of the view that the bail should not be taken or sufficient security is not given.
Section 331 of the Cr.P.C. thereafter talks of resumption of enquiry or trial, when the concerned
persons ceases to be of unsound mind. Section 332 of the Cr.P.C. prescribes a procedure to proceed
with the trial or enquiry as the case may be.

*** *** ***” 25.1.1. The aforesaid expositions on the scope of the provisions relating to accused
person of unsound mind are not of much debate. However, nothing of the aforesaid principles could
apply to the present case, for there had been no material on record and no other reason appeared
during trial for which, the Trial Court would have been obliged to take recourse of the procedure
contemplated by Section 329 CrPC.

25.2. Similarly, the suggestions about defect in trial or failure on the part of the investigating agency
to get the appellant examined through psychiatrist with reference to the decision of the Bombay HC
in case of Ajay Ram Pandit (supra) remain too far-stretched. In the said case, it was noticed that the
investigating officer became aware of the fact after apprehending the accused that he was mentally
unstable and in fact, the people in his locality used to consider him as a mad man. The fact situation
of the present case is entirely different.

25.3. In the given set of facts and circumstances, we are not dilating on the other decisions cited by
the learned counsel for the appellant for being not relevant for the present purpose. Fact of the
matter in the present case remains that there is nothing on record to show that the appellant was a
person of unsound mind, whether at the time of commission of crimes or during the course of trial.

26. Apart that there was no fault on the part of the Trial Court or the investigating agency, it is also
noteworthy that contrary to even a trace of want of mental capacity of the appellant at the time of
commission of the crimes in question, the manner of commission, with strangulation of the children
one by one; throwing of their dead bodies into the canal; appellant himself swimming in the canal
and coming out; and immediately thereafter, stating before several persons that the children had
accidentally slipped into the canal so as to project it as a case of accidental drowning, if at all, show
an alert and calculative mind, which had worked with specific intent to cause the death of the
children and to cause disappearance of evidence by throwing dead bodies into the canal and
thereafter, to mislead by giving a false narrative. By no logic and by no measure of assessment, the
appellant, who is found to have carried all the aforesaid misdeeds, could be said to be a person of
unsound mind.

27. Thus, we are clearly of the view that the appellant was neither suffering from any medically
determined mental illness nor could be said to be a person under a legal disability of unsound mind.
Hence, neither Section 84 IPC applies to the present case nor Section 329 CrPC would come to the
rescue of the appellant.

28. The suggestions about treatment of the appellant for his abnormal behaviour in jail also does not
take his case any further. As noticed, there is nothing on record to find that the appellant was a

36

Prem Singh vs State Of Nct Delhi on 2 January, 2023

person of unsound mind at the time of commission of crime or was a person of unsound mind when
tried in this case. Post-conviction behaviour is hardly of any relevance so far as present appeal is
concerned. In fact, his post-conviction abnormalities, as dealt with in year 2013 i.e., nearly two years
after the impugned judgment of the Trial Court, cannot even remotely be correlated with the
relevant questions arising for the purpose of present appeal. Even in that regard, the report of the
Medical Officer (I/C) Central Jail No. 5, Tihar New Delhi dated 22.07.2013 states that the appellant
was admitted to psychiatry ward from 07.01.2013 to 04.03.2013 for complaints of abnormal
behaviour but, he improved following treatment and at time of issuance of certificate, his general
condition was satisfactory; and his mental status examination did not reveal any gross
psychopathology.

29. Hence, viewed from any angle, the contention urged on behalf of appellant, as to be given the
benefit of the provisions meant for a person of unsound mind, cannot be accepted. The said
provisions do not enure to the benefit of the appellant from any standpoint.

30. We may in the passing also observe that in the given set of facts and circumstances, even when
the appellant was shown to be a person taken to excessive consumption of alcohol, there is nothing
on record to show if he did the offending acts in a state of intoxication so as to give rise to a doubt
about intention with reference to the principles underlying Section 86 IPC. We need not elaborate
on this aspect for the same having not been projected in evidence at all. In other words, the present
one is not a case where intent could be ruled out so as to reduce the offence of murder to that of
culpable homicide not amounting to murder. The suggestions about altering the conviction to
Section 304 IPC are also required to be rejected.

Conclusion

31. For what has been discussed hereinabove, we are satisfied that there is no infirmity in the
findings concurrently recorded by the Trial Court and the High Court that the prosecution case is
amply established by cogent and convincing chain of circumstances, pointing only to the guilt of the
appellant, who caused the death of victim children, his sons, by strangulation and also caused the
evidence of offence to disappear by throwing the dead bodies into the canal. The submissions
evolved for the purpose of the present appeal that the appellant be extended the benefit of alleged
want of mental capacity also remain baseless and could only be rejected. Therefore, no case for
interference is made out.

32. Consequently, this appeal fails and is, therefore, dismissed.

……....……………………. J.

(DINESH MAHESHWARI) ……....……………………. J.

(SUDHANSHU DHULIA) NEW DELHI;

JANUARY 02, 2023.

37