Qamar Ghani Usmani vs The State Of Gujarat on 10 April, 2023

Qamar Ghani Usmani vs The State Of Gujarat on 10 April, 2023

Author: M.R. Shah

Bench: C.T. Ravikumar, M.R. Shah

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 1045−1046/2023
SLP (CRL) NOS. 011196 − 011197 / 2022

Qamar Ghani Usmani                      ...Appellant(s)

Versus

The State of Gujarat               …Respondent(s)

JUDGMENT

M.R. SHAH, J.

1. Leave granted.

2. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment and order dated 23.09.2022
passed by the High Court of Gujarat at Ahmedabad in Criminal Appeal Nos. 1215/2022 and
1216/2022, by which, the Division Bench of the High Court has dismissed the said appeals and has
refused to release the appellant – accused on statutory bail (default bail) under Section 167(2) of the
Cr.PC, the original accused has preferred the present appeals.

3. The facts leading to the present appeals in a nutshell are as under: − 3.1 That the accused came to
be arrested on 29.01.2022. The 90 days period as provided under Section 167 of the Cr.PC,
therefore, was to expire on 29.04.2022. However, on 22.04.2022, the Investigating Officer prayed
for extension of time to complete the investigation which came to be granted by the learned Trial
Court by granting extension of 30 days period. The accused came to be informed about the
extension on 23.04.2022 itself. On 22.05.2022, the Investigating Officer again prayed for further
extension which came to be allowed by the learned Trial Court on 22.05.2022. At this stage, it is
required to be noted that on 22.05.2022, the second extension was granted in the presence of the
accused. In the meantime, the accused submitted the default bail application on 10.05.2022 on the
ground that at the time when the first extension was granted on 22.04.2022, the same was not in the
presence of the accused and the accused was not kept present and therefore, first extension was bad

1

Qamar Ghani Usmani vs The State Of Gujarat on 10 April, 2023

in law and therefore, the accused acquired right to get the default bail on 10.05.2022. The learned
Trial Court rejected the said application(s). The Division Bench of the High Court by the impugned
judgment and order has dismissed the appeals. Hence, the present appeals at the instance of the
original accused.

4. Shri Mehmood Pracha, learned counsel has appeared on behalf of the appellant and Shri Tushar
Mehta, learned Solicitor General has appeared on behalf of the respondent – State of Gujarat.

4.1 Shri Pracha, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the accused has vehemently submitted that
as such the judgment and order which has been relied upon by the Division Bench of the High Court
has been subsequently set aside by this Court in the case of Jigar alias Jimmy Pravinchandra
Adatiya Vs. State of Gujarat 2022 SCC OnLine SC 1290.

4.2 It is further submitted by Shri Pracha, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the accused that it
is admitted by the prosecution that the appellant was not produced before the learned Trial Court at
the time of consideration of application for first extension of period of investigation. It is submitted
that in the case of Hitendra Vishnu Thakur and Ors. Vs. State of Maharashtra and Ors. (1994) 4 SCC
602 and in the case of Sanjay Dutt Vs. State through CBI, Bombay (II) (1994) 5 SCC 410, notice to
the accused at the time of consideration of application for extension of period of investigation has
been held to be mandatory. It is submitted that in the case of Sanjay Dutt (supra), this Court has
further interpreted to mean that a written notice is not mandatory but the presence of the accused
suffices. It is submitted that therefore, even as per the law laid−down by this Court in the case of
Sanjay Dutt (supra) at the time of consideration of application for extension of period of
investigation, the presence of the accused is must. It is submitted that therefore, in the present case
when the first extension was granted on 22.04.2022 admittedly the accused was not produced
before the learned Trial Court, the first extension before itself is illegal and not an extension in the
eye of law and therefore, thereafter when the accused filed the application(s) under Section 167(2) of
the Cr.PC for default bail/statutory bail, the accused had acquired a indefeasible right for release on
statutory bail as by the time 90 days period was over and the first extension is to be ignored.

4.3 It is further submitted by learned counsel appearing on behalf of the accused that as observed
and held by this Court in the case of Sayed Mohd. Ahmed Kazmi Vs. State (2012) 12 SCC 1 extension
of period of investigation from retrospective effect, after the initial order has been set aside, is not
permissible.

4.4 It is further submitted by learned counsel appearing on behalf of the accused that recently in the
case of Jigar (supra) this Court after taking into consideration the decisions of this Court in the cases
of Hitendra Vishnu Thakur (supra) and Sanjay Dutt (supra), has specifically reiterated the
proposition that failure to produce the accused at the time of extension of period of investigation
renders such extension bad in law and entitles the accused to statutory bail.

4.5 Making the above submissions and heavily relying upon the decisions of this Court in the cases
of Hitendra Vishnu Thakur (supra); Sayed Mohd. Ahmed Kazmi (supra); Sanjay Dutt (supra) and
Jigar (supra), it is prayed to allow the present appeals and direct the respondent to release the

2

appellant – accused on statutory bail.

Qamar Ghani Usmani vs The State Of Gujarat on 10 April, 2023

5. While opposing the present appeals, Shri Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor General appearing on
behalf of the State has vehemently submitted that as such the decision of this Court in the case of
Hitendra Vishnu Thakur (supra) has been subsequently watered down by this Court in the case of
Sanjay Dutt (supra). It is submitted that the view taken by this Court in the case of Hitendra Vishnu
Thakur (supra) that at the time of extension of time for investigation, a notice to the accused is
required to be given by the Designated Court before it grants any extension is no longer a good law
in view of the subsequent decision of this Court in the case of Sanjay Dutt (supra). It is submitted
that in the case of Sanjay Dutt (supra) this Court has explained the decision in the case of Hitendra
Vishnu Thakur (supra) and has observed and held that the only requirement is the production of the
accused before the Court in accordance with Section 167(1) of the Cr.PC and that the accused is not
entitled to written notice giving reasons for the extension.

5.1 Now so far as the reliance placed upon the decision of this Court in the case of Jigar (supra) is
concerned, it is vehemently submitted that as such the said decision requires reconsideration by the
Larger Bench as in the said decision this Court has not taken into consideration Section 465 of the
Cr.PC. It is submitted that this Court has failed to consider the law laid−down by this Court in the
case of Rambeer Shokeen Vs. State (2018) 4 SCC 405, in which it was categorically held that the
accused persons are entitled to the right of the default bail only after rejection of the application for
extension of time period for investigation or when the chargesheet is not filed within the prescribed
time. 5.2 It is further submitted that even otherwise as observed and held by this Court in the case of
Narender G. Goel Vs. State of Maharashtra (2009) 6 SCC 65 the accused has no right to be heard at
the stage of investigation and more particularly, at the stage of extension of period for investigation.

It is submitted that as observed and held by this Court, the accused is not entitled to have the
reasonings for extension of period of investigation because accused has no right to be heard at the
stage of investigation.

5.3 It is further submitted by Shri Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor General appearing on behalf of
the State that even otherwise, in the facts and circumstances of the case, the appellant is not entitled
to any relief(s) as prayed, more particularly, the statutory bail. It is submitted that the first extension
was granted by the learned Trial Court on 22.04.2022. The accused was informed about extension of
time for investigation immediately on the very next day i.e., 23.04.2022. It is submitted that nothing
was done by the accused even on 29.04.2022 (when the 90 days period was over). It is submitted
that though the accused was informed about the extension of time for investigation on 23.04.2022,
till 10.05.2022 he did not challenge the extension of time for investigation for a further period of 30
days granted on 22.04.2022. It is submitted that even thereafter when the second extension was
sought and granted on 22.05.2022 on which date the accused was present and in whose presence
the extension was granted, no grievance was made by the accused on the legality and validity of
earlier order dated 22.04.2022 granting the extension for a further period of 30 days. It is submitted
that therefore, once the accused failed to challenge the first order of extension dated 22.04.2022 on
whatever grounds available and allowed the period of extension and thereafter at the time when the
second extension was granted the accused was present and he did not make any grievance with

3

Qamar Ghani Usmani vs The State Of Gujarat on 10 April, 2023

respect to the first extension granted on 22.04.2022, thereafter, it is not open for the accused to
make any grievance on the grant of first extension granted on 22.04.2022.

5.4 It is submitted that therefore, at the time when the accused preferred application(s) for
statutory/default bail on 10.05.2022, there was already an extension of time for investigation by the
learned Trial Court vide order dated 22.04.2022, which was not challenged by the accused and
therefore, the application(s) for default/statutory bail during the period of extension would not be
maintainable at all as the said application(s) were made during the period of extension for
investigation. It is submitted by Shri Mehta, learned Solicitor General that even in the application(s)
for default/statutory bail preferred on 10.05.2022, the accused did not even disclose that the learned
Trial Court had granted the extension for investigation vide order dated 22.04.2022 which as such
was communicated to the accused on 23.04.2022. It is submitted that therefore, in view of the above
facts, none of the decisions of this Court relied upon on behalf of the accused shall be applicable to
the facts of the case on hand. It is submitted that so far as the reliance placed upon the decision of
this Court in the case of Sayed Mohd. Ahmed Kazmi (supra) is concerned, it is submitted by learned
Solicitor General that on facts the said decision shall not be applicable to the facts of the case on
hand. It is submitted that in the case before this Court, in fact the extension was challenged before
the Sessions Court and the extension was held to be bad in law.

5.5 Making the above submissions, it is prayed to dismiss the present appeals.

6. We have heard Shri Mehmood Pracha, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the accused –
appellant and Shri Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor General appearing on behalf of the State of
Gujarat.

6.1 The short question which is posed for the consideration of this Court is whether in the facts and
circumstances of the case, the appellant shall be entitled to the statutory/default bail under Section
167(2) of the Cr.PC on the ground that at the time when the extension of time for completing the
investigation was prayed by the investigating agency and granted by the Trial Court the accused was
not kept present?

6.2 Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant – accused has heavily relied upon the
decisions of this Court in the cases of Hitendra Vishnu Thakur (supra); Sanjay Dutt (supra); Sayed
Mohd. Ahmed Kazmi (supra) and on the recent decision of this Court in the case of Jigar (supra).
6.2.1 In the case of Hitendra Vishnu Thakur (supra), this Court observed and held that when a
report is submitted by the Public Prosecutor to the Designated Court for grant of extension, its
notice should be issued to the accused before granting such an extension so that the accused may
have an opportunity to oppose the extension on all legitimate and legal grounds available to him.

6.2.2 However, thereafter, the decision of this Court in the case of Hitendra Vishnu Thakur (supra)
fell for consideration before this Court in the case of Sanjay Dutt (supra) and the view taken by this
Court in the case of Hitendra Vishnu Thakur (supra) as above, has not been accepted by the
Constitution Bench of this Court and it is observed and held in the case of Sanjay Dutt (supra) that a
notice to the accused is not required to be given by the Designated Court before it grants any

4

Qamar Ghani Usmani vs The State Of Gujarat on 10 April, 2023

extension for completing the investigation. Meaning thereby, the accused is to be kept present
before the Court when it grants any extension for completing the investigation. The view taken by
this Court in the case of Hitendra Vishnu Thakur (supra) that a notice is to be given to the accused
so that he can oppose the extension has not been accepted by the Constitution Bench of this Court in
the case of Sanjay Dutt (supra). As such under the Scheme of Cr.PC and on the report submitted by
the Investigating Agency, prayer for extension of time for completing investigation is subject to the
satisfaction of the concerned Court whether to grant further extension or not. The Court is to be
satisfied on the grounds on which the extension is sought.

6.2.3 Now so far as the reliance placed upon the decision of this Court in the case of Sayed Mohd.
Ahmed Kazmi (supra) by learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant is concerned, at the
outset, it is required to be noted that the said decision shall not be applicable to the facts of the case
on hand. In the case before this Court, in fact, the extension granted by the learned Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate was challenged on the ground that the learned Chief Metropolitan
Magistrate had no competence to extend the judicial custody of the accused. The learned Additional
Sessions Judge accepted the same. However, thereafter, a fresh extension was sought which was
beyond the period prescribed under Section 167 of the Cr.PC and therefore, this Court observed and
held that extension for period of investigation from retrospective effect shall not be permissible. 6.3
Similarly, even the decision of this Court in the case of Rambeer Shokeen (supra) relied upon by
learned Solicitor General shall also not be applicable to the facts of the case on hand. In the case of
Rambeer Shokeen (supra) pending application by the Investigating Agency for extension of time for
completing the investigation, the accused made an application for statutory/default bail and to that
this Court observed and held that the application filed by the Investigating Agency for extension of
time for completing the investigation which was prayed in time kept pending ought to be decided
first by the Court.

6.4 Thus, sum and substance of law laid−down by this Court in the cases of Sanjay Dutt (supra) and
Jigar (supra) are that while considering the application by the Investigating Agency for extension of
time for completing the investigation beyond the period prescribed under Section 167(2) of the
Cr.PC the accused is to be given notice and/or is to be kept present before the Court, so that, the
accused had knowledge that the extension is sought and granted. 6.5 However, in the facts and
circumstances of the case, we are of the view that the appellant is not entitled to the relief of
statutory/default bail. In the present case the facts are glaring which are as under: − ……The accused
was arrested on 29.01.2022. The 90 days provided under Section 167 Cr.PC thus would expire on
29.04.2022.

Within the period of 90 days i.e., on 22.04.2022, the IO submitted the report and prayed for
extension of time for completing the investigation which came to be allowed by the learned Trial
Court by granting extension of 30 days period. It is true that for whatever reason, the accused was
not kept present at the time when the learned Trial Court considered the report submitted by the IO
for extension of time for completing the investigation. However, the accused came to be informed
about the extension on the very next day i.e., 23.04.2022. The accused did not challenge the
extension on any ground which may be available to him and/or did not make any grievance that
such an extension is illegal and/or contrary to law. On 10.05.2022, he made the present application

5

Qamar Ghani Usmani vs The State Of Gujarat on 10 April, 2023

for default bail/statutory bail on the ground that the chargesheet has not been filed within the
period of 90 days. At this stage, it is required to be noted that at the time when the present
application for default/statutory bail was made on 10.05.2022, there was already an extension of
time by the learned Trial Court which as such was in existence and the extension was up to
22.05.2022. At this stage, it is required to be noted that though informed on 23.04.2022 about the
extension of time for completing the investigation, the accused did not disclose the same in the
application for default bail/statutory bail submitted on 10.05.2022. That thereafter, on 22.05.2022,
IO again submitted the report for further extension of time for completing the investigation which
came to be allowed/granted by the learned Trial Court which as such was in the presence of the
accused and at that time, the accused remained present. Neither the first extension nor the second
extension came to be challenged by the accused.”

7. Therefore, in the aforesaid peculiar facts and circumstances of the case, when two extensions
granted by the Court which are not challenged and at the time when the default bail application was
made on 10.05.2022 there was already an extension and even thereafter, also there was a second
extension which was in presence of the accused and thereafter, when the chargesheet has been filed
within the period of extension, the accused is not entitled to be released on statutory/default bail as
prayed. Therefore, in the facts and circumstances of the case, we are in agreement with the ultimate
conclusion reached by the High Court denying the statutory/default bail to the accused.

8. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above and, in the facts, and circumstances of the
case narrated hereinabove, the appellant is not entitled to the benefit of statutory/default bail.
Under the circumstances, the present appeals deserve to be dismissed and are accordingly
dismissed. However, it will be open for the accused to prayer for regular bail which may be
considered in accordance with law and on its own merits. Present appeals stand dismissed
accordingly.

………………………………….J. [M.R. SHAH] ………………………………….J. [C.T. RAVIKUMAR] NEW
DELHI;

APRIL 10, 2023

6