Rajo @ Rajwa @ Rajendra Mandal vs The State Of Bihar on 25 August, 2023

Rajo @ Rajwa @ Rajendra Mandal vs The State Of Bihar on 25
August, 2023

Author: S. Ravindra Bhat

Bench: Prashant Kumar Mishra, S. Ravindra Bhat

1

2023INSC771                                                                                        REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

WRIT PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO(S). 252 OF 2023

RAJO @ RAJWA @ RAJENDRA MANDAL                                                   …APPELLANT(S)

VERSUS

THE STATE OF BIHAR & ORS.                                                     …RESPONDENT(S)

JUDGMENT

S. RAVINDRA BHAT, J.

1. The petitioner, currently serving a sentence of life imprisonment for commission of offences
punishable under Section 302/34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and Section 27 of the Arms Act,
1959 approaches this court under its Article 32 jurisdiction, seeking appropriate direction to the first
respondent to prematurely release him, on the ground that he has been in custody for 24 years
without grant of remission or parole.

2. The petitioner (aged 40, at the time), with three other co-accused persons, was convicted1 on
24.05.2001 for the murder of three persons – two of which were police personnel (dafadars) and the
third being a chowkidar, who were all on duty during a village mela – by indiscriminate firing, while
they were waiting By the Sessions Court, Madhepura in Sessions Case No. 123/2000 and Sessions
Case No. 194/2000.

1

Rajo @ Rajwa @ Rajendra Mandal vs The State Of Bihar on 25 August, 2023

to be served food. The petitioner was accused to be one among those who had shot at the deceased
victims, in a premediated and planned manner. The trial court sentenced the petitioner and three
other co-accused persons to undergo rigorous imprisonment for life; while three other accused were
acquitted on all charges. A co-accused (Baudha Mandal), who was the first to fire at the victims, was
killed during the pendency of investigation/trial in a police encounter. The petitioner’s conviction
and sentence (along with that of three other co-accused convicts), was affirmed by the High Court
on 01.09.2005.2 Owing to a lack of means and awareness, the petitioner could not approach this
court to challenge the same, and his conviction by the High Court, attained finality.

3. Pursuant to an order of this court, after notice was issued, the respondent- state has filed an
affidavit indicating the computation of his period of sentence undergone, the status of his plea for
remission to be granted, as well as the remission policies (as amended from time to time) of the
state government. This affidavit confirms that the petitioner long completed 14 years of actual
imprisonment (on 19.07.2013), and in fact has, as on 26.07.2023, completed over 24 years of actual
imprisonment. Accounting for the remission earned (of over 4 years and 8 months of remission, i.e.,
a total 1694 days), he has served 28 years, 8 months and 21 days. It is pertinent to mention that he
completed 20 years of actual imprisonment on 19.07.2019, and if computed with remission earned
as per prevailing rules, then on 05.11.2014 itself.

4. After the completion of the mandatory 14 years actual imprisonment, and 20 years of custody
with remission, the petitioner’s case (application dated 14.04.2021) was considered by the
Remission Board on 19.05.2021. In accordance with the prescribed rules, prior to this meeting, the
opinion of the Presiding Officer of the convicting court, probation officer and Superintendent of By
the Patna High Court in Criminal Appeal No. 327/2001 (which was disposed along with Criminal
Appeal No 309/2001, filed by three co-accused persons).

Police, was also sought. The Board rejected the petitioner’s application for premature release –
despite a favourable report by the Probation Officer and Superintendent of Police – noting the
adverse report by the Presiding Judge.

5. After this rejection, a writ petition was filed before the High Court, seeking relief similar to what is
sought in the present petition. It was however dismissed for non-prosecution. Later, in terms of
prevailing rules3, the petitioner’s proposal was again put up before the Remission Board in its
meeting dated 20.04.2023. This time, the proposal was rejected in light of adverse/negative
opinions received from the Superintendent of Police, Purnea and the Presiding Officer of the
convicting court, and noting Rule 529(iv)(b) of the remission policy contained in the Bihar Jail
Manual (as amended by Notification dated 10.12.2002 and notified on 28.12.2002). The relevant
rule is extracted below:

“(iv) Ineligibility for premature release The following category of convicted prisoners
undergoing life sentence may not be considered eligible for premature release. –

a) Prisoners convicted of the heinous offences such as rape, dacoity, terrorist crimes,
etc.

2

Rajo @ Rajwa @ Rajendra Mandal vs The State Of Bihar on 25 August, 2023

b) Prisoners who have been convicted for organized murder in a premeditated
manner and in an organized manner.

c) Professional murders who have been found guilty of murder by hiring.

d) Convicted prisoners, who commit murder while involving in smuggling operations
or who are guilty of murder of public servants on duty” (emphasis supplied)

6. These are the facts, leading to the present writ petition.

Analysis and conclusion

7. Section 432(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereafter ‘CrPC’) empowers the
appropriate government to suspend or remit sentences and applies only in the case of additional
remission, over and above what is earned as per the Rule 6(d) of the Notification No. 3106 dated
10.12.2002 which stipulates that rejection of proposal for pre- mature release shall not be a bar for
reconsideration.

jail manual or statutory rules.4 Section 432(2) prescribes the procedure whereby the appropriate
government may seek the opinion of the Presiding Judge of the court before, or by which the
applicant had been convicted, on whether the applications should be allowed or rejected, along with
reasoning. Section 432(2) of the CrPC is extracted for ready reference:

“432. Power to suspend or remit sentences.—(1)*** (2) Whenever an application is
made to the appropriate Government for the suspension or remission of a sentence,
the appropriate Government may require the Presiding Judge of the Court before or
by which the conviction was had or confirmed, to state his opinion as to whether the
application should be granted or refused, together with his reasons for such opinion
and also to forward with the statement of such opinion a certified copy of the record
of the trial or of such record thereof as exists.”

8. This statutory power to grant remission is limited by Section 433A (which was incorporated in the
CrPC subsequently5) when it comes to those convicted for an offence where death is one of the
punishments:

“ 4 3 3 - A .   R e s t r i c t i o n   o n   p o w e r s   o f   r e m i s s i o n   o r   c o m m u t a t i o n   i n   c e r t a i n
cases.—Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 432, where a sentence of
imprisonment for life is imposed on conviction of a person for an offence for which
death is one of the punishments provided by law, or where a sentence of death
imposed on a person has been commuted under Section 433 into one of
imprisonment for life, such person shall not be released from prison unless he had
served at least fourteen years of imprisonment.”

3

Rajo @ Rajwa @ Rajendra Mandal vs The State Of Bihar on 25 August, 2023

9. Sentencing is a judicial exercise of power. The act thereafter of executing the sentence awarded,
however, is a purely executive function – which includes the grant of remission, commutation,
pardon, reprieves, or suspension of sentence.6 This executive power is traceable to Article 72 and
161 of the Constitution of India, by which the President of India, and Governor of the State,
respectively, are empowered to grant pardons and to suspend, remit or commute Sangeet v. State of
Haryana [2012] 13 SCR 85.

By Act 45 of 1978, sec. 32 (w.e.f. 18.12.1978).

See Gopal Vinayak Godse v. State of Maharashtra [1961] 3 SCR 440; Maru Ram v. Union of India
[1981] 1 SCR 1196; Sarat Chandra Rabha v. Khagendranath Nath [1961] 2 SCR 133; Kehar Singh v.
Union of India [1988] Supp. 3 SCR 1102.

sentences in certain cases. Whilst the statutory (under Section 432 CrPC) and constitutional (under
Articles 72 and 161 of the Constitution) powers are distinct- the former limited power, is still an
imprint of the latter (much wider power), and must be understood as such and placed in this
context. This framework of executive power and how it is to be exercised, is lucidly explained, in the
judgment of State of Haryana v. Jagdish7:

“27. Nevertheless we may point out that the power of the sovereign to grant remission
is within its exclusive domain and it is for this reason that our Constitution makers
went on to incorporate the provisions of Article 72 and Article 161 of the Constitution
of India. This responsibility was cast upon the executive through a constitutional
mandate to ensure that some public purpose may require fulfilment by grant of
remission in appropriate cases. This power was never intended to be used or utilised
by the executive as an unbridled power of reprieve. Power of clemency is to be
exercised cautiously and in appropriate cases, which in effect, mitigates the sentence
of punishment awarded and which does not, in any way, wipe out the conviction. It is
a power which the sovereign exercises against its own judicial mandate. The act of
remission of the State does not undo what has been done judicially. The punishment
awarded through a judgment is not overruled but the convict gets benefit of a
liberalised policy of State pardon. However, the exercise of such power under Article
161 of the Constitution or under Section 433-A CrPC may have a different flavour in
the statutory provisions, as short-sentencing policy brings about a mere reduction in
the period of imprisonment whereas an act of clemency under Article 161 of the
Constitution commutes the sentence itself.”

10. That this executive power which is inherently discretionary in nature, has to be exercised fairly,
reasonably, and not arbitrarily, has been held by this court in numerous cases.8 Absence to do so,
would - like is the case for other executive action - compel the court to exercise its judicial review,
and in appropriate cases remit the matter for reconsideration.9 The procedure laid out in Section
432(2), has been held to be mandatory by a five-judge bench of this court, in Union of India v. V.
Sriharan10. The court also observed how the said procedure operated [2010] 3 SCR 716 [hereafter
referred to as ‘Jagdish’] State of Haryana v. Mohinder Singh [2000] 1 SCR 698; Sangeet v. State of

4

Rajo @ Rajwa @ Rajendra Mandal vs The State Of Bihar on 25 August, 2023

Haryana [2012] 13 SCR 85; Union of India v. V. Sriharan [2015] 14 SCR 613; Rajan v. The Home
Secretary, Home Department of Tamil Nadu [2019] 6 SCR 1035; Ram Chander v. State of
Chhattisgarh [2022] 4 SCR 1103.

See Rajan and Ram Chander (ibid).

[2015] 14 SCR 613 [hereafter referred to as ‘Sriharan’].

as a safeguard, much like the ones provided under Article 72 and 161 of the Constitution:

“141. […] Therefore, when in the course of exercise of larger constitutional powers of
similar kind under Articles 72 and 161 of the Constitution it has been opined by this
Court to be exercised with great care and caution, the one exercisable under a statute,
namely, under Section 432(1)CrPC which is lesser in degree should necessarily be
held to be exercisable in tune with the adjunct provision contained in the same
section. Viewed in that respect, we find that the procedure to be followed whenever
any application for remission is moved, the safeguard provided under Section
432(2)CrPC should be the sine qua non for the ultimate power to be exercised under
Section 432(1)CrPC.

142. By following the said procedure prescribed under Section 432(2), the action of
the appropriate Government is bound to survive and stand the scrutiny of all
concerned, including the judicial forum. It must be remembered, barring minor
offences, in cases involving heinous crimes like, murder, kidnapping, rape, robbery,
dacoity, etc. and such other offences of such magnitude, the verdict of the trial court
is invariably dealt with and considered by the High Court and in many cases by the
Supreme Court. Thus, having regard to the nature of opinion to be rendered by the
Presiding Officer of the court concerned will throw much light on the nature of crime
committed, the record of the convict himself, his background and other relevant
factors which will enable the appropriate Government to take the right decision as to
whether or not suspension or remission of sentence should be granted. It must also
be borne in mind that while for the exercise of the constitutional power under
Articles 72 and 161, the Executive Head will have the benefit of act and advice of the
Council of Ministers, for the exercise of power under Section 432(1)CrPC, the
appropriate Government will get the valuable opinion of the judicial forum, which
will definitely throw much light on the issue relating to grant of suspension or
remission.” The court then proceeded to approve the following reasoning in Sangeet
v. State of Haryana11 on this point (Sangeet SCR pp. 119-120):

“63. It appears to us that an exercise of power by the appropriate Government under
sub-section (1) of Section 432CrPC cannot be suo motu for the simple reason that this
sub-section is only an enabling provision. The appropriate Government is enabled to
“override” a judicially pronounced sentence, subject to the fulfilment of certain
conditions. Those conditions are found either in the Jail Manual or in statutory rules.

5

Rajo @ Rajwa @ Rajendra Mandal vs The State Of Bihar on 25 August, 2023

Sub-section (1) of Section 432CrPC cannot be read to enable the appropriate
Government to “further override” the judicial pronouncement over and above what is
permitted by the Jail Manual or the statutory rules. The process of granting
“additional” remission under [2012] 13 SCR 85 [hereafter referred to as ‘Sangeet’]
this section is set into motion in a case only through an application for remission by
the convict or on his behalf. On such an application being made, the appropriate
Government is required to approach the Presiding Judge of the court before or by
which the conviction was made or confirmed to opine (with reasons) whether the
application should be granted or refused. Thereafter, the appropriate Government
may take a decision on the remission application and pass orders granting remission
subject to some conditions, or refusing remission. Apart from anything else, this
statutory procedure seems quite reasonable inasmuch as there is an application of
mind to the issue of grant of remission. It also eliminates “discretionary” or en masse
release of convicts on “festive” occasions since each release requires a case-by-case
basis scrutiny.” (emphasis supplied)

11. This court, in various judgments, has outlined the parameters to be considered,
when considering grant of remission. In Jagdish (supra) this court held:

“38. At the time of considering the case of premature release of a life convict, the
authorities may require to consider his case mainly taking into consideration whether
the offence was an individual act of crime without affecting the society at large;
whether there was any chance of future recurrence of committing a crime; whether
the convict had lost his potentiality in committing the crime; whether there was any
fruitful purpose of confining the convict any more; the socio-economic condition of
the convict's family and other similar circumstances.” (emphasis supplied) This was
based on an earlier judgment (though not expressly cited in Jagdish) - Laxman
Naskar v. State of W.B12 which prescribed five guiding factors.

12. In Sriharan (supra), the court went on to discuss specifically, the role of the report
submitted by the presiding officer, and held that the “ultimate order of suspension or
remission should be guided by the opinion to be rendered by the Presiding Officer of
the court concerned.”13 This in turn, was relied upon, and explained recently, in Ram
Chander v. State of Chhattisgarh14 as follows:

“20. In Sriharan [Union of India v. V. Sriharan, (2016) 7 SCC 1 : (2016) 2 SCC (Cri)
695] , the Court observed that the opinion of the Presiding Judge shines a light on the
nature of the crime that has been (2000) 2 SCC 595 [para 6] [hereafter referred to as
‘Laxman Naskar’]. These factors were reiterated in Laxman Naskar v. State of W.B.
(2000) 7 SCC 626 [para 6] as well.

Para 143.

6

Rajo @ Rajwa @ Rajendra Mandal vs The State Of Bihar on 25 August, 2023

[2022] 4 SCR 1103 [hereafter referred to as ‘Ram Chander’] committed, the record of the convict,
their background and other relevant factors. Crucially, the Court observed that the opinion of the
Presiding Judge would enable the Government to take the “right” decision as to whether or not the
sentence should be remitted. Hence, it cannot be said that the opinion of the Presiding Judge is only
a relevant factor, which does not have any determinative effect on the application for remission. The
purpose of the procedural safeguard under Section 432(2)CrPC would stand defeated if the opinion
of the Presiding Judge becomes just another factor that may be taken into consideration by the
Government while deciding the application for remission. It is possible then that the procedure
under Section 432(2) would become a mere formality.

21. However, this is not to say that the appropriate Government should mechanically follow the
opinion of the Presiding Judge. If the opinion of the Presiding Judge does not comply with the
requirements of Section 432(2) or if the Judge does not consider the relevant factors for grant of
remission that have been laid down in Laxman Naskar v. Union of India [Laxman Naskar v. Union
of India, (2000) 2 SCC 595 : 2000 SCC (Cri) 509], the Government may request the Presiding Judge
to consider the matter afresh.

22. In the present case, there is nothing to indicate that the Presiding Judge took into account the
factors which have been laid down in Laxman Naskar v. Union of India [Laxman Naskar v. Union of
India, (2000) 2 SCC 595 : 2000 SCC (Cri) 509] . These factors include assessing:

(i) whether the offence affects the society at large;

(ii) the probability of the crime being repeated;

(iii) the potential of the convict to commit crimes in future;

(iv) if any fruitful purpose is being served by keeping the convict in prison; and

(v) the socio-economic condition of the convict's family. In Laxman Naskar v. State of
W.B. [Laxman Naskar v. State of W.B., (2000) 7 SCC 626: 2000 SCC (Cri) 1431] and
State of Haryana v. Jagdish [State of Haryana v. Jagdish, (2010) 4 SCC 216 :

(2010) 2 SCC (Cri) 806], this Court has reiterated that these factors will be
considered while deciding the application of a convict for premature release.

23. In his opinion dated 21-7-2021 the Special Judge, Durg referred to the crime for which the
petitioner was convicted and simply stated that in view of the facts and circumstances of the case it
would not be appropriate to grant remission. The opinion is in the teeth of the provisions of Section
432(2)CrPC which require that the Presiding Judge's opinion must be accompanied by reasons.
Halsbury's Laws of India (Administrative Law) notes that the requirement to give reasons is
satisfied if the authority concerned has provided relevant reasons. Mechanical reasons are not
considered adequate. The following extract is useful for our consideration:

7

Rajo @ Rajwa @ Rajendra Mandal vs The State Of Bihar on 25 August, 2023

“[005.066] Adequacy of reasons Sufficiency of reasons, in a particular case, depends
on the facts of each case. It is not necessary for the authority to write out a judgment
as a court of law does. However, at least, an outline of process of reasoning must be
given. It may satisfy the requirement of giving reasons if relevant reasons have been
given for the order, though the authority has not set out all the reasons or some of the
reasons which had been argued before the court have not been expressly considered
by the authority. A mere repetition of the statutory language in the order will not
make the order a reasoned one.

Mechanical and stereotype reasons are not regarded as adequate. A speaking order is
one that speaks of the mind of the adjudicatory body which passed the order. A
reason such as ‘the entire examination of the year 1982 is cancelled’, cannot be
regarded as adequate because the statement does explain as to why the examination
has been cancelled; it only lays down the punishment without stating the causes
therefor.” [Halsbury's Laws of India (Administrative Law) (Lexis Nexis, Online
Edition).]

24. Thus, an opinion accompanied by inadequate reasoning would not satisfy the requirements of
Section 432(2)CrPC. Further, it will not serve the purpose for which the exercise under Section
432(2) is to be undertaken, which is to enable the executive to make an informed decision taking
into consideration all the relevant factors.”

13. Noting that the presiding judge’s opinion did not consider the five parameters laid out in
Laxman Naskar (supra), a coordinate bench of this court in Ram Chander (supra) directed the
presiding officer of the concerned court, to consider the matter afresh and in light of these factors,
so that the appropriate government could in turn reconsider the petitioner’s application for
premature release. A similar fate awaited the writ petitioner in Jaswant Singh v. State of
Chhattisgarh15 (wherein both writ petitions arose from the same facts and commission of offence).

14. In the present case, the Remission Board rejected the petitioner’s application for premature
release twice. A brief glance at all the reports submitted by the authorities to the Remission Board
before each of its two meetings where it considered the petitioner’s case, is telling:

Jaswant Singh v. State of Chhattisgarh, 2023 SCC OnLine SC 35 Considered in
Remission Board Considered in Remission Board meeting meeting dated 19.05.2021
dated 20.04.2023 Jail Superintendent report dated Jail Superintendent report dated
27.04.2021: 15.09.2022:

“conduct of prisoner is satisfactory. “Recommended for premature release.”
Recommended for premature release from jail.” Probation Officer’s report dated
Probation Officer’s report dated 05.04.2021: 08.06.2022:

“can be considered to release the “Keeping in view at the residential resources
prisoner prematurely in accordance with and means for livelihood for the convicts,

8

Rajo @ Rajwa @ Rajendra Mandal vs The State Of Bihar on 25 August, 2023

the Rules” social and economic status of the household, the no- objection and
acceptance of the people of the family and the society , the need for rehabilitation and
the possibility of living as a normal citizen a clear recommendation is made regarding
the timely release of the above convicted prisoner.” Police Superintendent’s report
dated Police Superintendent’s report dated 11.01.2021: 22.07.2022:

“…DPO has reported that on release of Noting the input received from the concerned
prisoner, there does not seem to be any DPO - “…The local people have got the
possibility of any law-and-order problem information regarding his premature will
arise” release. The local people speak in the crossroads about the adverse effect of his
release due to his premature release, an atmosphere of unrest and fear will arise in
the society and criminal incidents may also increase NCR (Sanha) No. 211 dated
10.07.2022 is marked in this regard. In this context, the premature release of the said
prisoner does not seem appropriate” Remarks of the Presiding Judge dated Remarks
of the Presiding Judge dated

15.12.2018: 02.07.2022:

“…I perused the judgment and Noting the report submitted earlier by the
supplementary case record of above then presiding officer on 15.12.2018, stated
noted sessions case, from which it “….Further having gone through the case appears
that it is a triple murder case in record, I also find that the manner of the which two
dafadars were killed under a occurrence in alleged offence done by the calculated
move and in plan manner and Rajo@Rajua@Rajendra mandal along with both
Dafadar and Chaukidar were other co-accused person was so harsh and sincere in
duty and dedicated to their professional under such facts and work and they used to
jointly move from circumstances, I also agreed with the opinion duty, as a result of
which the criminals of the then P.O of this court. Therefore prayer were under
constant fear psychosis and for remission and commutation of sentence in the
criminals including the convicts favor of Rajo@Rajua@Rajendra Mandal murdered
these two officials. may be refused.” Considering the manner of occurrence and
seriousness of the case, in my opinion the application remission and commutation of
sentence filed on behalf of the convict petitioner should be refused.” Screening
Committee/ Inspector General:

Took note of the adverse reports of Police Superintendent and Presiding Judge and
noted that “2. In the Notification No. 3106 dated 10.012.2002 of the Home (Special)
Department Bihar, it is provided in clause

(iv) (b) that the prisoners who are convicted for organizing murders in a systematic
manner shall not be eligible for premature release.

3. In that light, the proposal for untimely release from prison can be rejected.” Taking note of the
reports before it at the time, the Remission Board concluded as follows:

9

Rajo @ Rajwa @ Rajendra Mandal vs The State Of Bihar on 25 August, 2023

Remission Board meeting dated Remission Board meeting dated 20.04.2023
19.05.2021 “Favourable report by Probation Taking note of the adverse reports by the
Police Officer/ Superintendent of Police, but Superintendent, Presiding Judge, and
adverse report by Presiding Judge” conclusion of the Screening Committee/Inspector
General regarding clause

(iv)(b) – “3. After due consideration, the proposal for premature release from prison
is rejected.”

15. The record clearly indicates that the reason for rejection of the petitioner’s
application, is the adverse report submitted by the presiding judge in the first round,
which was perfunctorily relied upon and reiterated in the report submitted by the
then presiding judge in the second round as well. Both the reports submitted by the
presiding judges (at the relevant time), demonstrate a casual opinion, based solely on
the judicial record which presumably consisted of the finding of guilt, by the trial
court and High Court. This offers only a dated insight on the petitioner, one that has
limited opportunity to consider the progress the convict has made in the course of
serving his sentence. Yet, the Remission Board has privileged the presiding judge’s
opinion over the other authorities – like the Probation Officer, and Jail authorities,
who are in a far better position to comment on his post-conviction reformation –
offering a cautionary tale.

16. In this court’s considered view, overemphasis on the presiding judge’s opinion
and complete disregard of comments of other authorities, while arriving at its
conclusion, would render the appropriate government’s decision on a remission
application, unsustainable. The discretion that the executive is empowered with in
executing a sentence, would be denuded of its content, if the presiding judge’s view –
which is formed in all likelihood, largely (if not solely) on the basis of the judicial
record – is mechanically followed by the concerned authority. Such an approach has
the potential to strikes at the heart, and subvert the concept of remission – as a
reward and incentive encouraging actions and behaviour geared towards reformation
– in a modern legal system.

17. All this is not to say that the presiding judge’s view is only one of the factors that
has no real weight; but instead that if the presiding judge’s report is only reflective of
the facts and circumstances that led to the conclusion of the convict’s guilt, and is
merely a reiteration of those circumstances available to the judge at the time of
sentencing (some 14 or more years earlier, as the case may be), then the appropriate
government should attach weight to this finding, accordingly. Such a report, cannot
be relied on as carrying predominance, if it focusses on the crime, with little or no
attention to the criminal. The appropriate government, should take a holistic view of
all the opinions received (in terms of the relevant rules), including the judicial view of
the presiding judge of the concerned court, keeping in mind the purpose and
objective, of remission.

10

Rajo @ Rajwa @ Rajendra Mandal vs The State Of Bihar on 25 August, 2023

18. The views of the presiding judge, are based on the record, which exists, containing
all facts resulting in conviction, including the nature of the crime, its seriousness, the
accused’s role, and the material available at that stage regarding their antecedents.
However, post-conviction conduct, particularly, resulting in the prisoner’s earned
remissions, their age and health, work done, length of actual incarceration, etc.,
rarely fall within the said judge’s domain. Another factor to bear in mind, is that the
presiding judge would not be the same presiding judge who had occasion to observe
the convict (at a much earlier point in time) and thus form an opinion. The presiding
judge, at this stage, would only look into the record leading to conviction. This
judicial involvement in executive decision making is therefore, largely limited to the
input it provides regarding the nature of the crime, its seriousness, etc. Undoubtedly,
even at the stage of sentencing, the judge ideally is to exercise discretion after looking
at a wide range of factors relating to the criminal and not just the crime; but as
noticed in numerous precedents16 that have dealt with sentencing in the commission
of heinous crimes, this is unfortunately, often not the reality. Guidance has been
offered by this court17 on how to mitigate this in recent years, but in this court’s
considered view, it is pragmatic to acknowledge that it will require time for our
criminal justice system to incorporate, and uniformly reach such standards. In fact,
earlier cases of conviction (such as the present one - in 2001), have an even lesser
p r o b a b i l i t y   o f   a   j u d i c i a l   r e c o r d   w h i c h   r e f l e c t s   c o n s i d e r a t i o n   o f   s u c h
multi-dimensional factors at the sentencing stage; the lack of which should not serve
as an obstacle to the convict seeking release (after serving almost two decades, or
more), erasing the reformative journey they may have undertaken as a result of their
long incarceration.

19. It has been repeatedly emphasized that the aim, and ultimate goal of
imprisonment, even in the most serious crime, is reformative, after the offender
Sangeet (supra); Swamy Shraddananda (2) @ Mural Manohar Mishra v. State of
Karnataka [2008] 11 SCR 93; Santosh Kumar Satishbhushan Bariyar v. State of
Maharashtra [2009] 9 SCR 90; Chhannu Lal Verma v.

State of Chattisgarh [2018] 14 SCR 355; Rajendra Pralhadrao Wasnik v. State of Maharashtra [2018]
14 SCR 585; and Manoj v. State of Madhya Pradesh [2022] 9 SCR 452.

Ibid.

undergoes a sufficiently long spell of punishment through imprisonment. Even while upholding
Section 433A, in Maru Ram v. Union of India18, this court underlined the relevance of
post-conviction conduct, stating whether the convict, “Had his in-prison good behavior been
rewarded by reasonable remissions linked to improved social responsibility, nurtured by familial
contacts and liberal parole, cultured by predictable, premature release, the purpose of habilitation
would have been served, If law--S. 433-A in this case--rudely refuses to consider the subsequent
conduct of the prisoner and forces all convicts, good, bad and indifferent, to serve a fixed and
arbitrary minimum it is an angry flat untouched by the proven criteria of reform.”

11

Rajo @ Rajwa @ Rajendra Mandal vs The State Of Bihar on 25 August, 2023

20. Another aspect of note in this case, is the report submitted by the Superintendent of Police in the
second round (which is diametrically different from that which was submitted in the first round),
was adverse. Without casting aspersions on the veracity of it, or questioning it on merits, it is
appropriate to flag another concern in such a context. In each case, the appropriate government has
to be cognizant of the latent (not always) prejudices of the crime, that the police as well as the
investigating agency, may be citing – especially in a case such as the present one, where the slain
victims were police personnel themselves, i.e., members of the police force. These biases may inform
the report, and cannot be given determinative value. Doing so will potentially deflect the appropriate
government from the facts relevant for consideration for premature release, and instead, focus
almost entirely upon facts which evoke a retributive response.

21. Apart from the other considerations (on the nature of the crime, whether it affected the society at
large, the chance of its recurrence, etc.), the appropriate government should while considering the
potential of the convict to commit crimes in the future, whether there remains any fruitful purpose
of continued incarceration, and the socio-economic conditions, review: the convict’s age, state of
heath, familial relationships and possibility of reintegration, extent of earned remission, and the
post-conviction conduct including, but not limited to – whether [1981] 1 SCR 1196 the convict has
attained any educational qualification whilst in custody, volunteer services offered, job/work done,
jail conduct, whether they were engaged in any socially aimed or productive activity, and the overall
development as a human being. The Board thus should not entirely rely either on the presiding
judge, or the report prepared by the police. In this court’s considered view, it would also serve the
ends of justice if the appropriate government had the benefit of a report contemporaneously
prepared by a qualified psychologist after interacting/interviewing the convict that has applied for
premature release. The Bihar Prison Manual, 2012 enables a convict to earn remissions, which are
limited to one third of the total sentence imposed. Special remission for good conduct, in addition, is
granted by the rules.19 If a stereotypical approach in denying the benefit of remission, which
ultimately results in premature release, is repeatedly adopted, the entire idea of limiting
incarceration for long periods (sometimes spanning a third or more of a convict’s lifetime and in
others, result in an indefinite sentence), would be defeated. This could result in a sense of despair
and frustration among inmates, who might consider themselves reformed– but continue to be
condemned in prison.

22. The majority view in Sriharan (supra) and the minority view, had underlined the need to balance
societal interests with the rights of the convict (that in a given case, the sentence should not be
unduly harsh, or excessive). The court acknowledged that it lies within the executive’s domain to
grant, or refuse premature release; however, such power would be guided, and the discretion
informed by reason, stemming from appropriate rules. The minority view (of Lalit and Sapre JJ)
had cautioned the court from making sentencing rigid:

“73. […] Any order putting the punishment beyond remission will prohibit exercise of
statutory power designed to achieve same purpose Under Section 432/433 Code of
Criminal Procedure In our view Courts cannot and ought not deny to a prisoner the
benefit to be considered for remission of sentence. By doing so, the prisoner would be
condemned to live in the prison till the last breath without there being even a ray of

12

Rajo @ Rajwa @ Rajendra Mandal vs The State Of Bihar on 25 August, 2023

hope to come See Rules 405 and 413 of the Bihar Prison Manual, 2012.

out. This stark reality will not be conducive to reformation of the person and will in
fact push him into a dark hole without there being semblance of the light at the end of
the tunnel.” This concern suffuses the reasoning in Ram Chander (supra).

23. This court, on earlier occasion, had grappled with the situation of different remission
policies/rules prevailing at different points of the convict’s sentence – i.e., when the policy on the
date of conviction, and on the date of consideration for premature release, are different. It has been
held that the policy prevailing on the date of the conviction20, would be applicable. However, in
Jagdish (supra) it was also recognised that if a more liberal policy exists on the date of
consideration, the benefit should be provided:

“43. […] The State authority is under an obligation to at least exercise its discretion in
relation to an honest expectation perceived by the convict, at the time of his
conviction that his case for premature release would be considered after serving the
sentence, prescribed in the short-sentencing policy existing on that date. The State
has to exercise its power of remission also keeping in view any such benefit to be
construed liberally in favour of a convict which may depend upon case to case and for
that purpose, in our opinion, it should relate to a policy which, in the instant case,
was in favour of the respondent. In case a liberal policy prevails on the date of
consideration of the case of a “lifer” for premature release, he should be given benefit
thereof.”

24. Applying these principles in the case at hand, on the date of conviction (24.05.2001), it is the
pre-2002 policy21 that was applicable. The relevant extract is as follows:

“[…] the State Government has decided that to give remission to the accused who has
been sentenced to life imprisonment and subsequently to release him from prison,
life imprisonment should be considered as imprisonment for 20 years and the
following procedure should be adopted in the matter of releasing the prisoners
sentenced for life imprisonment –

1. Under Section 429 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 Act No. 2 of 1974, the
prisoner who gets life imprisonment will not get the benefit of presumptive report
(ambiguous) i.e. in the case in which he has been sentenced to life imprisonment, the
period spent in jail during the period of enquiry, investigation and disposal of the
case and before See State of Haryana v. Raj Kumar, (2021) 9 SCC 292 [para 16].

No. A/P.M-03/91-550 dated 21.01.1984.

the     date      of     conviction     may     be    deducted     from
the imprisonment of 20 years.

13

Rajo @ Rajwa @ Rajendra Mandal vs The State Of Bihar on 25 August, 2023

2. Upon conviction, if any person has been sentenced to imprisonment for life for an offense for
which one of the punishments is death or if the death sentence has been commuted to life
imprisonment under Section 433 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, and where such sentence
of imprisonment for life has been awarded on or after 18.12.1978, such prisoner shall be released
from prison only if-

a. He has spent a period of 14 years in prison from the date of conviction.

b. The total of the period of remission and imprisonment is 20 years.

[….]” It is pertinent to point out that in the old pre-2002 policy, there is no mention of any
ineligibility criteria, much less one that is analogous to Rule 529(iv)(b) of the 2002 policy, which
was cited by the Remission Board in its rejection of the petitioner’s application on 20.04.2023.

25. In light of these findings and the precedents discussed above, it would be appropriate if the
Remission Board reconsidered the petitioner’s application for remission afresh, considering the
reports of the police and other authorities, the post-prison record of the petitioner, the remissions
earned (including that which is earned for good conduct) his age, health condition, family
circumstances, and his potential for social engagement, in a positive manner. The concerned
presiding judge is hereby directed to provide an opinion on the petitioner’s application for
premature release, by examining the judicial record, and provide adequate reasoning, taking into
account the factors laid down in Laxman Naskar (supra), within one month from the date of this
judgment. With the benefit of this new report, the Remission Board may reconsider the application
– without entirely or solely relying on it, but treating it as valuable (maybe weighty) advice that is
based on the judicial record. Given the long period of incarceration already suffered by the writ
petitioner and his age, the Remission Board should endeavour to consider the application at the
earliest and render its decision, preferably within three months from the date of this judgment. A
copy of this judgment shall be marked by the Registry of this Court, to the Home Secretary,
Government of Bihar, who is the chairperson of the Remission Board, as well as the concerned
Presiding Judge, through the Registrar, High Court of Judicature at Patna High Court.

Before parting, this court would like to place on record its deep appreciation for the valuable
assistance provided by Mr. Randhir Kumar Ojha, appearing on behalf of the petitioner and Mr.
Azmat Hayat Amanullah, appearing on behalf of the State.

26. The writ petition is allowed in the above terms. Pending applications, if any, are disposed of.

………………….……………….….J. [S. RAVINDRA BHAT] .…………..…..……………………..J. [PRASHANT
KUMAR MISHRA] NEW DELHI AUGUST 25, 2023

14