Inspector, Railway Protection Force, ... vs Mathew K Cherian on 9 January, 2025

Inspector, Railway Protection Force, ... vs Mathew K Cherian on
9 January, 2025

Author: Dipankar Datta

Bench: Prashant Kumar Mishra, Dipankar Datta

2025 INSC 51                                                                       REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 4169/2024
                               [Arising out of SLP (CRIMINAL) No. 2408/2017]

     INSPECTOR, RAILWAY PROTECTION FORCE,
     KOTTAYAM                                                                … APPELLANT
                               VERSUS

     MATHEW K CHERIAN & ANR.                                                  …RESPONDENTS

                                                       WITH

                                    CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 139-140/2025
                            [Arising out of SLP (CRIMINAL) Nos. 9225-9226/2022]

     J. RAMESH                                                                … APPELLANT

                                                      VERSUS

     UNION OF INDIA                                                           …RESPONDENT

                                                  JUDGMENT

DIPANKAR DATTA J.

INTRODUCTION

1. Common question of law touching interpretation of Section 143 of the Railways Act, 19891 is
involved in these appeals by special leave; hence, we propose to decide the same by this common
judgment.

2. In the first of the two sets of appeals2, the judgment and order3 of the High Court of Kerala at
Ernakulum4 is assailed whereby criminal rashmi dhyani pant Date: 2025.01.09 17:22:46 IST
Reason:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5744556/

1

Inspector, Railway Protection Force, ... vs Mathew K Cherian on 9 January, 2025

the Act the lead appeal in Criminal Miscellaneous Case No. 1991/2016 dt. 22.09.2016
Kerala High Court proceedings under Section 143 of the Act launched against the first
respondent – Mathew K. Cheriian5 – was quashed.

3. In the connected appeals, the appellant - J. Ramesh6 – has assailed the judgment and order7 of
the High Court of Judicature at Madras8 refusing to quash the criminal proceedings launched
against Ramesh under Section 143 of the Act.

FACTUAL MATRIX

4. The factual scenario of the two sets of appeals are not too complicated. The facts which are
germane are noted as a precursor to our discussion.

5. The prosecution case in the lead appeal is that on 11.03.2016, on reliable information being
disclosed to the Inspector, Railway Protection Force9, that unauthorised business of procuring and
supplying railway e-tickets was being carried out in the office of Mathew, Crime Case No. 524/2016
under Section 143 of the Act was registered and a search conducted thereat. During the search and
seizure operation, one employee named Joby Jose of Kosamattam Finance, a non-banking finance
company (of which Mathew happened to be the managing director) was arrested and 17 pieces of
evidence were seized. In his confessional statement, Joby Jose stated he was working under the
supervision of Mathew. On the basis of this statement, Mathew was made co-accused in Crime Case
No. 524/2016. He was accused of creating fraudulent user IDs with the Indian Railway Catering and
Tourism Corporation10 web portal to procure and Mathew Ramesh in CRL. O.P. No.18701/2020
18703/2020 and Crl. MP. Nos.7328/2020 and 7329/2020 Madras High Court RPF IRCTC peddle
railway tickets for profit, without being an agent authorised to procure and supply railway tickets
and, therefore, operating an unauthorised business for procurement and supply of railway tickets.
Aggrieved, Mathew moved the Kerala High Court under Section 482, Code of Criminal Procedure,
197311 seeking quashing of the proceedings. The Kerala High Court, vide the impugned order,
quashed the criminal proceedings emanating from Crime Case No. 524/2016. Dissatisfied thereby,
the Inspector, RPF is in appeal.

6. The connected appeals arise out of Case Crime No. 3116/2019 and Case Crime No. 600/2020. The
case of the prosecution is that Ramesh and his son are the owners of “Big Top Travels” which is an
authorised agent for railway e-tickets. On 05.12.2019, Case Crime No. 3116/2019 came to be
registered against Ramesh under Section 143 of the Act on the basis of a search and seizure
operation conducted by a special team of the RPF in the shop premises of Ramesh. The offence
alleged against him is that he has been supplying e-tickets to various customers, and that these
e-tickets had been booked through multiple user IDs. Case Crime No. 600/2020 was registered
against Ramesh, also under Section 143(1)(a) of the Act for his involvement in fraudulent activities
such as supply of Tatkal e- tickets by creating multiple personal-user IDs and issuing unauthorised
e- tickets procured through IRCTC website, contrary to IRCTC Rules. Ramesh, feeling aggrieved by
initiation of criminal action by the respondent- authorities, approached the Madras High Court
under Section 482, Cr. PC with a prayer to quash the criminal proceedings. The Madras High Court,
Cr. PC however, refused to quash the criminal proceedings. Dissatisfied with the impugned order of

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5744556/

2

Inspector, Railway Protection Force, ... vs Mathew K Cherian on 9 January, 2025

the Madras High Court, Ramesh has questioned the same in the connected appeals.

SUBMISSIONS

7. For the sake of brevity, the submissions advanced by the parties in both sets of the appeals are
noted together. Arguments of the prosecution can be summarised as follows:

I. Section 143 of the Act does not permit authorised agents to carry out unauthorised
actions under the façade of authorisation. When an authorised agent carries out
unauthorised transactions using the personal IDs of other individuals, the cloak of
authorisation cannot be used as a ruse. Therefore, to be exempt from the application
of Section 143, both the status of the person and the nature of the action must be
considered.

II. Section 143 is part of the overall scheme to promote the efficacy of the railway
system and its operations. Therefore, the Court must interpret the provision in line
with the object of the statute.

III. Mathew, as the Managing Director of a finance company, created hundreds of
user IDs to sell railway tickets at a premium which constitutes an offence under
Section 143.

IV. Section 143 makes no distinction between physical tickets and e-

tickets and only contemplates penal action against unauthorised carrying on of the
business of procuring and supplying railway tickets.

V. Offence under Section 143 is a social crime. The mischief is sought to be addressed
by limiting the number of tickets that an individual can purchase using his personal
ID and, thereby, touting of railway tickets is prevented.

VI. The Kerala High Court has erred in quashing the criminal proceedings at this
stage as a bare perusal of the complaint reveals that all the ingredients under Section
143 are prima facie attracted.

VII. The Madras High Court has correctly refrained from following the erroneous
decision of the Kerala High Court.

VIII. While upholding the decision of the Madras High Court, the decision of the
Kerala High Court ought to be reversed and the prosecution allowed to lead its
evidence before the relevant trial courts for the proceedings to be taken to its logical
conclusion.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5744556/

3

Inspector, Railway Protection Force, ... vs Mathew K Cherian on 9 January, 2025

8. The submissions on behalf of the accused – Mathew and Ramesh – in favour of quashing of the
proceedings, as advanced before us, are these:

I. The plain and unambiguous words of Section 143 of the Act make it clear that the
creation of multiple user IDs is not an offence under Section 143, and Section 143
must be construed strictly as it is a penal provision.

II. The materialisation of e-ticketing scheme could not have been conceptualised by
the legislature at the time of passing the Act, as the scheme as well as the internet did
not exist at that time.

III. Section 143(1)(a) was intended to penalise the sale of tickets by persons other
than railway servants and authorized agents.

IV. Ramesh is an authorised agent and, thus, could not have been proceeded against
under Section 143(1), on its own terms; and, if at all, there has been a breach or
violation of the terms and conditions of the contract by Ramesh, the remedy of the
railways/RPF is to approach the civil court.

V. The decision of the Madras High Court ought to be reversed and the decision of
the Kerala High Court upheld, thereby bringing down the curtain on both the
criminal proceedings.

IMPUGNED ORDERS

9. Now, let us have a look at the orders impugned before us. A thorough examination thereof would
enable us to arrive at an appropriate conclusion.

10. In the lead appeal, the Kerala High Court has quashed the criminal proceedings against the first
respondent. The reasons assigned therefor are reproduced below:

“5. The Act was enacted much before the advent of e-ticket system. The object of
Section 143 is to prevent procurement of ticket for travelling on railway or 1n a
reserved compartment or journey in a train by any person with the ticket not being
issued by railway servant or by an authorised agent. It appears that Railway wants to
ensure the authenticity of the tickets issued to the travellers on a travel in a railway. It
appears that many travellers were travelling on railway in a ticket not being issued to
them and issued in the name of third parties. The Railways Act wants to ensure that
the ticket is issued by railway servant or agent authorised on this behalf as the case
may be to a genuine travellers (sic, “traveller”).

6. …The use of internet medium registered in the name of a person, to issue tickets to
a third party is not one contemplated under Section 143 for the purpose of
considering it as an offence. … There is no sale of ticket by the petitioner as even

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5744556/

4

Inspector, Railway Protection Force, ... vs Mathew K Cherian on 9 January, 2025

admitted in the counter, the sale is being conducted by IRCTC.

The use of computer or use of printer for printing ticket purchased by a traveller cannot be deemed
as sale effected by the owner of the computer or printer. Procuring tickets has to be understood as
providing or giving tickets to the travellers.

Admittedly tickets are procured by the genuine travellers. When legislature considered an actionable
wrong in a particular manner in a brick and mortar business, it cannot be applied to an online
business unless all elements constituting the offence- are present in the online business. The offence
is not attracted even if one has to assume that action of the accused would amount to revision clearly
mandates that tickets have to be procured by the offender.”

11. The view taken by the Kerala High Court appears to be that Section 143 is somewhat outdated in
the age of purchasing tickets using the internet. It has, in essence, read down Section 143 to state
that one can conduct a business of procuring and supplying tickets without the authorisation of the
railways as long as it is done through the internet. The order also observes that as the tickets were
procured in the name of genuine passengers, it cannot be said that Mathew had contravened Section
143.

12. In the connected appeals, the Madras High Court refused to quash the criminal appeal and
ratiocinated its view in the following words:

“9. …This Court is of the considered view that the decision held by the High Court of
Kerala holding that the said provision was enacted much prior to the creation of
e-tickets and the petitioner therein was not carrying a business of procuring and
supplying of tickets for travel on the Railway reserved tickets through internet and
therefore online was not prohibited, whereas in the case on hand, the offence
committed by the petitioner is completely different from the aforesaid case. The
petitioner himself created more than 200 user IDs, procured tickets and supplied to
the passengers. Further, in the said business of procuring and purchasing tickets on
Railways were for the benefit of Rs.150/- for sleeper and Rs.250/- for A/C per head in
addition to ticket fare as service charge from his customers, prohibited by the
provisions under Section 143 of the Act. In fact, recommendation of the e-tickets
scheme no way alters the position of purchase of tickets, as agent or the customer can
book e-tickets by creating ID in their name. But the authorized agent cannot create
other user IDs for the purpose of procuring tickets for illegal gain. Therefore,
judgement cited by the learned counsel for the petitioner is not applicable to the case
on hand. That apart, the crime is under investigation and only after investigation, the
respondent can unearth the truth.”

13. The Madras High Court acknowledged that Ramesh was an authorised agent under Section 143;
however, it refused to quash the criminal proceedings on the ground that such authorisation did not
empower the appellant to create multiple user IDs for the purpose of procuring tickets for illegal
gain. On the ground that Ramesh was only authorised to sell tickets through his own account and

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5744556/

5

Inspector, Railway Protection Force, ... vs Mathew K Cherian on 9 January, 2025

was not specifically authorised to create multiple user IDs, the Madras High Court dismissed
Ramesh’s petition seeking quashing of the criminal proceedings. ANALYSIS

14. The appeals before us, although have different factual matrices, involve a common question of
law. Having bestowed serious consideration and thought, we find ourselves in a curious position
where our interference seems to be warranted in both sets of appeals.

15. In order to settle the controversy in the present lis, the ambit and scope of Section 143 of the Act
has to be noticed and comprehended. The question before us is whether the act of creating
fake/multiple user IDs by an individual, who may or may not be an authorized railway agent, with
the intention to procure and supply online tickets through IRCTC portal would constitute an offence
under Section 143 of the Act? In addition to the scope of Section 143, we need to analyse whether the
two criminal proceedings in question did merit quashing by the respective High Court.

16. At this stage, it would be beneficial to read Section 143 of the Act. It reads:

143. Penalty for unauthorised carrying on of business of procuring and supplying of
railway ticket-

(1) if any person, not being a railway servant or an agent authorised in this behalf,-

(a) carries on the business of procuring and supplying tickets for travel on a railway
or from reserved accommodation for journey in a train; or

(b) purchases or sells or attempts to purchase or sell tickets with a view to carrying on
any such business either by himself or by any other person, he shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine which
may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both, and shall also forfeit the tickets
which he do so procures, supplies, purchases, sells or attempts to purchase or sell:

Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the contrary to be
mentioned in judgment of the court, such punishment shall not be less than
imprisonment for a term-of one month or a fine of five thousand rupees.

(2) Whoever abets any offence punishable under this section shall, whether or not
such offence is committed, be punishable with the same punishment as is provided
for the offence.

(emphasis supplied)

17. The purport and objective of Section 143 of the Act is to restrict entities which are not under the
disciplinary control of or are not authorised by the railways to conduct the business of procurement
and supply of railway tickets. Railway servants and authorised agents stand apart since, on its own
terms, Section 143 has no application to them.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5744556/

6

Inspector, Railway Protection Force, ... vs Mathew K Cherian on 9 January, 2025

18. The whole scheme of e-ticketing was introduced for the convenience and betterment of the
passenger’s experience of travelling on a train, due to which the procurement and supply of these
e-tickets, rightfully so, is highly regulated. In the additional affidavit of the appellant in the lead
appeal, Rules and Regulations for Reserved Bail e-Ticketing Service Providers (PSPs/RSPs) have
been annexed which reflect the idea of protecting the consumer and strictly prohibit using
personal/fraudulent IDs to book tickets for commercial purposes. These rules, further, bar sharing
of the credentials by these authorised agents. Also, the perils of hoarding of resources by a select few
are widely known and has to be kept in mind while adjudicating the present lis.

19. IRCTC has limited the number of tickets which can be reserved on one personal user ID at 12 per
month (24 per month with a user ID which is Aadhaar verified). Mathew, it is alleged, had created
hundreds of fake user IDs to sell tickets without any authorisation from the railways. Although the
internet and e-tickets were unknown in India when the Act was brought into force, this conduct of
Mathew (who is neither a railway servant nor an authorised agent) nevertheless attracts criminality
under Section 143(1)(a) of the Act.

20. The Kerala High Court allowed the quashing petition filed by Mathew on the ground that the Act
was enacted before the advent of internet and e- tickets and the lawmakers could not have
envisioned sale of tickets, online. We find this line of reasoning of the High Court to be plainly
erroneous.

21. Statutory interpretation has to follow certain principles which have been formulated through
legal precedents. No court can refuse to enforce a provision on the sole basis of the provision
predating any subsequent development regarding the ticketing process. If it can be demonstrated
that a statutory provision is broad enough to envelop the subsequent developments, even if the
developments were not envisioned by the legislature, the provision would stay operational. This
principle was expounded by this Court in Senior Electric Inspector v. Laxminarayan Chopra12 in the
following words:

“…This Court in construing the words ‘sale of goods’ in Entry 48, List II of the
Seventh Schedule to the Government of India Act, 1935, accepted the aforesaid
principle in State of Madras v. Gannon Dunkerley & Co., (Madras) Ltd. [(1959) SCR
379] and restated it at p. 416 thus:

‘The principle of these decisions is that when, after the enactment of a legislation,
new facts and situations arise which could not have been in its contemplation, the
statutory provisions could properly be applied to them if the words thereof are in a
broad sense capable of containing them.’ The legal position may be summarized thus:
The maxim contemporanea expositio as laid down by Coke was applied to construing
ancient statutes, but not to interpreting Acts which are comparatively modern. There
is a good reason for this change in the mode of interpretation. The fundamental rule
of construction is the same whether the Court is asked to construe a provision of an
ancient statute or that of a modern one, namely, what is the expressed intention of
the Legislature. It is perhaps difficult to attribute to a legislative body functioning in a

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5744556/

7

Inspector, Railway Protection Force, ... vs Mathew K Cherian on 9 January, 2025

static society that its intention was couched in terms of considerable breadth so as to
take within its sweep the future developments comprehended by the phraseology
used. It is more reasonable to confine its intention only to the circumstances
obtaining at the time the law was made. But in a modern progressive society it would
be unreasonable to confine the intention of a Legislature to the meaning attributable
to the word used at the time the law was made, for a modern Legislature making laws
to govern a society which is fast moving must be presumed to be aware of an enlarged
meaning the same concept might attract with the march of time and with the
revolutionary changes brought about in social, economic, political and scientific and
other fields of human activity. Indeed, unless a contrary intention appears, an
interpretation should be given to the words used to take in new facts and situations, if
the words are capable of comprehending them. We cannot, therefore, agree with the
learned Judges of the High Court that the maxim contemporanea expositio could be
invoked in construing the word ‘telegraph line’ in the Act.” (emphasis supplied)

22. The aforenoted decision has been followed in a relatively recent decision of this Court in Dharani
Sugars and Chemicals Ltd. v. Union of AIR 1962 SC 159 India13. This Court, further, noticed an
English decision in Comdel Commodities Ltd. v. Siporex Trade S.A. (No. 2)14 distilling the principle
as follows:

‘… When a change in social conditions produces a novel situation, which was not in
contemplation at the time when a statute was first enacted, there can be no a priori
assumption that the enactment does not apply to the new circumstances. If the
language of the enactment is wide enough to extend to those circumstances, there is
no reason why it should not apply.’

23. Bearing in mind the above principles, we may now proceed to consider a couple of decisions of
this Court on the rule of literal interpretation.

24. In Jugalkishore Saraf v. Raw Cotton Co. Ltd.15 , Hon’ble S.R. Das J.

(as His Lordship then was), speaking for the Court, held as follows:

“6…The cardinal rule of construction of statutes is to read the statutes literally, that
is, by giving to the words their ordinary, natural and grammatical meaning. If,
however, such a reading leads to absurdity and the words are susceptible of another
meaning, the Court may adopt the same. But if no such alternative construction is
possible, the Court must adopt the ordinary rule of literal interpretation. In the
present case, the literal construction leads to no apparent absurdity and therefore,
there can be no compelling reason for departing from that golden rule of
construction.”

25. A reference can also be made to the decision of not too distant an origin.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5744556/

8

Inspector, Railway Protection Force, ... vs Mathew K Cherian on 9 January, 2025

In Ansal Properties & Industries Ltd. V. State of Haryana16, the rule of literal construction has been
reiterated in the following words:

“39. If the legislature had intended that the licensee is required to transfer the land
and also to construct the buildings on it or to make payment for such construction,
the legislature would have made specific provisions laying down such conditions
explicitly and in clear words in which event the provisions would have been worded
in (2019) 5 SCC 480 (1990) 2 All E R 552 (HL) AIR 1955 SC 376 2009 (3) SCC 553
altogether different words and terms. It is a well-settled principle in law that the
court cannot read anything into a statutory provision which is plain and
unambiguous. The language employed in a statute is determinative factor of
legislative intent. If the language of the enactment is clear and unambiguous, it would
not be proper for the courts to add any words thereto and evolve some legislative
intent, not found in the statute.” (emphasis supplied)

26. From the above decisions, it is quite clear that if the language of the particular statute under
consideration is clear and unambiguous, it is not for the courts to add to or delete any words from
the statute in the guise of ascertaining what could have been the legislative intent.

27. Section 143, on its plain language, prohibits any person, other than a railway servant or an
authorised agent, to conduct the business of procurement and supply of railway tickets. The
provision does not specify the modalities of the procurement and supply. Hence, if we read the
section and give its contents the natural and ordinary meaning, keeping in mind the objective and
purpose of the legislation, as discussed above, it admits of no doubt that this provision criminalises
unauthorised procurement and supply, irrespective of the mode of procurement and supply.

28. We are further of the considered opinion that the mere fact of the system of e-reservation and
e-tickets being introduced after the enactment of the Act does not render the provision in Section
143 toothless to combat the illegal sale of e-tickets. Section 143, importantly, makes no distinction
between physical and online sale of tickets. The mischief that the provision seeks to remedy is that
there should not be illegal and unauthorised procurement and sale of tickets, whatever be the mode
– physical or online. The Kerala High Court seems to have missed this aspect.

29. There has been a major technological development in the last three decades by reason whereof a
significant number of services provided by the Governments are available online. Electronic and
internet services have not only become indispensable but offer significant advantages to the public.
Having regard to the comprehensive phraseology employed in Section 143, the net of its coverage is
wide enough to encompass regulation of the conduct of ticketing agents and to protect the public
from unscrupulous elements trying to defraud them by sale of valueless tickets.

30. The Kerala High Court made the distinction between “procure” and “purchase”. It held that the
tickets were “purchased” by genuine passengers. The tickets were not sold by Mathew, rather, the
tickets were sold by IRCTC in the names of the passengers. Hence, it cannot be said that Mathew
was procuring the tickets. This reasoning, in our view, is flawed and unsustainable. Travel agents, by

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5744556/

9

Inspector, Railway Protection Force, ... vs Mathew K Cherian on 9 January, 2025

and large, do not purchase tickets in their own name and then sell it to the passengers. Tickets are
procured in the name of the passengers by these agents in lieu of a commission on the price thereof.
Taking active steps, however faithfully, in order to acquire and provide tickets to third parties but
without being a railway servant or an authorised agent would attract the expression ‘procure and
supply’ as in Section 143.

31. We agree with the prosecution that Section 143, a penal provision, has been enacted to tackle a
social crime. The Indian Railways is a keystone of our country’s infrastructure. It carries around 673
crore passengers annually and has a tremendous impact on the economy of this country.

Any effort to disrupt the integrity and stability of the ticketing system has to be stopped on its
tracks.

32. The second issue before us is whether these criminal proceedings in the two appeals should be
quashed. This Court has dealt with the issue of quashing numerous times. Reference in this
connection may be made to the decisions in R.P. Kapur v. State of Punjab17, State of W.B. v. Swapan
Kumar Guha18, State of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal19, Pepsi Foods Ltd. v. Special Judicial Magistrate20,
and Amit Kapoor v. Ramesh Chander21.

33. The principles which can be extrapolated from these precedents are that quashing of a criminal
proceeding can take place, inter alia, if the first information report does not reveal a crime or if the
fact situation be such that continuance of the criminal proceedings would result in abuse of the
process causing injustice to the accused. This power of quashing, however, is not unfettered or
unlimited and as the old adage goes - “judicial discretion has to be exercised judiciously”.

34. In the lead appeal, the facts of the case prima facie reveal the commission of an offence under
Section 143 of the Act. Mathew, without the authorisation of the railways, was carrying on a
business of procurement and supply of railway tickets. The allegations against Mathew taken at face
1960 SCC OnLine SC 21.

(1982) 1 SCC 561.

1992 Supp (1) SCC 335.

(1998) 5 SCC 749 (2012) 9 SCC 460 value fulfil the elements required under Section 143(1)(a) of the
Act; hence, the threshold for quashing has not been met in this case.

35. In the connected appeals, Ramesh was an authorised agent of the railways carrying on the
business of procurement and supply of railway tickets. Section 143 only deals with the actions of
unauthorised persons and does not mandate a procedure to be followed by the authorised agents for
procuring or supplying tickets to its customers. The nature of allegations against Ramesh in the
connected appeal, though serious, Section 143 would not be attracted insofar as he is concerned.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5744556/

10

Inspector, Railway Protection Force, ... vs Mathew K Cherian on 9 January, 2025

36. That apart, Section 143 does not criminalise creating multiple user IDs. Penal provisions have to
be read strictly and narrowly as a general rule. Section 143, by being completely silent on creation of
multiple user IDs, penalises the actions of only the unauthorised agents and not unauthorised
actions of the authorised agents. Thus, even if the facts disclosed in the first information report are
taken at face value, commission of an offence cannot be attributed to Ramesh. Any breach has to be
remedied by civil action and not criminal action.

37. To sum up, Mathew not being an authorised agent has to face the proceedings against him while
Ramesh, being an authorised agent, cannot be proceeded against under Section 143 of the Act for
alleged breach of any of the terms and conditions of the contract. If, at all, he would be liable to face
civil action.

38. In our view, for the foregoing reasons, the lead appeal deserves to be allowed and consequently,
the criminal proceedings against Mathew need to be restored. It is ordered accordingly.

39. The proceedings against Mathew shall be taken to its logical conclusion, in accordance with law.
Observations made by us hereinabove are for the purpose of a decision on the lead appeal and may
not be construed as an expression of opinion on the merits of the prosecution’s case.

40. The connected appeals are allowed as well, but the criminal proceedings against Ramesh are
hereby quashed.

……………………………………J. (DIPANKAR DATTA) .…………..……………………….J. (PRASHANT
KUMAR MISHRA) New Delhi;

January 09, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5744556/

11

