Irfan @ Bhayu Mevati vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 16 January, 2025

Irfan @ Bhayu Mevati vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 16
January, 2025

Author: Vikram Nath

Bench: Sanjay Karol, Vikram Nath

2025 INSC 150                                                                    REPORTABLE

                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). 1667-1668 OF 2021

            IRFAN ALIAS BHAYU MEVATI                                      …APPELLANT(S)

                                                  VERSUS

            STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH                                      ….RESPONDENT(S)

                                                    WITH

                                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). 220 OF 2022

                                               ORDER

Mehta, J.

1. These appeals take exception to the judgment dated 9th September, 2021, rendered by the
Division Bench of High Court of Madhya Pradesh at Indore,1 whereby the criminal appeals2 filed by
the appellants Irfan @ Bhayu Mevati3 and Asif Mevati4 were dismissed, and the criminal reference5
under Section 366 of the Signature1Not Verified Hereinafter referred to as ‘High Court’.

2 by Criminal Appeal No. 7215 of 2018 was filed by Irfan @ Bhayu Mevati, and Criminal Appeal
No.7269 of 2018 was filed by Asif Mevati.

Hereinafter referred to as ‘Irfan’.

Hereinafter referred to as ‘Asif’.

Criminal Reference No. 14 of 2018.

Code of Criminal Procedure, 19736 instituted upon being forwarded by the 2nd Additional Session
Judge/Special Judge, POCSO Act, Mandsaur, Madhya Pradesh7 was allowed and the death penalty

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/31392346/

1

Irfan @ Bhayu Mevati vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 16 January, 2025

awarded to the appellants was confirmed.

2. The appellants were tried by the trial Court in Sessions Case No. 141 of 2018 for the offences
punishable under Sections 363, 366-A, 376(2)(m), 307 of the Indian Penal Code, 18608, Section
376(DB) of the Criminal Law(Amendment) Ordinance, 2018, and under Section 5(g), 5(j)(iii)(m)
and Section 5(r) read with Section 6 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 20129.
The trial Court, vide judgment dated 21st August, 2018, convicted the appellants and sentenced
them as below: -

                Conviction                  Sentence
    Sections & Act     Imprisonment Fine       Imprisonment
                                    Amount     in lieu of fine
         363 IPC           7 years      Rs.       6 months
                                     10,000/-
        366-A IPC          7 years      Rs.       6 months
                                     10,000/-
         307 IPC             L.I.       Rs.       6 months
      (in respect of                 10,000/-
     appellant Irfan)
       307/34 IPC            L.I.       Rs.       6 months
      (in respect of                 10,000/-
     appellant Asif)

  Hereinafter, referred to as ‘CrPC’.

  Hereinafter referred to as ‘trial Court’.

  Hereinafter referred to as ‘IPC’.

  Hereinafter referred to as ‘POCSO’.

(cid:12)         376(DB)                To be Hanged
      Criminal Law               by the neck
      (Amendment)                 till death
     Ordinance, 2018

3. Being aggrieved by their conviction and sentence awarded, the appellants preferred separate
criminal appeals10 before the High Court. Reference was forwarded by the trial Court to the High
Court for confirmation of the capital punishment awarded to the accused under Section 366 CrPC.
The criminal appeals preferred by the appellants and the reference made by the trial Court were
decided as above vide common judgment dated 9th September, 2021, which is the subject matter of
challenge in these appeals by special leave.

4. The prosecution story, in a nutshell, is that on 26th June, 2018, Smt. Kamlabai(PW-7), lodged an

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/31392346/

2

Irfan @ Bhayu Mevati vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 16 January, 2025

FIR11 by alleging inter alia that her granddaughter12, who was studying in the 3rd standard had
gone missing from the school premises after the classes. Based on the said report, a police case for
the offence punishable under Section 363 IPC was registered and the investigation was commenced.
On the next day, i.e., on 27th June, 2018, the Refer, Note 2 Case No. 327 of 2018.

Hereinafter, referred to as ‘ child victim’.

Investigating Agency received information that the child victim had been seen in an injured
condition by witness Karan(PW-10). Thereupon, the police rushed to the spot and took the child
victim to the Civil Hospital at Mandsaur from where, looking at her serious condition, she was
further referred to M.Y. Hospital at Indore.

5. The child victim was provided treatment and was operated upon. On inquiry being made from
her, she narrated the story of her plight to the police officials alleging inter alia that on the day of the
incident, after her school was over, she was waiting outside, when suddenly a person came and
forcibly put a sweet(ladoo) in her mouth. Thereafter, the assailant forcibly took her to a secluded
spot where he called another person. She was forcibly undressed and was subjected to forcible
sexual assault by the person who gave her the sweet, while the other person caught hold of her
hands. The police started searching for the alleged miscreants. Incriminating articles such as the
underwear of the child victim, rocks, a beer bottle, a school bag, shoes, blood-stained soil, and
normal soil were collected from the spot, sealed, and sent to the FSL13. Enquiries were made from
the nearby shop keepers and 13 Forensic Science Laboratory CCTV footage from three shops
adjoining the place of the incident was collected. Upon analyzing the CCTV footage, certain
suspicious movements were noticed. The persons known to the victim and her relatives were shown
the CCTV footage and they identified the victim and the appellants in these footages.

6. The appellants were apprehended, and a Test Identification Parade (TIP) was carried out in the
jail premises during which, PW- 10 the witnesses who had allegedly seen the victim being taken
away by the assailant(s), identified them as the miscreants. The child victim was also shown the
photo albums containing the photographs of the accused along with photos of persons bearing
similarity in appearance and she correctly identified both the accused (appellants herein) from the
albums as the persons who had committed the ghastly crime upon her. Various specimens such as
oral swab, vaginal slides, vulval pad, etc. were drawn from the child victim by the Medical Officers
and were handed over to the Investigating Officer in a sealed condition, who, in turn, dispatched
these articles to the FSL for DNA analysis.

7. The appellants were interrogated, and they suffered separate disclosure statements leading to the
recovery of clothes worn by them at the time of the incident, and the vehicle used during the
commission of the crime. Both the accused were subjected to medical examination and the blood
samples, semen slides, and hair including pubic hair, nails, etc. were collected. The appellant Irfan
was found to be having marks of scratches and teeth-bite on his body and his private organ also bore
redness which was considered to be an indicator of forcible intercourse on his part.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/31392346/

3

Irfan @ Bhayu Mevati vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 16 January, 2025

8. The medical examination of the victim revealed that not only she had been subjected to sexual
intercourse, but in addition thereto, she was also subjected to serious assault leading to injuries to
her throat and private parts, and one of her eyes had bulged out due to compression leading to
compromised vision. The perineum and anus were found to be pierced, and she had to be surgically
operated for the purpose of creating a passage in her abdomen in order to facilitate defecation.

9. The investigation was completed and a chargesheet was filed against the appellants. Charges were
framed against them for the offences punishable under aforesaid sections.14 The appellants abjured
their guilt and claimed to be innocent. 37 witnesses were examined, and various documents were
exhibited by the prosecution to bring home the guilt of the appellants. The trial Refer, Para 2.

Court questioned the appellants under Section 313 CrPC and confronted them with the allegations
appearing in the prosecution case which they denied and claimed to be innocent. No evidence was
led in defence.

10. Learned trial Court, vide judgment dated 21st August, 2018, convicted the appellants and
sentenced them as above15. The appellants assailed their conviction and sentence by filing separate
appeals16 before the High Court. Since the appellants were awarded capital punishment, the trial
Court made a reference to the High Court for confirmation of death penalty under Section 366 CrPC.

11. Vide common judgment dated 9th September, 2021, the High Court dismissed the criminal
appeals filed by the appellants and the reference forwarded by the trial Court was answered in the
affirmative, confirming the capital punishment awarded to the appellants, which is assailed in these
appeals by special leave.

12. The appellants have preferred an I.A. No. 98928 of 2022 under Section 391 CrPC read with
Article 142 of the Constitution of India seeking complete laboratory documents and for 15 Refer,
Para 2.

16 Refer, Note 2.

examination of expert witnesses. The prayer made in the application reads: -

“A. Direct Ld. 2nd ADJ/ Special Judge POCSO, Mandsaur, to summon and allow
examination in chief, as well as allow cross- examination by counsel for the
Applicant, of Dr. Anil Kumar Singh, Scientific Officer, and Assistant Chemical
Examiner, Govt of Madhya Pradesh, FSL Sagar who would be competent to testify to
the methodology, analysis, and conclusions of the DNA Report; B. Direct Ld. 2nd
ADJ/ Special Judge POCSO, Mandsaur, to allow such cross-examination by counsel
for the Applicant, by calling for and with the aid of the complete laboratory
documentation in relation to the report dated 11.07.2018 of FSL Sagar, bearing no.
/DNA/1078, 1087, and 1132 /2018 filed in ST 88 of 2018 before the Ld. 2nd ADJ/
Special Judge POCSO, Mandsaur, including but not limited to copies of the following
documents in the present case:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/31392346/

4

Irfan @ Bhayu Mevati vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 16 January, 2025

i. All laboratory documentation including worksheets, bench notes, and equipment
log sheets related to the tests conducted and methods used for extraction,
quantification, amplification, and genotyping for all the articles received;

ii. Details and complete laboratory documentation of tests conducted and results of
the tests;

iii. Electropherograms for DNA profiles and electronic raw data (.fsa) obtained from
all articles received, allelic ladders, and control samples used;

iv. Working procedure manuals including DNA manual and Serology manual used in
examination of all exhibits received;

v. Details of kits used for DNA extraction, quantification, amplification, and
genotyping in the case along with manuals of such kits; and vi. Complete
documentation of the chain of custody of all the Articles sent for examination to FSL
Sagar, with details of the packaging seals and sample seals used. C. Direct the trial
Court to examine the Applicant under Section 313 CrPC in respect of such additional
evidence.” The grounds set out in the application are reproduced hereinbelow for the
sake of ready reference: -

“ A .   A P P E L L A N T   D I D   N O T   H A V E   A N   A D E Q U A T E   O P P O R T U N I T Y   T O
CHALLENGE THE DNA REPORT

6. As per the Order Sheet of the Ld. Trial Court, the chargesheet in the present case
was filed on 10.07.2018. On such date, an advocate from the District Legal Services
Authority was appointed for the Appellant; however, the said lawyer was not present
in court. The chargesheet was filed while the DNA report was still awaited. The DNA
report dated 11.07.2018 was submitted in court only on 19.07.2018. Thereafter, the
37 prosecution witnesses were examined on 8 days by 8.08.2018.

The Appellant's examination under Section 313 CrPC was done one day later on 9.08.2018 and the
matter was listed for final arguments on 10.08.2018.

7. The DNA report, being of a scientific nature, requires careful study and analysis. Given the above
timeline, the Appellant was not afforded adequate time during the trial process to meaningfully
understand and challenge the said report. The Trial Court did not call for any underlying materials
or for examination of the DNA expert in order to understand the report in accordance with Section
45 of the Indian Evidence Act, as elaborated below. This is despite the prima facie errors in the
report mentioned in part B below. Such denial of an adequate and meaningful opportunity to
challenge the DNA report has resulted in violation of the Appellant's right to fair trial under Article
21 of the Constitution.

B. SUBSTANTIVE ISSUES WITH THE DNA REPORT WHICH MAKE THE REPORT UNRELIABLE

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/31392346/

5

Irfan @ Bhayu Mevati vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 16 January, 2025

8. A prima facie examination of the DNA evidence reveals several discrepancies which raise doubts
regarding the integrity of the samples, and the accuracy and reliability of the DNA examination. A
brief description of these discrepancies is as follows:

i. Discrepancy in the DNA profiles generated from vulval pad (item R) and evidence
samples prepared from the same source: As per the DNA Report (Ex. Pl57), a Y-STR
DNA profile generated from the vulval pad (item R) is consistent with the Y- STR
profile of the Applicant. However, other genital samples of the Prosecutrix prepared
from the same and similar sources such as the vaginal slide (item 0), smear tube
(item Q), vulval smear (item U) did not contain any male Y-STR profile, which raises
doubts regarding the integrity of the vulval pad (item R). This is particularly
important since the vaginal slide (item 0) was the first sample collected from the
Prosecutrix after she was brought to Civil Hospital Mandsaur on 27.06.18. After 6
days on 02.07.2019, the smear tube (item Q), vulval smear (item U), and the vulval
pad (item R) were collected at MY Hospital Indore. It is also important to note that
Directorate of Forensic Science Services (DFSS) MHA guidelines for medical
practitioners note that vulval swabs should be taken before the collection of vaginal
or cervical swabs in order to avoid contamination of vaginal samples from the DNA
that may be present on the outer parts such as labia majora. [DFSS MHA Guidelines
for Forensic Medical Examination in Sexual Assault Cases, 2018, pg 8] Despite
ignoring that settled procedure, the presence of male DNA in the vulval pad (item R)
and not the vaginal slide (item 0) gains significance.

ii. Presence of Male DNA in the vulval pad (item R) and nails (item T) despite
extensive medical procedures and delay in collection: The vulval pad (item R) and
nails (item T) were collected along with smear tube (item Q), vulval smear (item U)
on 02.07 .18, after the Prosecutrix had been admitted in the hospital for 6 days (Ex
Pl16, Pg. 239 Hindi TCR). During this period, the Prosecutrix had undergone
extensive medical procedures and treatment, including on her vaginal, perineal and
rectal areas (see Ex. P78 Pg. 188, Ex. 86 Pg. 199, Ex. 97 Pg. 213, Ex. P108 Pg. 228, Ex.
Pll1 Pg. 231, Ex. ll3 Pg. 234 Hindi TCR). In such a scenario, the finding of viable male
Y-STR DNA in the vulval pad collected 7 days after the sexual assault (approximately
163 hours after the alleged time of the incident) would be impossible. For this,
reference may be made to established scientific protocols and literature, which state
that DNA profile cannot be obtained from vaginal samples 96 hours after sexual
assault. [Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Guidelines & Protocols Medico-legal
care for survivors/victims for sexual violence, 2014, pgs 29, 59; Gringas et. al.
Biological and DNA evidence in 1000 sexual assault cases, Forensic Science
International: Genetics Supplement Series 2 (2009) 138-140] Further, it is important
to note that a set of samples, including nails, pad, hair combings, grass and mud
samples, and swabs taken from labia and posterior fornix were collected from the
Prosecutrix on 27.06.2018 at MY Hospital Indore (Ex.85, Pg. 198 Hindi TCR). No
seizure memo was prepared after the collection of these samples and the chain of
custody of these samples after collection by the doctors is unknown. Despite that,

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/31392346/

6

Irfan @ Bhayu Mevati vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 16 January, 2025

since the Prosecutrix's nails were collected on 27.06.2018 as per the medical record,
the finding of Y-STR DNA on the second set of nail clippings collected after 6 days on
02.07.2018 would be impossible.

iii. Issues in the chain of custody of vulval pad (item R) which warrant further examination of DNA
profiling results:

As per the medical records at MY Hospital Indore (Ex. 116, Pg. 239-240 Hindi TCR),
the vulval pad (item R) was collected along with 4 swabs (from the perinium, vagina,
preanal and anal), 2 smears, blood sample, hair and nail clippings on 02.07.2018 at 1
PM and handed over to PC Archana Dodiya (760). However, as per the seizure memo
(Ex. 181, Pg. 348 Hindi TCR) and the forwarding memo from the police to SFSL
Sagar (Ex. 154), these items were seized on 29.06.2018. It is important to note that
no samples have been collected from the Prosecutrix on 29.06.2018. Therefore, the
identity and custody of the vulval pad (item R) is dubious.

iv. Doubts over identity of pubic hair (item 1): Item I is alleged to be the pubic hair of the Applicant
from which a mixed DNA profile has been generated that is reported to include the DNA profile of
the Prosecutrix. However, the mixed DNA profile excludes the Applicant's DNA, on 5 out of 24
genetic markers or loci (THOJ, D22Sl045, D10S1248, Y-Indel, DYS391) (Pg. 302 Hindi TCR), which
raises doubts regarding the identity of the pubic hair. It is important to note that the DNA report
fails to mention this exclusion for the Applicant's DNA in item I and incorrectly refers to Item I as
pubic hair of the Applicant in the findings and opinion.

v. Absence of Applicant's DNA from clothes (Pant item K, Shirt item L and Baniyan item N): It is the
prosecution's case that items K, Land N are clothes worn by the Applicant during the commission of
the offence. As per the DNA report, the Pant item K and Baniyan item N only have a single source
DNA profile which is consistent with the DNA of the Prosecutrix. Further, item L reveals a mixed
DNA profile which is also reported as containing the DNA of the Prosecutrix. However, the
Applicant is excluded from this mixed DNA profile on 9 out of 24 loci(D8Sll79, D19S433, THO1,
D22Sl045, D13S317, D7S820, D1OSJ248, D1Sl656, D12S391) (Pg. 302 Hindi TCR). Therefore, the
Applicant's DNA is not found on any of the clothing items attributed to him which raises a serious
doubt since a person's clothes may contain different sources of their DNA, including skin, saliva,
sweat, semen, blood etc. vi. Presence of unknown alleles in DNA profiles generated from hair found
at crime scene (item Y) and Applicant's shirt (item L): The mixed DNA profile obtained from the
shirt (item L) contains unknown alleles on 5 out of 24 loci (CSFlPO, D21Sll, FGA, SE33, D2S 1338)
which are not attributable either to the Prosecutrix or the Applicant (Pg. 302 Hindi TCR). Further,
the mixed Y-STR DNA profile obtained from the hair found at the crime scene (item Y) contains an
unknown allele on one locus (DYS635) (Pg. 299 Hindi TCR). Since both these samples show the
presence of unknown alleles, it is more important to review the interpretation of the mixed DNA
profile by reviewing the electronic raw data and the electropherograms. As explained in the section
below, interpretation of DNA mixtures requires consideration of the number of contributors, the
peak heights of the alleles as seen in the electropherograms and the peak height ratios to consider
the allele pairs (or genotype) for ascertaining whether an individual's DNA is present within the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/31392346/

7

Irfan @ Bhayu Mevati vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 16 January, 2025

mixture. Mere finding of individual alleles without identifying the genotypes is scientifically invalid.
For example, if alleles A, B, C, D are present in a DNA mixture and the suspect has alleles C and D in
their profile, it is incorrect to conclude that the suspect's DNA is present in the DNA mixture. This is
because with these alleles, 10 possible genotypes are possible i.e. AA, BB, CC DD, AB, AC, AD, BC,
BD, CD. In such a scenario, it is possible that genotype CD may not be present in the mixture
although the individual alleles C and D are reported in the mixture. Further since unknown alleles
have been found in DNA profiles generated from hair found at crime scene (item Y) and Applicant's
shirt (item L), equipment log sheets are required to check for contamination, to determine which
samples were run with the aforesaid samples. In the absence of any interpretational data in the DNA
report, the finding of unknown alleles in hair found at the crime scene (item Y) and the Applicant's
shirt (item L) raise more concerns regarding the interpretation of the DNA mixtures to conclude the
presence of the Applicant's and the Prosecutrix's DNA in these items, respectively.

vii. Presence of off-ladder allele in multiple samples: As per the allelic tables in the DNA report, the
autosomal STR profiles for six samples shows an off-ladder peak on locus SE33 (Pg. 300 and 304,
Hindi TCR). The samples include the hair found at the crime scene (item Y), and blood sample (item
F), underwear (item A), pubic hair (item B), nail (item Z-4) and baniyan (item Z-7) collected from
co-accused Asif. As per established scientific protocols, including the DFSS MHA Working
Procedures Manual for Forensic DNA Profiling, an off- ladder peak may either be a true allele or an
artefact created during the DNA profiling process. To determine the nature of an OL allele,
re-amplification of the samples would be required, particularly if the peak is observed in a DNA
mixture such as the hair found at the crime scene (item Y). Interpretation of DNA profiles without
determining the nature of the OL peak cannot be done. Further, as per the DFSS manual,
documentation of an OL allele requires the electropherogram with both the sample and associated
allelic ladder for the locus to be provided. (DFSS MHA, Working Procedures Manual Forensic DNA
Testing, 2019, pg 131-132) Since multiple samples have displayed an OL allele, it is essential to check
if the procedures for interpretation of an OL allele have been followed in this case. The identity of
this OL allele directly impacts the interpretation and genotyping of the other allelic peaks that
present in these samples. Without such information, the interpretation and conclusions regarding
these samples cannot be relied upon.

A. Lack of serological examination to identify the body fluid in item W: As per the forwarding letter
(Ex. PI 54, Pg. 602 Hindi TCR), the soil seized from the crime scene (item W) was forwarded to the
SFSL Sagar as "blood stained soil". The DNA Report refers to this sample as blood stained soil from
the crime scene and concludes that the Prosecutrix's DNA is found in that sample. However, it must
be noted that no serological examination has been done to conclude that this sample contains blood.
Further, even assuming that the DNA profile generated is correctly reported in the allelic table, DNA
examination cannot determine the biological material from which the DNA is sourced.

B. THE DNA REPORT (EX. 157) IS INCOMPLETE AND CANNOT BE RELIED UPON IN THE
ABSENCE OF UNDERLYING REASONS

9. The DNA Report does not contain the complete data and materials relied upon during the DNA
examination, which form the basis of the conclusion drawn in the report. It is pertinent to note that

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/31392346/

8

Irfan @ Bhayu Mevati vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 16 January, 2025

without examining these materials, neither this Hon'ble Court nor the Applicant can verify the
accuracy and reliability of the DNA evidence. As per settled law, under Section 45 of the Indian
Evidence Act, it is the duty of the expert to provide the "necessary scientific criteria for testing the
accuracy of the conclusions so as to enable the Judge to form his independent judgment by the
application of these criteria to the facts proved by the evidence of the case." (State of Himachal
Pradesh v Jai Lal, (1999) 7 SCC 280, para 18, Ramesh Chandra Agarwal v. Regency Hospital Ltd.
(2009) 9 sec 709,para 20)

10. The DNA report only contains the allelic tables followed by the conclusions of the tests and
analysis conducted. Crucial underlying data and materials, such as details of the amount of DNA
extracted and amplified for each sample, quantification kits used, use of positive and negative
controls during different steps of DNA profiling, use of allelic ladders for interpretation, the
electronic raw data and electropherogram generated during the electrophoresis process which were
interpreted to prepare the allelic tables, the method and thresholds for interpretation of the DNA
samples, and the statistical analysis of the samples that have matched have not been provided to the
Applicant.

11. There are glaring lapses in the chain of custody documentation with respect to crucial reference
and evidence samples which cast a doubt over the integrity of the samples and require further
examination of laboratory records. For instance, Article Zl and Z2 i.e. the blood sample (used for
generating reference DNA profile of the Prosecutrix) and oral swab of the Prosecutrix were sent to
SFSL Sagar with letter bearing no. PO/Mand/FSL/177-A/20 18 dated 02.07.2018 (Ex .155, Pg. 292
Hindi TCR). As per the evidence of PW33 SI Vijay Purohit (Pg. 454, Hindi TCR), he deposited these
articles to FSL Sagar. However, the receipt issued by SFSL Sagar dated 03.07.2018 (Ex Pl6l, Pg. 311
Hindi TCR) mentions that the articles were brought by Constable Lalit (not examined).

12. Further, the Applicant has never been given access to these documents and therefore, has been
denied an adequate opportunity to challenge the evidence adduced against him. The lack of these
documents gains further significance in this case as the DNA report has been admitted under
Section 293 CrPC (Pg.10 297 Hindi TCR) and the evidence of the DNA experts who have signed the
report, Dr Kamlesh Kaitholia Scientific Officer, Dr. Praveesh Bhati Scientific Officer and Dr Ani!
Kumar Singh Scientific Officer & Assistant Chemical Examiner, have not been recorded. This has
further limited the scope of the scientific and technical examination of the DNA evidence in the
present case. In several decisions, this Hon'ble Court has reiterated the need to ensure quality
control of the samples and the testing methods used as part of the DNA examination. Given the
sensitive nature of DNA which makes it susceptible to issues of contamination and DNA transfer,
this Court has also stressed on the need to ensure that possibility of contamination is eliminated
(Anil v. State of Maharashtra (2014) 4 SCC 69 para 53, Manoj v. State of Madhya Pradesh, Crl.
Appeal 248-250 of 2015 decided on 20.05.2022 paras 139- 141, Pattu Rajan v. State of Tamil Nadu
(2019) 4 SCC 771 para

52)

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/31392346/

9

Irfan @ Bhayu Mevati vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 16 January, 2025

13. The non-supply of the complete laboratory documentation violates the Applicant's right to an
adequate and meaningful opportunity to challenge the DNA evidence adduced against him,
resulting in violation of his right to fair trial under Article 21 of the Constitution. As explained above,
without these documents, the scientific accuracy and reliability of DNA evidence cannot be
ascertained. Furthermore, the absence of a request on the Applicant's part to supply these
documents at an earlier stage cannot have the effect of foreclosing a right of the accused. [Manu
Sharma v. State (NCT of Delhi) 2010 6 SCC 1 (paras 220-221), V.K. Sasikala v. State (2012) 9 SCC
771 (paras 20-21)] C. THE DNA REPORT (EX. 157) HAS NOT BEEN PROVED BY THE DNA
EXPERT

14. The DNA Report has been signed by Dr Kamlesh Kaitholia Scientific Officer, Dr. Praveesh Bhati
Scientific Officer and Dr Ani! Kumar Singh Scientific Officer & Assistant Chemical Examiner (Pg.
305 Hindi TCR). However, none of these experts were examined in order to prove the contents or
the conclusions of the DNA report. In fact, the DNA report was proven by PW31 Rakesh Mukati, the
Superintendent of Police, who merely mentions that the DNA report was received via letter bearing
serial no. FSL/DNA/1078, 1087 and 1132 /2018 dated 11.07.2018 and was sent by PS City Kotwali
for the purpose of attaching it to the case documents (PW31, Pg. 447 Hindi TCR). Not involved in
the process of DNA examination, PW31 Rakesh Mukati does not testifY to the methodology used
during the different steps of the DNA profiling process or the basis for the interpretation of the DNA
profiles. Further, given the absence of the DNA experts who conducted the examination, the
Applicant is prohibited from cross-examining on the scientific and technical aspects of DNA
profiling, which go to the foundation of the DNA evidence.

15. It is humbly submitted that errors in the DNA examination mentioned above have been
overlooked by the lower courts and the DNA evidence has been incorrectly considered. Contrary to
the correct scientific and legal position, the Ld. Trial Court in paragraph 62 of its decision even
mentioned that DNA profile detection is an "advanced and precise science". Hence, the Ld. Trial
Court did not question the conclusions of the DNA Report and took the opinions as facts.

16. That in order to effectively challenge the conclusions of the DNA Report, the Applicant seeks a
copy of all underlying documents, including but not limited to, the worksheets for DNA extraction,
quantification, amplification and electrophoresis for all exhibits received in the present case,
electropherograms for DNA profiles generated in respect of all articles received, allelic ladders and
control samples, details of all the tests conducted as well as their results, DNA working procedure
manual used in examination of all exhibits received in the present case, complete chain of custody
documentation for all Articles received, with details of the packaging, seals and sample seals used, in
respect of all forensic DNA reports generated by FSL Sagar.

17. The Applicant further seeks that the Ld. Trial Court be directed to summon and take on record
the testimony of Dr Anil Kumar Singh or any such person competent to testify to the methodology
adopted, the manner in which DNA profiles were extracted, tests conducted, the chain of custody of
articles within FSL Sagar, analysis of the DNA, and basis of the conclusions in the DNA Report.”
Notice was issued on this application on 10th August, 2022 and the State has filed a response to the
same with a categoric plea that the State FSL has preserved the documents for 10 years and they are

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/31392346/

10

Irfan @ Bhayu Mevati vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 16 January, 2025

available with the State FSL, Sagar, Madhya Pradesh. It is further stated that the scientific officers
are still in service of State FSL, but they have been transferred to different units and can be called
upon as and when this Court deems it necessary to summon them so as to substantiate the exhibited
reports.

13. Learned counsel appearing for the appellants vehemently and fervently contended that the
denial of the permission to examine the scientific experts with reference to the documents on which,
the evidence of DNA Experts and the FSL Experts was based, has caused grave prejudice to the
appellants and goes to the very root of the case.

14. He submitted that the DNA report signed by the scientific experts forms a critical piece of
evidence, which has been relied upon by the trial Court and High Court while convicting the
appellants. Therefore, the non- examination of these scientific experts has led to gross miscarriage
of justice vitiating the entire trial.

15. Learned counsel urged that the DNA report has been signed by Dr. Anil Kumar Singh, Scientific
Officer and Assistant Chemical Examiner, Dr. Kamlesh Kaitholia, Scientific Officer, and Dr. Pravesh
Bhatti, Scientific Officer. However, none of these Experts were examined to prove the
contents/conclusions of the DNA report (Exhibit - 157) which was proved during the evidence of
Rakesh Mukati, Superintendent of Police (PW-31). It was submitted that the mere exhibiting of the
DNA report during the deposition of the Police Officer would not satisfy the essential requirement to
prove the methodology used during the different steps of DNA profiling or the basis of the
interpretation of DNA profiling.

16. Learned counsel further pointed out that even the allele number entered into the table, was
corrected subsequently after comparison from the Electropherogram, without giving any
opportunity to the accused to rebut the same. He urged that the State Government has admitted in
its reply that there was a typographical error in the allele number, which was corrected at a later
stage. He thus, urged that the accused have suffered grave prejudice on account of the failure of the
prosecution to provide the fundamental material on which, the DNA report was based. It was also
contended that the failure to examine the experts in evidence has led to a miscarriage of justice.

17. He submitted that even the relevant questions regarding the DNA report were not put to the
accused persons (appellants herein) when their statements were recorded under Section 313 CrPC,
which has caused them grave prejudice. He placed reliance on the judgment of this Court in the case
of Anokhilal v. State of Madhya Pradesh17 and urged that the application deserves acceptance and
the scientific experts be summoned and the accused be allowed to cross-examine these witnesses
with reference to the complete records including the link evidence so that they can be provided a
proper opportunity to defend themselves, more particularly as they face the daunting prospect of
death penalty.

18. Learned counsel for the State has filed a detailed reply to the application filed by the accused
under Section 391 read with Article 142 of the Constitution of India. It has been asserted in the reply
that the (2019) 20 SCC 196 discrepancy in the allele number entered into the table was simply a

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/31392346/

11

Irfan @ Bhayu Mevati vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 16 January, 2025

typographical error and thus, was bona fide corrected after comparison with the Electropherogram.
It was further submitted that the trial Court acted in consonance with the legislative mandate of the
Criminal Law Amendment Act, 2018 which requires that a trial for the offence under Section
376(DB) IPC must be completed in a time-bound manner and thus, no fault can be found in the
procedure of conducting trial.

19. Learned counsel for the State urged that there is absolutely no necessity to examine the scientific
experts and that the exhibiting of the DNA report under Section 293 CrPC is sufficient compliance of
the statutory mandate. The examination of the expert(s) would have been a mere formality thereby,
delaying the trial. Contending so, he implored the Court to dismiss the application.

20. Learned standing counsel appearing for the State was, however, not in a position to dispute the
fact that the DNA report was formally exhibited in the evidence of the Superintendent of Police
(PW-31)and none of the scientific experts who conducted the DNA profiling procedure, prepared
and issued the report, were examined during trial so as to testify about the methodology used during
the different steps of the DNA profiling or the basis for the interpretation thereof.

21. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the submissions advanced by the parties and have
perused the material available on record.

22. It is an admitted position that the DNA profiling report (Exhibit-

157) was formally exhibited by the Superintendent of Police(PW-31) in his evidence. None of the
scientific experts involved in the process of conducting the DNA profiling examination and issuing
the report have been examined by the prosecution.

23. The DNA profiling report is a document on which the entire fulcrum of the prosecution case is
based. The defence has claimed grave prejudice on account of non-examination of these scientific
witnesses and the non-production of the experts in evidence, thereby creating a grave doubt on the
probative value of the report.

24. The aspect concerning evidentiary value of DNA report has been explained by this Court in
Rahul v. State of Delhi, Ministry of Home Affairs18, wherein it was held as under: -

"36. The learned Amicus Curiae has also assailed the forensic evidence i.e. the report
regarding the DNA profiling dated 18-4- 2012 (Ext. P-23/1) giving incriminating
findings. She vehemently submitted that apart from the fact that the collection of the
samples sent for examination itself was very doubtful, the said forensic evidence was
neither scientifically nor legally proved and could not have been used as a
circumstance against the appellant-accused. The Court finds substance in the said
submissions made by the Amicus Curiae. The DNA evidence is in the nature of
opinion (2023) 1 SCC 83 evidence as envisaged under Section 45 and like any other
opinion evidence, its probative value varies from case to case.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/31392346/

12

Irfan @ Bhayu Mevati vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 16 January, 2025

38. It is true that PW 23 Dr B.K. Mohapatra, Senior Scientific Officer (Biology) of CFSL, New Delhi
had stepped into the witness box and his report regarding DNA profiling was exhibited as Ext. PW
23/A, however mere exhibiting a document, would not prove its contents. The record shows that all
the samples relating to the accused and relating to the deceased were seized by the investigating
officer on 14-2-2012 and 16-2-2012; and they were sent to CFSL for examination on 27-2-2012.
During this period, they remained in the malkhana of the police station. Under the circumstances,
the possibility of tampering with the samples collected also could not be ruled out. Neither the trial
court nor the High Court has examined the underlying basis of the findings in the DNA reports nor
have they examined the fact whether the techniques were reliably applied by the expert. In the
absence of such evidence on record, all the reports with regard to the DNA profiling become highly
vulnerable, more particularly when the collection and sealing of the samples sent for examination
were also not free from suspicion."

(emphasis supplied)

25. This Court in Zahira Habibulla H. Sheikh v. State of Gujarat19 has emphasized that the object of
the criminal trial is to search for the truth and the trial is not about over technicalities and must be
conducted in such a manner as will protect the innocent and punish the guilty. The relevant extract
is as follows:

“38. A criminal trial is a judicial examination of the issues in the case and its purpose
is to arrive at a judgment on an issue as to a fact or relevant facts which may lead to
the discovery of the fact issue and obtain proof of such facts at which the prosecution
and the accused have arrived by their pleadings; the controlling question being the
guilt or innocence of the accused. Since the object is to mete out justice and to convict
the guilty and protect the innocent, the trial should be a search for the truth and not a
bout over technicalities, and must be conducted under such (2004) 4 SCC 158 rules
as will protect the innocent, and punish the guilty. The proof of charge which has to
be beyond reasonable doubt must depend upon judicial evaluation of the totality of
the evidence.

oral and circumstantial, and not by an isolated scrutiny.

39. Failure to accord fair hearing either to the accused or the prosecution violates even minimum
standards of due process of law. It is inherent in the concept of due process of law, that
condemnation should be rendered only after the trial in which the hearing is a real one, not sham or
a mere farce and pretence. Since the fair hearing requires an opportunity to preserve the process, it
may be vitiated and violated by an overhasty, stage- managed, tailored, and partisan trial.

40. The fair trial for a criminal offence consists not only in technical observance of the frame and
forms of law, but also in recognition and just application of its principles in substance, to find out
the truth and prevent miscarriage of justice.”

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/31392346/

13

Irfan @ Bhayu Mevati vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 16 January, 2025

26. The controversy in question is squarely covered by the decision of this Court in
Anokhilal(supra), wherein, this Court remanded the matter to the trial Court for de-novo trial,
considering the fact that the entire trial was completed in a period of less than one month and that
the DNA report was received almost at the fag end of the matter, and after such receipt, though
technically an opportunity was given to the accused, the issue on the point was concluded the very
same day. The relevant extract is as under:

“26. Expeditious disposal is undoubtedly required in criminal matters and that would
naturally be part of guarantee of fair trial. However, the attempts to expedite the
process should not be at the expense of the basic elements of fairness and the
opportunity to the accused, on which postulates, the entire criminal administration of
justice is founded. In the pursuit for expeditious disposal, the cause of justice must
never be allowed to suffer or be sacrificed. What is paramount is the cause of justice
and keeping the basic ingredients which secure that as a core idea and ideal, the
process may be expedited, but fast tracking of process must never ever result in
burying the cause of justice.

……..

28. All that we can say by way of caution is that in matters where death sentence
could be one of the alternative punishments, the courts must be completely vigilant
and see that full opportunity at every stage is afforded to the accused.

29. We, therefore, have no hesitation in setting aside the judgments of conviction and
orders of sentence passed by the trial court and the High Court against the appellant
and directing de novo consideration. It shall be open to the learned counsel
representing the appellant in the trial court to make any submissions touching upon
the issues (i) whether the charges framed by the trial court are required to be
amended or not; (ii) whether any of the prosecution witnesses need to be recalled for
further cross-examination; and (iii) whether any expert evidence is required to be led
in response to the FSL report and DNA report. The matter shall, thereafter, be
considered on the basis of available material on record in accordance with law.”

27. This Court in Anokhilal(supra), has further provided certain norms to remove the technical
infirmities in Para 31 of the judgment, which reads as under:-

“31. Before we part, we must lay down certain norms so that the infirmities that we
have noticed in the present matter are not repeated:

31.1. In all cases where there is a possibility of life sentence or death sentence, learned
advocates who have put in minimum of 10 years' practice at the Bar alone be
considered to be appointed as Amicus Curiac or through legal services to represent an
accused.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/31392346/

14

Irfan @ Bhayu Mevati vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 16 January, 2025

31.2. In all matters dealt with by the High Court concerning confirmation of death
sentence, Senior Advocates of the Court must first be considered to be appointed as
Amicus Curiae.

31.3. Whenever any learned counsel is appointed as Amicus Curiae, some reasonable
time may be provided to enable the counsel to prepare the matter. There cannot be
any hard-and-

fast rule in that behalf. However, a minimum of seven days' time may normally be considered to be
appropriate and adequate. 31.4. Any learned counsel, who is appointed as Amicus Curiae on behalf
of the accused must normally be granted to have meetings and discussions with the accused
concerned. Such interactions may prove to be helpful as was noticed in Imtiyaz Ramzan Khan.”

28. Further, this Court in Naveen @ Ajay v. State of Madhya Pradesh20, wherein the accused was
never asked as to whether he admits the documents, as required under Section 294 CrPC and
neither the scientific experts were called to prove the reports, remanded the matter to the trial Court
for de-novo trial holding that no proper opportunity was granted to the accused therein to defend
himself. The relevant extract from this judgment is as under:-

“8. ………It is significant to note that the FSL report, Viscera report and DNA report
were not submitted along with the charge-sheet. The same were presented before the
Trial Court on 04.05.2018. The accused was never asked as to whether he admits the
documents, as required under Section 294 of Cr. P.C.. Neither any witnesses were
called to prove these reports. After the prosecution case was closed on 08.05.2018,
the accused examination was conducted on the very next day i.e. on 09.05.2018 and
thereafter on the next day i.e. on 10.05.2018, the case was fixed for examination of
defence witness.

It requires special notice that the accused was in jail and was not defended by a
counsel of his choice but by a legal aid counsel. He was not in a position to present
the witness himself, yet he was directed to keep his witnesses present on the next day
i.e. on 10.05.2018. On this date, he could not produce his witnesses, therefore, his
defence was closed, and the case was posted for final arguments after recess.

22. In the case at hand, the prosecution is based on circumstantial evidence in which
the prosecution has to prove each link in the chain of circumstantial evidence and the
important chains in the link are DNA report, FSL report and Viscera report. When
the reports were challenged by the 2023 SCC OnLine SC 1365 accused before the
High Court, it was brushed aside by observing that even if the authors of the reports
were not called for evidence, in terms of Section 293 Cr. P.C., the reports are not open
to question as the defence had an opportunity to cross-examine the authors of the
reports during the trial. In our considered view, the High Court was not correct in
saying that the defence had an opportunity to cross-examine the experts. The trial
has been conducted on day-to-day basis wherein the accused, who was in jail and

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/31392346/

15

Irfan @ Bhayu Mevati vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 16 January, 2025

defended by a counsel from legal aid, was compelled by the Trial Court to produce
defence witness of his own in one day. It was impossible for the accused himself to
produce Dr. Anil Kumar Singh and Dr. Kamlesh Kaitholiya, the authors of the
Reports (Ex.P-72), in one day because the said experts are government servants and
could not have attended the Court at the request of an accused in jail. The Trial Court
treated the accused as if he is carrying a magic wand which is available to produce
highly qualified experts, who are government servants, on a phone call. There was no
opportunity, in the real sense, to the appellant to cross-examine the experts.”
(emphasis supplied)

29. The instant case involves capital punishment and thus, providing a fair opportunity to the
accused to defend himself is absolutely imperative and non-negotiable. The trial in the case at hand
was concluded without providing appropriate opportunity of defending to the accused and within
and within a period of less than two months from the date of registration of the case, which is
reflective of undue haste. The failure of the trial Court to ensure the deposition of the scientific
experts while relying upon the DNA report, has definitely led to the failure of justice thereby,
vitiating the trial.

30. In the wake of the above discussion, we allow the application filed by the appellants. The case is
remanded to the trial Court who shall summon the scientific experts associated with the preparation
and issuance of the DNA report with the entire supporting material. These scientific experts shall be
summoned and examined as Court witnesses with a proper opportunity of examination to the
prosecution and the defence in that order. In case the accused are not represented by a counsel of
their choice, a defence counsel having substantial experience in terms of the guidelines laid down by
this Court in Anokhilal(supra) (extracted in Para 26 of this judgment) shall be appointed to defend
the accused and in the de novo trial.

31. Pursuant to the testimony of the scientific experts being recorded, the accused shall be again
questioned under Section 313 CrPC in context to the fresh evidence. They shall be provided a fair
opportunity of leading defence evidence. Thereafter, the trial Court shall proceed to re- hear the
arguments and decide the case afresh as per law. The entire process as directed above, shall be
completed within a period of four months from the date of receipt of this order.

32. That the discussion made above is confined to the issue of the right of the accused to seek
examination of the scientific experts connected with the DNA report and the same shall not be taken
to be a reflection on the merits of the matter, which shall be considered and gone into, uninfluenced
by any observations made by us in this order.

33. Consequently, the judgment dated 21st August, 2018, passed by the trial Court and the judgment
dated 9th September, 2021, passed by the High Court are quashed and set aside.

34. The appeals are allowed accordingly.

35. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/31392346/

16

Irfan @ Bhayu Mevati vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 16 January, 2025

… … … … … … … . … … … . J .   ( V I K R A M   N A T H )   … … … … … … … . … … … . J .   ( S A N J A Y   K A R O L )
………………………….J. (SANDEEP MEHTA) New Delhi;

January 16, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/31392346/

17

