Roopwanti vs The State Of Haryana on 24 February, 2023

Roopwanti vs The State Of Haryana on 24 February, 2023

Author: Krishna Murari

Bench: B.V.Nagarathna, Krishna Murari

REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1904 OF 2014

ROOPWANTI                                                  … APPELLANT(S)

VERSUS

STATE OF HARYANA
AND ORS.                                                   … RESPONDENT(S)

JUDGMENT

KRISHNA MURARI, J.

1. The instant appeal is directed against the judgment and final order dated 24.01.2013 passed by
the High Court of Punjab & Haryana at Chandigarh, (hereinafter referred to as “High Court”) in
Criminal Appeal No. 43/MA/2012 where the Respondent Nos. 2 to 6 were acquitted of the charges
framed against them.

FACTS

2. Briefly, the facts relevant to the present appeal are that the respondents Nos. 2 to 6 herein, in
furtherance of their common intention, attacked the deceased on 22.12.2009. The deceased was
then taken to a hospital where he later died the next day on 23.12.2009.

3. An FIR of the alleged incident was lodged on 22.12.2009 at Police Station Karnal City, registered
as FIR No. 905 against the respondents herein under Sections 148,149,323,324,307,302 and 506 of
the IPC, and the police began the investigation.

4. On completion of the investigation, a final report was presented in court, and the case was
committed to the competent court for trial. The respondents were charge sheeted vide order dated
17.05.2010 to which they pleaded not guilty and sought for a full trial. After the appraisal of
evidence, the trial judge found the case of the prosecution to be doubtful which ultimately resulted

1

in the acquittal of all the respondent accused vide order dated 18.10.2011.

Roopwanti vs The State Of Haryana on 24 February, 2023

5. The Appellant herein aggrieved by the above-mentioned order of the Trial Court filed a criminal
appeal. The High Court vide impugned order dated 24.01.2013 dismissed the appeal on grounds
that judgment of acquittal passed by Trial Court was based on proper appreciation of evidence and
facts and there was no error. Aggrieved, the Appellant has preferred the instant appeal. ANALYSIS

6. In its reasoning for acquitting the respondents herein, the Trial Court in its findings held that
none of the eyewitnesses were able to support the case of the prosecution. The court noted that
Appellant, who is the mother of the deceased gave a completely different narration of events as
compared to PW1. The Trial Judge also noted that the presence of the Appellant on the spot of the
crime was also not proved, and that because she was mother of the deceased, hence, an interested
witness and her evidence was not reliable. It was also observed that as per the Forensic Science
Laboratory Report, no blood was present on the weapons recovered except for traces of blood on
one lathi, and even that could not be linked with the blood of the deceased.

7. In cases where a reversal of acquittal is sought, the courts must keep in mind that the
presumption of innocence in favour of the accused, on grounds of it surviving the rigours of a full
trial, is strengthened and stands fortified. The prosecution then, while still working under the same
burden of proof, is required to discharge a more onerous responsibility to annul and reverse the
fortified presumption of innocence. This fortification of the presumption of innocence has been held
in a catena of judgments by this court.

8. In the case of Allarakha K. Mansuri Vs. State of Gujarat 1, this Court has held that in cases of
reversal of acquittal, where two views are possible, the view which favors the accused has to be
adopted. For the sake of Convenience, the relevant paragraph of the judgment is being produced
hereunder:

“The settled position of law regarding the powers to be exercised by the High Court in
an appeal against the order of acquittal is that though the High Court has full powers
to review the evidence upon which an order of acquittal is based, it will not interfere
with an order of acquittal because with the passing of an order of acquittal the
presumption of innocence in favour of the accused is reinforced. The High Court
should be slow in disturbing the finding of the fact arrived at by the trial court. The
golden thread which runs through the web of administration of justice in criminal
case is that if two views are possible on the evidence adduced in the case, one
pointing to the guilt of the accused and the other to his innocence, the view which is
favourable to the accused should be adopted.”

9. Further, in the case of Suman Chandra Vs. Central Bureau Of Investigation2 wherein the acquittal
of the accused was challenged, this court held that while exercising its powers to reverse an
acquittal, the order of the trial court must not only be erroneous, but also perverse and 1 2002(1)
RCR(Criminal) 748 2 Criminal Appeal No.1645 of 2021 unreasonable. The relevant paragraph of the
judgment is being extracted herein:

2

Roopwanti vs The State Of Haryana on 24 February, 2023

“It is well settled law that reversal of acquittal is permissible only if the view of the
Trial Court is not only erroneous but also unreasonable and perverse. In our
considered opinion, the view taken by the Trial Court was a possible view, which was
neither perverse nor unreasonable, and in the facts and circumstances of the present
case, ought not to have been reversed or interfered with by the High Court.”

10. Similarly in the case of Mrinal Das & Others Vs. The State of Tripura3, this Court
held that interference in a judgment of acquittal can only be made if the judgment is
“clearly unreasonable” and there are “compelling and substantial reasons” for
reversing the acquittal. The relevant paragraph of the judgment is being reproduced
herein:

"An order of acquittal is to be interfered with only when there are "compelling and
substantial reasons", for doing so. If the order is "clearly unreasonable", it is a
compelling reason for interference. When the trial court has ignored the evidence or
misread the material evidence or has ignored material documents like dying
declaration/report of ballistic experts etc., the appellate court is competent to reverse
the decision of the trial Court depending on the materials placed".

3 2011(9) SCC 479 CONCLUSION

11. As can be seen from the above-mentioned judgments, an additional layer of protection is granted
to an accused in cases where the accused already enjoys an acquittal. In the present case, we are in
agreement with the decision of the High Court. From a perusal of the judgment of the Trial Court, it
can be seen that no perversity has been committed by the Trial Court while reaching its conclusion.
All the evidence on record has been carefully perused and a detailed analysis has been carried out to
come to the conclusion.

12. In such circumstance, we find no reason to interfere with the decision of the Trial Court as well
as the High Court. As a consequence, the appeal stands dismissed.

….……....….......................…,J.

(KRISHNA MURARI) ….…....….......................…,J.

(B.V.NAGARATHNA) NEW DELHI;

24TH FEBRUARY, 2023

3