Sanjay Raghunath Agarwal vs The Directorate Of Enforcement on 20 April, 2023

Sanjay Raghunath Agarwal vs The Directorate Of Enforcement
on 20 April, 2023

Author: Pankaj Mithal

Bench: Pankaj Mithal, V. Ramasubramanian

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1198 OF 2023
(Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No.1655 of 2023)

SANJAY RAGHUNATH AGARWAL                                        …APPELLANT
VERSUS
THE DIRECTORATE OF ENFORCEMENT                                 …RESPONDENT

JUDGMENT

PANKAJ MITHAL, J.

1. Leave granted.

2. Heard Shri R. Basant, senior counsel and Shri S.V. Raju, learned Additional Solicitor General for
the parties.

3. A criminal complaint in FIR No.664/2013 was registered on 29.10.2013 with the Cyberabad
Police, against six persons, including the appellant herein for alleged offences under Sections 406,
407, 415 to 420, 120B read with Section 34 IPC. The FIR was registered on the basis of a complaint
lodged by one M. Srinivas Reddy, who was the Managing Director of a Company by name M/s
Farmax India Limited1. The gist of the complaint was, 1hereinafter referred to as “Farmax” that
Farmax availed the services of the accused in raising Global Depository Receipts (GDRs), to the tune
of USD 71.09 millions equivalent to INR 318 crores; that though the accused raised the said amount,
they transferred to Farmax only a sum of USD 0.4 millions equivalent to INR 2.20 crores; and that
upon enquiry with the bank, the complainant company came to know that the accused has
misappropriated the balance amount by forging the signatures, with the help of the pledged
documents.

4. It is relevant to note here that the aforesaid FIR was registered, pursuant to an Order passed by
the VI Metropolitan Magistrate, Cyberabad at Medchal, Rangareddy District, under Section156(3) of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

1

Sanjay Raghunath Agarwal vs The Directorate Of Enforcement on 20 April, 2023

5. Though the FIR was registered more than nine years ago, no final report has been filed so far.
However, the raising of GDR by Farmax became the subject matter of enquiry by Securities and
Exchange Board of India2. SEBI passed an Order dated 14.07.2020 holding that there were
violations of various provisions of Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 and various
regulations of Securities and Exchange Board of India (Prohibition of Fraudulent and Unfair Trade
Practices relating to Securities Market) Regulations, 2003. More 2 For Short “SEBI” particularly,
SEBI found one Mr. Arun Panchariya and a few others guilty of misleading Indian investors through
14 identical GDR issues involving fraudulent schemes.

6. Pursuant to the aforesaid, the Enforcement Directorate filed an information report in ECIR
No.HYZO/26/2022 dated 05.05.2022, naming six individuals and nine entities, as persons
suspected of committing the offence of money-laundering under Section 3 of the Prevention of
Money-laundering Act, 2002 3.

7. After the lodging of the Enforcement Case Information Report, the appellant was arrested by the
Enforcement Directorate on 26.09.2022. By an Order dated 27.09.2022, the appellant was
remanded to judicial custody by the Metropolitan Sessions Judge, Hyderabad. The Court also
granted the custody of the appellant to the Enforcement Directorate for a period of six days from
06.10.2022 to 11.10.2022.

8. Subsequently, the Enforcement Directorate filed a prosecution complaint under Sections 44 and
45 of PMLA against four individuals and two entities, namely, (i) Shri Sanjay Aggarwal, (ii) Shri
Morthala Malla Reddy, (iii) Shri Arun Panchariya, (iv) Shri Mukesh Chauradiya, (v) M/s La
Richesse Advisors Private limited represented by Shri Sanjay Aggarwal and 3 For short “PMLA”

(vi) M/s Vintage FZE, UAE represented by Shri Arun Panchariya. The sum and substance of the
complaint was, that Farmax availed the services of the appellant herein and the other accused in
raising GDRs to the tune of USD 71.09 millions equivalent to INR 318 crores; that Vintage FZE, a
wholly owned entity of Arun Panchariya solely subscribed to these GDRs, after availing a loan from
EURAM Bank, under a loan agreement dated 05.05.2020; that Farmax executed a pledge
agreement with EURAM Bank, undertaking that the entire proceeds will be pledged to secure the
loan granted by EURAM Bank; that though Farmax issued GDRs, the proceeds were not credited to
Farmax’s credit in India, as the same had been kept as collateral; that Vintage FZE repaid only part
of the loan and, hence, the balance amount alone got released by the bank to Farmax; that this
diversion of funds caused a loss to Farmax to the extent of USD 15.60 millions; that the GDRs were
thereafter converted into equity shares and sold in the Indian Stock Market; that when Farmax was
advised by the appellant to go for GDRs, Farmax was not eligible for the amount of GDR; that
therefore, the appellant herein and the entity owned by him took the lead role in coordinating the
offering; that the appellant was the central figure in the entire drama; that the appellant is a
qualified Chartered Accountant, having had experience of working with stock exchange filings
related to GDRs; that the appellant was introduced by Arun Panchariya to Srinivas Reddy; and that
the appellant and the others had committed the offence of money-laundering.

2

Sanjay Raghunath Agarwal vs The Directorate Of Enforcement on 20 April, 2023

9. According to the Enforcement Directorate, the appellant was responsible for creating the entire
infrastructure for Farmax and Arun Panchariya to bring about the fraudulent GDR issue and that
the appellant provided formats for Board Resolutions and also helped in transferring the funds from
the account of Farmax with EURAM Bank to the Farmax subsidiary, namely, M/s. Farmax
International FZE in UAE.

10. In the background of the above facts, it is contended by Shri R. Basant, learned senior counsel:
(i) that the appellant has been languishing in jail from 26.09.2022, without any charge-sheet having
been filed against him in the predicate offence for the past more than nine years; (ii) that even
Srinivas Reddy at whose instance a FIR was registered way back in the year 2013 for the predicate
offence was arrested by the Enforcement Directorate, but the application filed by the Enforcement
Directorate for his remand was rejected by the Court; (iii) that the appellant is a Chartered
Accountant by profession and that he offered only professional services within the framework of
law; and (iv) that there is nothing in the prosecution complaint to show that the appellant is in
possession of “the proceeds of crime”.

11. However, it is contended by Shri S.V. Raju, learned Additional Solicitor General (i) that the
appellant is the kingpin and the master mind behind all the transactions; and (ii) that the petition
for bail deserves to be dismissed in view of the twin conditions prescribed in Section 45 of PMLA.

12. We have carefully considered the rival contentions.

13. Since the main contention of the learned Additional Solicitor General revolves around Section 45
of PMLA, it is necessary to see the specific role assigned to the appellant in the prosecution
complaint lodged by the Enforcement Directorate. The relevant portion of paragraph 8 of the
prosecution complaint reads as follows:

“ S P E C I F I C   R O L E   O F   T H E   A C C U S E D /   C O - A C C U S E D   P E R S O N S   I N
THECOMMISSION OF OFFENCE OF MONEY LAUNDERING IN TERMS
OFSECTION 3 OF PMLA:

(cid:132) Role of Shri Sanjay Aggarwal (A-1):-

a) Based on Sanjay Agarwal's assurances, M/s Farmax India Limited decided to
proceed with plans for a GDR listing. At this point of time M/s Farmax India Limited
was not eligible for USD 72.20 million GDR. Sanjay Agarwal and M/s La Richesse,
accompanied by Nitish Bangera took the lead role coordinating the offering.

Sanjay Agarwal decided on all the participants, including the Lead Arranger (Prospect Capital) and
the company's legal advisor ("Fox Mandal"). Although, Fox Mandal acted as counsel to Farmax, the
email communications indicate that its role was limited to preparing a due diligence report and the
Listing Prospectus ("Prospectus") to be filed with the Luxembourg Exchange.

3

Sanjay Raghunath Agarwal vs The Directorate Of Enforcement on 20 April, 2023

b) Sanjay Agarwal acted as an intermediary for almost all communications with the various
participants, and gave instructions to M/s Farmax India Limited before and after the offering.
Notwithstanding that Agarwal was the central figure who gave instructions to Farmax which was
duly followed by Morthala Srinivasa Reddy. (A-1) being a qualified Chartered Accountant, had
experience of working with stock exchange filings related to GDRs, and was introduced by Arun
Panchariya to MD of Farmax Ltd, Shri M. Sreenivasa Reddy. (A-1) by representing Arun
Panchariya's firm Prospect Capital before the depositary, the Bank of New York and being well
aware of the relation Arun Panchariya had with EURAM Bank insisted all companies going through
GDR to open a bank account in that particular bank, (A-1) being well aware of the arrangement
between Arun Panchariya and the Company promoters to share the proceeds of GDR, took the lead
role of coordinating the offering, by purposely hiding the subscriber list from submitting to
Ahmedabad Stock Exchange and hence was directly involved in the process and activity connected
with the proceeds of crime including its acquisition and hence has committed the offence of
money-laundering as defined under section 3 of PMLA, 2002 and is liable for punishment under
Section 4 of PMLA, 2002.”

14. Keeping in mind the specific role attributed to the appellant, let us now revert back to the facts
pleaded and arguments advanced. At the outset, there is no controversy about the following facts:

(i) that the registration of the ECIR and the lodging of the prosecution complaint in
the year 2022 were a sequel to the registration of the FIR for the predicate offence,
way back in the year 2013, at the instance of one M. Srinivas Reddy, Managing
Director, Farmax and also a sequel to the order passed by SEBI in the year 2020;

(ii) that no final report has been filed in the FIR for the predicate offence, for the past
nine years;

(iii) that even M. Srinivas Reddy, the de-facto complainant in the FIR for the
predicate offence, was sought to be arrested as an accused in connection with the
ECIR, but the application of the Enforcement Directorate for remand was rejected;

(iv) that the appellant is a Chartered Accountant by profession and has been in jail
from 26.09.2022; and

(v) that the relevant portion of paragraph 8 of the prosecution complaint filed by the
Enforcement Directorate, which we have extracted in the preceding paragraph, gives
room for a valid argument that the second condition found in Clause (ii) of
sub-section (1) of Section 45 of PMLA is satisfied qua the appellant.

Therefore, the continued incarceration of the appellant, in our opinion, may not be justified.

15. However, the apprehension of the Enforcement Directorate that the appellant is a flight-risk and
may go out of the country if released on bail, has to be taken care of by imposing appropriate
conditions.

4

Sanjay Raghunath Agarwal vs The Directorate Of Enforcement on 20 April, 2023

16. In view of the above, the appeal is allowed and the appellant is directed to be enlarged on bail in
ECIR No.HYZO/26/2022 dated 05.05.2022, subject to such terms and conditions as may be
imposed by the Metropolitan Sessions Judge-cum-Special Court under PMLA, Nampally,
Hyderabad. The conditions to be imposed by the Special Court shall include the following additional
conditions:

(i) The appellant shall surrender his passport before the Special Court; and

(ii) The appellant shall regularly appear before the Special Court without fail
whenever the prosecution complaint filed by ED is posted.

The appeal is allowed on the above terms. No costs.

……………………………….. J.

(V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN) ……………………………….. J.

(PANKAJ MITHAL) New Delhi;

April 20, 2023

5