Shah Newaz Khan vs The State Of Nagaland on 28 February, 2023

Shah Newaz Khan vs The State Of Nagaland on 28 February,
2023

Author: Dipankar Datta

Bench: Dipankar Datta, Hrishikesh Roy

1

Reportable

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

CIVIL APPELLATE/ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1497/2023
[ARISING OUT OF SLP(C) NO. 4149/2016]

SHAH NEWAZ KHAN & ORS.                      APPELLANTS

VS.

STATE OF NAGALAND & ORS.                    RESPONDENTS

WITH

TRANSFER PETITION (C) NO. 307/2016

SHAH NEWAZ KHAN & ORS.                      PETITIONERS

VS.

STATE OF NAGALAND & ORS.                    RESPONDENTS
Signature Not Verified

1

Shah Newaz Khan vs The State Of Nagaland on 28 February, 2023

Digitally signed by
Harshita Uppal
Date: 2023.02.28
17:28:06 IST
Reason:
(cid:12)                                  2

JUDGMENT

Dipankar Datta, J.

1. Leave granted.

THE ISSUE

2. An issue, pristinely legal and novel, emerges for decision. It is novel in the sense that although
three different High Courts of the country have taken views which are entirely consistent, except the
view taken in the judgment and order under challenge of the Gauhati High Court which impliedly
stands overruled by a larger Bench of the same High Court, this Court hitherto might not have had
the occasion to deal with such an issue and decide either way.

3. Shortly put, the issue is:

Is the Supreme Court the sole repository of power in terms of section 25 of the Code
of Civil Procedure (for brevity ‘the CPC’) to direct transfer of a suit, appeal or other
proceeding from a Civil Court in one State to a Civil Court in another State? Or, is it
open for a High Court, if it is the common High Court for two or more States, to
entertain an application for transfer under section 24 of the CPC and transfer a suit,
appeal or other proceeding from a Civil Court to another Civil Court, both of which
are subordinate to such High Court but situate in different States in relation to which
it exercises jurisdiction, for consideration and decision?

FACTS AND THE ORDER UNDER CHALLENGE

4. The facts leading to presentation of this appeal reveal that the appellants having instituted a suit
for declaration of right, title and interest as well as for perpetual injunction and damages in the
court of the District Judge at Dimapur, Nagaland sometime in 2007, failed to prosecute it in the
right earnest allegedly due to hostile circumstances created by the private defendants in the suit
resulting in dismissal and restoration thereof on three occasions. Pleading why it is impossible for
them to continue with prosecution of the suit at Dimapur, the appellants moved an application
under section 24 of the CPC before the Gauhati High Court for an order to transfer the suit to the
court of the District Judge at Guwahati, Assam. A learned Judge of the Gauhati High Court, which
presently happens to be the common High Court for the States of Assam, Nagaland, Mizoram and
Arunachal Pradesh, presiding over the Bench at the principal seat at Guwahati, rejected the

2

Shah Newaz Khan vs The State Of Nagaland on 28 February, 2023

application for transfer by a judgment and order dated 10 th December, 2015. While so rejecting, the
learned Judge followed His Lordship’s previous decision in Pomi Sengupta vs. Biswajit Sengupta1
which, in turn, had entirely relied on the decision of this Court in Durgesh Sharma vs. Jayshree2.
The judgment and order of rejection of the application under section 24 of the CPC is under
challenge in this appeal.

5. The appellants, by way of abundant caution, have also applied before this Court under section 25
of the CPC seeking the same relief that was disallowed by the learned Judge. APPELLANTS’
CONTENTIONS 1 (2015) 6 GLR 396 2 (2008) 9 SCC 648

6. Appearing in support of the appeal, Mr. Goswami, learned senior counsel contended that:

a. Article 214 of the Constitution of India ordains that there shall be a High-Court for
each State. Article 231 of the Constitution of India provides for the establishment of a
common High Court for two or more States.

b. The relevant provisions of the CPC for the purpose of a decision on the present
dispute are sections 22 to 25 read with section 3 thereof dealing with subordination
of courts. c. The power of the High Court and the District Courts to direct transfer of
proceedings is provided in section 24 of the CPC.

d. The facts of the instant case clearly satisfy all the ingredients of section 24 CPC,
more particularly, sub-clause (ii) of clause (b) of sub-section (1) thereof. A bare
perusal of such provision 24 would indicate that the High Court may, at any stage,
direct transfer of proceedings pending before it to any court subordinate to it, or
transfer proceedings pending in any court subordinate to it to itself or to any other
court subordinate to it. Thus, the emphasis under the said provision is on the
expression "court subordinate to it". Section 3 of the CPC, inter alia, defines the
courts subordinate to the High Court. Thus, on a plain reading of section 24 of the
CPC, it is evident that the common High Court, i.e., the Gauhati High Court, has the
power and jurisdiction to direct inter-State transfer of proceedings, provided both the
transferor and transferee courts are subordinate to it, and fall within its territorial
jurisdiction, which is the case here. e. On a harmonious construction of section 24
and section 25 of the CPC, it is clear that the latter will apply only to inter-State
transfer of proceedings between two States where the two States in question have
different High Courts, whereas, in a case involving inter-State transfer of proceedings
within the territorial jurisdiction of a common High Court, the common High Court
would have the power and jurisdiction to direct inter-State transfer of proceedings of
the nature stated above, in exercise of its power under section 24 of the CPC. f. It is a
settled proposition of law that in construing a provision, the consequences that befall
on a particular interpretation of a provision is a relevant consideration. Justice G.P.
Singh in his treatise3 has observed thus:

3

Shah Newaz Khan vs The State Of Nagaland on 28 February, 2023

4. REGARD TO CONSEQUENCES 3 12th Edition of 'Principles of Statutory
Interpretation' at page 131 If the language used is capable of hearing more than one
construction, in selecting the true meaning, regard. Must be had to the consequences
resulting from adopting the alternative constructions. A construction that results in
hardship, serious inconvenience, injustice, absurdity, or anomaly or which leads to
inconsistency or uncertainty and friction in the system which the statute purports to
regulate has to be rejected and preference should be given to that construction which
avoids such results.

g. This observation was quoted with approval by the Supreme Court in paragraph 17 of its decision
in D. Saibaba v Bar Council of India & Anr.4.

h. Therefore, the aforementioned observation would also lend support to the submission of the
appellants in as much as it would be more convenient for litigants within the territory of the
common High Court to approach the Gauhati High Court for seeking transfer.

7. Mr. Goswami also cited three other decisions. The first is a decision of the larger bench of the
Gauhati High Court in Megha Jain vs. Kartik Jain5. This decision has overruled Pomi Sengupta
(supra), on which the impugned judgment and order is premised. The second is a decision of the
(undivided) Andhra Pradesh High Court in Chalasani Deepthi vs. Chalasani Krishna Chaitanya6 and
the last a decision of the 4 (2003) 6 SCC 186 5 (2019) 6 GLR 379 6 2015 SCC OnLine Hyd 978
Bombay High Court in Irene Blanch Khera vs. Glenn John Vijay7.

8. Based on his aforesaid submissions, Mr. Goswami urged us to set aside the order under challenge
and to remit the matter to the Gauhati High Court for fresh consideration of the application of the
appellants under section 24 of the CPC. In the alternative, he submitted that the application under
section 25 may be considered by us on its own merits.

CONTENTIONS OF THE RESPONDENTS 1 TO 3

9. Opposing the appeal, Mr. Balgopal, learned senior counsel for the State of Nagaland and its
officers, contended as follows:

a. A brief issue with regard to the scope and ambit of section 24 vis-à-vis section 25 of
the CPC has arisen before this Court in the instant case in view of the peculiar
circumstances wherein two States share a common High Court as provided under
Article 231 of the Constitution of India.

b. Section 24(1)(b), CPC gives power to the High Court to withdraw any suit, appeal or other
proceeding pending in any 7 2018 (6) Mh. L.J. 199 court subordinate to it and to transfer the same
for trial or disposal to any Court subordinate to it which is competent to try or dispose of the same.
As the State of Nagaland does not have a separate High Court, consequently all courts functioning in
the State of Nagaland are subordinate to the Gauhati High Court, being the common High Court for
the States of Assam, Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh.

4

Shah Newaz Khan vs The State Of Nagaland on 28 February, 2023

c. However, in order to appreciate whether the common High Court has the power to withdraw any
suit, appeal or other proceeding pending before any Court subordinate to it from one State and to
transfer the same to any Court subordinate to it, in another State, the provisions of both sections 24
and 25 of the Code will have to be examined as it involves an inter-State transfer and not an
intra-State transfer simplicitor. d. To appreciate the true import and meaning of the provisions of
section 25(1), the said provision will have to be read in two parts as it contains two-fold power to
direct any suit, appeal or other proceeding to be transferred:

i. From one High Court to another High Court; or ii. From one Civil Court in one
State to another Civil Court in any other State.

This interpretation is substantiated by the observation made by this Court in Durgesh
Sharma (supra).

e. Section 25 is the only provision in the CPC, which refers to transfer of a case from a
Civil Court in one State to a Civil Court in another State. Incidentally, the appellants
themselves are asking for this relief.

f. Report of the Joint Committee, Lok Sabha of the Code of Civil Procedure
(Amendment) Bill 1974 which was passed on 1 st April, 1976 shows that this issue was
raised by one of the North-Eastern States, i.e., State of Meghalaya with regard to
conflict between sections 24 and 25 insofar as the North-East area is concerned and
reading of the minutes suggests that the Committee assured to look into the issue.

g. In view of the specific provision in section 25(1) of the CPC, it is only the Supreme
Court and no other court which has the power to direct transfer of the suit instituted
by the appellants from the Civil Court in Dimapur, Nagaland to the Civil Court in
Guwahati, Assam, if at all any ground is set up therefor.

10. In view of the aforesaid contentions, it was submitted by Mr. Balgopal that the
impugned judgement needs no interference and deserves to be upheld.

ARGUMENTS OF THE RESPONDENTS 4 AND 5

11. Mr. Sharma, learned counsel appearing for the respondents 4 and 5, advanced the following
arguments:

a. Power to effect inter-State transfer of any suit, appeal or other proceeding is not
available to be exercised by a High Court in terms of section 24 of the CPC since such
power is expressly and exclusively provided in section 25 thereof, to be exercised only
by the Supreme Court.

b. Reliance placed by the learned senior counsel for the appellants on Durgesh
Sharma (supra) is misplaced since that case is distinguishable. The observations in

5

Shah Newaz Khan vs The State Of Nagaland on 28 February, 2023

paragraph 47 were made by this Court to decide the issue captured in paragraph 3
and this Court had no occasion to examine the issue in the light as it has occurred in
the present case. It is trite to submit that such an observation could at best be treated
as obiter dicta (defined as an incidental remark of a Judge's expression of opinion
uttered in court or in a written judgment, but not essential to the decision and
therefore not legally binding as a precedent).

c. Be that as it may, what has been held by this Court in paragraph 57 of Durgesh
Sharma (supra) nullifies the point sought to be urged on the behalf of the appellants.
d. In Megha Jain (supra), the Division Bench of the Gauhati High Court has held that
it has jurisdiction to exercise powers under section 24 of the CPC read with section
23(1) and/or section 23(2) thereof to transfer a suit, appeal or any other proceeding
from one of the four States under its jurisdiction to any other State under its
jurisdiction for trial. In paragraph 9 of Megha Jain (supra), reference has been made
to section 24(1)

(a) of the CPC to arrive at the conclusion that the High Court or the District Court
may, at any stage, transfer any suit etc. pending before it to any court subordinate to
it and that a transfer petition seeking transfer from one State to any of the four States
shall be maintainable thereunder. The abovesaid conclusion is not the correct
exposition of law. Sections 22 to 24 of the CPC and section 25 thereof are two
different codes within the CPC and there is no overlapping in relation to the domain
where these two sets of codes operate.

e. A plain reading of section 22 of the CPC would show that the words “several Courts” occurring in
its last has been continued in section 23, while no such co-relation exists either between sections 22
and 25 or sections 23 and 25. Therefore, application of section 23 together with section 25 appears
completely faulty. Also, in relation to the exercise of power under section 24, the said power has
been made available to even a District Court, which makes it amply clear that the power under
section 24 is a continuation of sections 22 and 23 only.

f. Further, the power of transfer of suits under section 22 can be exercised, “(W)here a suit may be
instituted in any one of two or more courts and is instituted in one of such courts” . And this power
under section 22 is explained in section 23 for the purposes as to which court an application for
transfer may lie. Further, after the application is made, under section 24, such power is explained as
to how the same can be exercised. Therefore, section 22 provides which of the suits, section 23
provides which of the courts and section 24 provides how such transfers can be effected.

g. In contrast to the above, the power under section 25 has been clearly defined and the same does
not have any mention in sections 22 to 24 in the same manner as it occurs in section 25, categoric
and precise. Therefore, the legislative intent is clear that only under section 25 of the CPC a
direction that any suit, appeal or other proceeding may be transferred from a Civil Court in one
State to a Civil Court in any other State and that can only be made by this Court.

6

Shah Newaz Khan vs The State Of Nagaland on 28 February, 2023

12. Resting on the aforesaid arguments, Mr. Sharma too urged that no case for interference had
been made out by the appellants and the appeal deserves dismissal. THE RELEVANT PROVISIONS
OF LAW

13. Sections 24 and 25 of the CPC being at the heart of the debate, the same need to read carefully.
To the extent relevant, the said provisions read as follows:

“24. General power of transfer and withdrawal .—(1) On the application of any of the
parties and after notice to the parties and after hearing such of them as desire to be
heard, or of its own motion, without such notice, the High Court or the District Court
may, at any stage—

(a) transfer any suit, appeal or other proceeding pending before it for trial or disposal
to any court subordinate to it and competent to try or dispose of the same, or

(b) withdraw any suit, appeal or other proceeding pending in any court subordinate
to it, and

(i) try or dispose of the same; or

(ii) transfer the same for trial or disposal to any court subordinate to it and
competent to try or dispose of the same; or

(iii) retransfer the same for trial or disposal to the court from which it was
withdrawn.

(2) Where any suit or proceeding has been transferred or withdrawn under
sub-section (1), the court which thereafter tries such suit may, subject to any special
directions in the case of an order of transfer, either retry it or proceed from the point
at which it was transferred or withdrawn.

***” “25. Power of Supreme Court to transfer suits, etc.— (1) On the application of a party, and after
notice to the parties, and after hearing such of them as desire to be heard, the Supreme Court may,
at any stage, if satisfied that an order under this section is expedient for the ends of justice, direct
that any suit, appeal or other proceeding be transferred from a High Court or other Civil Court in
one State to a High Court or other Civil Court in any other State.

***”

14. Prior to its amendment in 1976, section 25 of the Code read as follows:

“25. Power of State Government to transfer suits .—(1) Where any party to a suit,
appeal or other proceeding pending in a High Court presided over by a Single Judge
objects to its being heard by him and the Judge is satisfied that there are reasonable

7

Shah Newaz Khan vs The State Of Nagaland on 28 February, 2023

grounds for the objection, he shall make a report to the State Government, which
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, transfer such suit, appeal or proceeding to
any other High Court.

Provided that no suit, appeal or proceeding shall be transferred to a High Court
without the consent of the State Government of the State in which that High Court
has its principal seat.”

15. Since acceptance of the arguments of Mr. Balgopal and Mr. Sharma would result in denuding a
common High Court of the jurisdiction to even entertain an application under section 24 of the CPC
for transfer of a suit from a Civil Court in one State to a Civil Court of another State,
notwithstanding that exercise of jurisdiction by such High Court extends to both such States, it is
absolutely necessary to consider Chapter V of the Constitution of India titled “(T)he High Courts in
the States” and more particularly the terms of Articles 214, 231, 227, 235 and 228 which, to our
mind, are of utmost relevance for deciding the legal issue. At the same time, having regard to the
terms of pre-amended section 25 of the CPC, a peep into the pages of history as to how the Gauhati
High Court became the common High Court for the State of Assam and the other States seems to be
imperative.

16. Article 214 is clear that there shall be a High Court for each State. Article 231, inserted in the
Constitution by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, is an ordainment that
notwithstanding anything contained in the preceding provisions of Chapter V, Parliament may by
law establish a common High Court for two or more States or for two or more States and a Union
territory. Article 227 is the recognition of the power of superintendence of every High Court over all
courts and tribunals throughout the territories in relation to which it exercises jurisdiction. The
control over all District Courts and courts subordinate thereto, in terms of Article 235, vests in the
High Court. One other important provision is Article 228. Article 228 empowers the High Court,
subject to its satisfaction that a case pending in a court subordinate to it involves a substantial
question of law as to the interpretation of the Constitution and the determination of which is
necessary for the disposal of the case, to withdraw the case and (a) either dispose of the case itself,
or (b) determine the said question of law and return the case to the court from which the case has
been so withdrawn together with a copy of its judgment on such question, whereupon the said court
shall proceed to dispose of the case in conformity with such judgment.

ORIGIN AND EVOLUTION OF THE COMMON HIGH COURT

17. We now move on to note the origin and evolution of the common High Court, i.e., the Gauhati
High Court and the trajectory that it has been ordained to follow in relation to the territories over
which it exercises jurisdiction.

18. The precursor of the Gauhati High Court was the High Court of Assam, which was established on
5 th April, 1948 in terms of the Assam High Court Order, 1948 (for brevity ‘the 1948 Order’) made
by the Governor General in exercise of power conferred by section 229 of the Government of India
Act, 1935 and as adopted by the India Provincial Constitution (Amendment) Order, 1948. In terms

8

Shah Newaz Khan vs The State Of Nagaland on 28 February, 2023

of paragraph 4 thereof, the High Court of Assam was conferred, in respect of the territories for the
time being included in the province of Assam, all such original, appellate and other jurisdiction as,
under the law in force immediately before the prescribed day, was exercisable in respect of the said
territories or any part thereof, by the High Court in Calcutta or by the Governor of Assam exercising
the functions of a high court.

19. In 1962, by an Act of Parliament titled the State of Nagaland Act, 1962 (for brevity ‘the 1962
Act’), the State of Nagaland was formed. While sub-section (1) of section 13 of the 1962 Act ordained
that there shall be a common high court called the High Court of Assam and Nagaland, sub-section
(3) thereof provided that expenditure in respect of the salaries and allowances of the Judges of the
common High Court shall be allocated between the States of Assam and Nagaland in such
proportion as the President may by order determine.

20. The 1962 Act was followed by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (for brevity
‘the 1971 Act’). This enactment contained provisions for the establishment of the States of Manipur
and Tripura and for the formation of the State of Meghalaya, and the Union territories of Mizoram
and Arunachal Pradesh, by reorganizing the existing State of Assam. Part IV of the 1971 Act titled
“High Court” contained sections 28 to 43. Sections 28 and 29, being relevant are quoted below:

“28. Common High Court for Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur and
Tripura.—(1) On and from the appointed day,—

(a) the High Court of Assam and Nagaland shall cease to function and is hereby
abolished;

(b) there shall be a common High Court for the States of Assam, Nagaland,
Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura to be called the Gauhati High Court (the High
Court of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura);

(c) the Judges of the High Court of Assam and Nagaland holding office immediately
before that day shall, unless they have elected otherwise, become on that day the
Judges of the common High Court:

(2) Nothing in clause (a) of sub-section (1) shall prejudice or affect the continued
operation of any notice served, injunction issued, direction given or proceedings
taken before the appointed day by the High Court of Assam and Nagaland under the
powers then conferred upon that Court.” “29. Jurisdiction of the common High
Court.—On and from the appointed day, the common High Court shall have, in
respect of the territories comprised in the States of Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya,
Nagaland and Tripura, all such jurisdiction, powers and authority as under the law in
force immediately before the appointed day, are exercisable in respect of those
territories by the High Court of Assam and Nagaland or the Court of the Judicial
Commissioner for Manipur, or the Court of the Judicial Commissioner for Tripura, as
the case may be.”

9

Shah Newaz Khan vs The State Of Nagaland on 28 February, 2023

21. With the enactment of the State of Arunachal Pradesh Act, 1986 and the State of Mizoram Act,
1986, two new States were born. Section 18 of the former and section 15 of the latter legislation,
more or less commonly worded, when read together would evince that a common High Court for the
States of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh to be
called the Gauhati High Court (the High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura,
Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh) came into existence. The common thread that runs through the
developments of 1962, 1971 and 1986, noted above, is that as and when the jurisdiction of the High
Court of Assam and thereafter the Gauhati High Court came to be enlarged and extended to States
other than Assam, all seven sister States in the North- Eastern part of the country agreed to bear the
expenditure in respect of the salaries and allowances of the Judges of the common High Court as
shall be allocated amongst the States in such proportion by an order of the President.

22. In view of the provisions of the 1971 Act, till little over a decade back, the Gauhati High Court
was the common High Court for the seven sister states. The jurisdiction of the said High Court
extended throughout the territories of Assam, Nagaland, Tripura, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram
and Arunachal Pradesh.

23. However, the 1971 Act came to be amended by the North- Eastern Areas (Re-organisation) and
Other Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012 (for brevity ‘the Amendment Act’). It established
separate High Courts for the States of Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura. Accordingly, the definition
of “common High Court” in section 2(d) of the 1971 Act was amended. Apart from insertion of
sections 28A to 28K between sections 28 and 29, the Amendment Act, inter alia, also introduced a
proviso in sub-section (1) of section 28, reading as follows:

“Provided that on and from the commencement of the North-Eastern Areas
(Reorganisation) and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012, the common High
Court shall be the High Court for the States of Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram
and Nagaland and shall cease to have its jurisdiction, powers and authority for the
States of Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura.”

24. Hence, today, the Gauhati High Court is the common High Court exercising jurisdiction
throughout Assam, Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh; a fortiori, all Civil Courts in these
four States are subordinate to the same High Court, i.e., the Gauhati High Court. Thus, it is a High
Court which earlier exercised its jurisdiction over seven different States and is presently exercising
jurisdiction over four different States. This, by itself, is a unique feature which stands unmatched in
the judicial annals of the country post-independence.

25. We can take judicial notice that Judges of the Gauhati High Court in the past have been elevated
from amongst advocates and judicial officers hailing from the aforesaid States.

26. Therefore, so far as judicial administration is concerned, in terms of Article 231 of the
Constitution, the Gauhati High Court is the High Court, inter alia, for the State of Assam as well as
for the State of Nagaland.

10

PRE-AMENDED SECTION 25, CPC

Shah Newaz Khan vs The State Of Nagaland on 28 February, 2023

27. Before proceeding further, we may now refer to the pre- amended section 25 of the Code for the
purpose of understanding what was the mischief that the Parliament intended to address by
radically altering its relevant terms resulting in its substantial substitution. Bare perusal of the pre-
amended provision clearly reflects that its scope and applicability were rather limited. Unless the
State Governments were ad idem, a transfer of a suit, appeal or other proceeding from a Civil Court
in one State to a Civil Court in another State was not a permissible option. That apart, such transfer
of a suit, appeal or other proceeding instead of being effected by a judicial act was left to an
administrative act and, that too, only if the two State Governments were in agreement. The Law
Commission having recommended an amendment, section 25 of the CPC came to be amended by
the Amendment Act 104 of 1976. A contrast of the pre-amended and present version of section 25 is
clearly suggestive of the distinctive variance qua the authority to exercise the power of transfer. At
this juncture, the Statement of Objects and Reasons (for brevity ‘the SOR’) for amending section 25
may also be noted:

“Clause 12.—Section 25 of the Code empowers the State Government to transfer suits,
etc. in certain circumstances from the High Court exercising jurisdiction in the State
to another High Court. This section is very narrow in scope as it provides only for the
transfer of suit, appeal or other proceeding pending in a High Court presided over by
a Single Judge. Besides, the State Government, does not seem to be an appropriate
agency for exercising the power of transfer. Section 25 is, therefore, being substituted
by a new section which provides for the transfer to the Supreme Court the existing
power vested with the State Government and to confer on the Supreme Court such
wide powers of transfer as it has in criminal cases under Section 406 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973. Further, the new section covers transfer of cases from or to
the Original Side of a High Court to or from any other civil court. The new section is
thus wider in scope than Section 406 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.”

28. Thus, with the amendment of section 25, a serious impediment in administration of justice by
the courts of law was remedied by conferment of power on this Court to decide on inter-State
transfer of any suit, appeal or other proceeding pending in a Civil Court of one State to a Civil Court
of another State. Since under the pre-amended section 25, such a transfer could be made by the
transferor State only if the transferee State were to consent to it, it was rightly observed in the SOR
that it was not the function of the States to decide on such transfer. Though advisedly, we presume,
that there is absence of any reference in the SOR about the uncertainty centering around
cooperation or the lack of it between the relevant States prior to a transfer of the nature referred to
in section 25 being effected, it does not take too long to comprehend that Parliament did proceed in
the right direction and sought to address the mischief that could ensue if the two States were not on
the same page resulting in depriving a litigant of having his cause vindicated. Be that as it may.

CONSIDERATION OF THE DECISIONS

11

Shah Newaz Khan vs The State Of Nagaland on 28 February, 2023

29. Having surveyed the provisions of the Constitution relating to the High Courts in general and
how the Gauhati High Court has taken shape as the common High Court for, inter alia, the States of
Assam and Nagaland, it is time to look into the decision in Durgesh Sharma (supra), cited by Mr.
Balgopal and by Mr. Goswami as well as the other decisions cited by him for the appellants.

30. In Durgesh Sharma (supra), this Court was seized of the question as to whether the High Court
of Madhya Pradesh was justified, on an application under section 23 of the Code, in ordering
transfer of a petition under section 13 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, instituted by the
appellant-husband in a court in Ujjain, Madhya Pradesh, to a court in Malegaon, District Nashik,
Maharashtra to be tried along with a petition under section 9 of the said Act instituted by the
respondent-wife. Considering the provisions of law, this Court held as follows:

“46. Having considered the scheme of the Code as amended from time to time, in our
judgment, the law relating to transfer of cases (suits, appeals and other proceedings)
is well settled. It is found in Sections 22 to 25 of the Code and those provisions are
exhaustive in nature. Whereas Sections 22, 24 and 25 deal with power of transfer,
Section 23 merely provides forum and specifies the court in which an application for
transfer may be made. Section 23 is not a substantive provision vesting power in a
particular court to order transfer.

47. In our considered opinion, where several courts having jurisdiction are
subordinate to one appellate court, an application for transfer may be made to such
appellate court and the court may transfer a case from one court subordinate to it to
another court subordinate to it. Likewise, where such courts are subordinate to the
same High Court, an application may be made and action may be taken by the High
Court transferring a case from one court subordinate to it to any other court
subordinate to that High Court. But where such courts are subordinate to different
High Courts, it is only the Supreme Court (this Court) which may pass an order of
transfer. In other words, if two courts are subordinate to different High Courts, one
High Court has no power, jurisdiction or authority to transfer a case pending in any
court subordinate to that High Court to a court subordinate to other High Court. It is
only the Supreme Court (this Court) which may order the transfer.

48. Section 25, as originally enacted in the Code of 1908 and the decisions prior to
the Amendment Act of 1976, have no application after substitution of Section 25 as it
stands today. To us, Section 23 has no application to such cases and the only
provision attracted is Section

25.

49. The language of Section 25 also supports the view which we are inclined to take.
Sub-section (1) of Section 25 of the Code enacts that ‘On the application of a party’,
this Court may pass an appropriate order of transfer. Thus, Section 25 is
‘self-contained code’ and comprises substantive as well as procedural law on the

12

Shah Newaz Khan vs The State Of Nagaland on 28 February, 2023

point. It allows a party to move the Court by making an application as also it
empowers the Court to make an order of transfer.

50. The matter can be examined from another angle also. Every court has its own
local or territorial limits beyond which it cannot exercise the jurisdiction. So far as
this Court is concerned, its jurisdiction is not circumscribed by any territorial
limitation and it extends over any person or authority within the territory of India.

But, it has no jurisdiction outside the country. So far as a High Court is concerned, its jurisdiction is
limited to territory within which it exercises jurisdiction and not beyond it. On that analogy also, a
High Court cannot pass an order transferring a case pending in a court subordinate to it to a court
subordinate to another High Court. It would be inconsistent with the limitation as to territorial
jurisdiction of the Court.

***

54. After the commencement of the Constitution and establishment of the Supreme Court (this
Court), Parliament thought it proper to amend Section 25 of the Code and accordingly, it was
substituted by empowering this Court to order transfer from one High Court to another High Court
or to one civil court in one State to another civil court in any other State.

55. It is no doubt true that even when Section 25 in the present form was substituted by the
Amendment Act of 1976, sub-section (3) of Section 23 of the Code has neither been deleted nor
amended. That, however, is not relevant. Since in our considered view, Section 23 is merely a
procedural provision, no order of transfer can be made under the said provision. If the case is
covered by Section 25 of the Code, it is only that section which will apply for both the purposes,
namely, for the purpose of making application and also for the purpose of effecting transfer. ***”

31. Durgesh Sharma (supra) is an authority having the effect of a binding precedent for deciding
cases where the High Court for a State seeks to transfer a suit, appeal or proceeding from a court
subordinate to it to a court subordinate to the High Court for another State. We share the views
expressed therein. However, having regard to the fundamental factual dissimilarities present in this
case, the ratio decidendi of Durgesh Sharma (supra) while answering the core issue may not apply
here.

32. The decision in Megha Jain (supra) was rendered on a reference being made to a larger Bench by
another single Judge of the Gauhati High Court, who was not persuaded to agree with the view
taken by the coordinate bench in Pomi Sengupta (supra). A matrimonial proceeding instituted by
the respondent, pending in a court in Aizawl, Mizoram was sought to be transferred to a court in
Kamrup, Guwahati, Assam by the petitioner by pursuing the remedy provided by section 24 of the
CPC. This is what the Division Bench, speaking through the Chief Justice, held:

“9. The constitution of the High Court with its Principal Seat and the Permanent
Benches in the manner, as taken note supra, would indicate that all the courts in all

13

Shah Newaz Khan vs The State Of Nagaland on 28 February, 2023

the said four States are subordinate to the Gauhati High Court and since no separate
High Courts are established in respect of Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh,
a provision under the Notification dated 22.6.1990 is made for the establishment of
the Permanent Bench at Aizawl. Similar Notifications had been issued in respect of
other two States. These aspects would leave no room for doubt that the Gauhati High
Court can exercise its power and jurisdiction over all Courts in all the four States. If
in that light, the provision as contained in section 24 of the CPC, extracted above, is
taken note, sub-section (1)(a) would indicate that the High Court or the District Court
may, at any stage, transfer any suit, appeal or other proceeding pending before it for
trial or disposal to any court subordinate to it and competent to try or dispose of the
same. If the said provision is kept in view and the above noted discussion relating to
the establishment of the High Court and the Permanent Bench is taken note and in
that circumstance, when the subordinate court in the State of Mizoram as also the
subordinate court in the State of Assam is subordinate to the Gauhati High Court, a
transfer petition filed under section 24 of the CPC before this court, namely, the
Gauhati High Court, even for transfer of a case from the subordinate court in any of
the four States, as indicated above, to the other State would be maintainable from the
very provision as contained in section 24 itself. In such circumstance, the question of
filing a petition under section 25 of the CPC would not arise since there are no
separate High Courts exercising jurisdiction over the States referred to above. If in
that background, the observation, as contained in Smt. Pomi Sengupta (supra) is
taken note, the learned Single Judge was not justified in arriving at the conclusion
that if a petition under section 24 of the CPC is entertained, it would amount to
adding words to the provision.”

33. Chalasani Deepthi (supra) arose out of an application filed by the petitioner-wife seeking
withdrawal and transfer of a suit for restitution of conjugal rights, instituted by the
respondent-husband in the Family Court, Ranga Reddy District, Telengana to the court of the
Judge, Family Court, Vijaywada, Andhra Pradesh. A learned Judge of the (undivided) Andhra
Pradesh High Court having heard the parties and the Advocates General of the States of Telengana
and Andhra Pradesh and upon consideration of the provisions of the Andhra Pradesh
Reorganisation Act, more particularly sections 30 and 31 thereof, together with sections 24 and 25
of the CPC as well as the decision in Durgesh Sharma (supra), held that both the courts being
subordinate to the Andhra Pradesh High Court, which was till then the common High Court for the
States of Telangana and Andhra Pradesh, the application for transfer under section 24 was
maintainable.

34. A learned Judge of the Bombay High Court, while following the decision in Chalasani Deepthi
(supra) allowed the application under section 24 of the CPC filed by the petitioner- wife seeking
transfer of a matrimonial petition pending on the file of the Civil Judge in the court at Mapusa,
North Goa, instituted by the respondent-husband, to the Family Court at Bandra, Mumbai,
Maharashtra. Incidentally, the Bombay High Court is the common High Court for the States of
Maharashtra and Goa as well as the Union territories of Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu.
The learned Judge spurned the objection of the respondent-husband that the transfer application

14

Shah Newaz Khan vs The State Of Nagaland on 28 February, 2023

ought to have been filed in the Bombay High Court at Goa and not at its principal seat in Mumbai,
for the reasons recorded in the decision. Significantly, no objection was raised in this case that
transfer ought to have been prayed by filing an application before this Court under section 25 of the
CPC.

35. There is, therefore, a host of judicial authorities at the level of the High Courts that section 25 of
the CPC would not bar entertainment of an application under section 24 thereof by a High Court,
even for an inter-State transfer, if such High Court is the common High Court for two or more States
and transfer, as prayed, is not to a civil court beyond the said High Court’s jurisdiction.

ANALYSIS AND DECISION

36. As noted, the appellants as plaintiffs have instituted the civil suit in the court of the District
Judge, Dimapur, Nagaland and now seek transfer of such suit to the court of the District Judge,
Guwahati, Assam. Such a transfer, if allowed, no doubt would constitute an inter-State transfer.
Insofar as inter-State transfer of any suit, appeal or other proceeding is concerned, a plain and
literal reading of section 25 of the CPC does suggest that the power to so transfer lies with the
Supreme Court only. Paragraph 54 of Durgesh Sharma (supra), heavily relied upon by Mr. Balgopal,
lends support to his contentions. Having regard to the scheme of section 25 of the CPC and on its
plain terms, read with Durgesh Sharma (supra), Mr. Balgopal seems to have a point that such an
inter-State transfer of the nature prayed by the appellants cannot be ordered under section 24.
However, something more seems to be visible when we put on our judicial lens to resolve the issue.

37. Section 24 of the CPC is a general power of ‘transfer and withdrawal’ capable of being invoked by
the High Courts at any stage either suo motu without notice or on the application of any of the
parties after notice, whereas section 25 confers exclusive power on the Supreme Court, on the
application of either of the parties and after notice, to transfer suits, etc. from the Courts stated
therein. While section 24 is part of the general law, section 25 is the special law. Clause (b) of sub-
section (1) of section 24, which is relevant for the present case, opens up an avenue for the High
Court, upon reaching a satisfaction that a case for transfer has been made out, to withdraw any suit,
appeal or other proceeding pending in any court subordinate to it and (i) to try and dispose of the
same; or

(ii) to transfer the same for trial or disposal to any court subordinate to it and competent to try or
dispose of the same; or (iii) to retransfer the same for trial or disposal to the court from which it is
withdrawn; whereas, section 25 empowers the Supreme Court on a satisfaction being recorded that
an order is expedient for the ends of justice to direct that any suit, appeal or other proceeding be
transferred (i) from one High Court to a High Court; and (ii) from other Civil Court in one State to
other Civil Court in any other State. The text of the two sections, therefore, makes the position clear
about the powers reserved for the High Courts and the Supreme Court to transfer suits, appeal or
other proceedings. Law is well-settled, and we may profitably refer to the decision in Amarendra
Pratap Singh vs. Tej Bahadur Prajapati8, that a general law cannot defeat the provisions of a special
law to the extent to which they are in conflict; else, an effort has to be made at reconciling the two
provisions by homogenous reading. What, therefore, needs to be seen and appreciated is whether

15

Shah Newaz Khan vs The State Of Nagaland on 28 February, 2023

there is any conflict or inconsistency between the general law (section 24) and the special law
(section 25) for the former to yield to the latter, and ascertain whether the High Court still has the
jurisdiction under the general law to order an inter-State transfer notwithstanding 8 (2004) 10 SCC
65 the special law vesting the Supreme Court with such power of transfer. There has to be an
inconsistency between the two so as to apply the maxim generalia specialibus non derogant. The
jurisdiction conferred on the Supreme Court pursuant to the amendment of section 25 of the CPC in
1976 though special, invocation of the jurisdiction of the High Court under section 24 may not come
in conflict and defeat section 25, if jurisdiction is still found available to be exercised in a given case
under the former without doing violence to the latter.

38. In our considered opinion, section 25 of the CPC would operate as a bar in cases like the one in
Durgesh Sharma (supra); however, section 25 of the CPC ~ notwithstanding the scheme envisaged
in it ~ does not operate as a complete bar to denude a common High Court, like the Gauhati High
Court, to entertain an application under section 24 thereof even for an order to transfer a suit,
appeal or other proceeding from one State to another State, provided the States concerned are two
of the four States in relation to which such High Court still exercises jurisdiction. This is an opinion
formed by us, for the reasons, which we venture to assign now.

39. From the factual matrix vis-à-vis the Constitutional and statutory provisions, there can be no
cavil that the courts and tribunals in the States of Assam, Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal
Pradesh are not only under the superintendence of the Gauhati High Court in terms of Article 227,
all district courts and courts subordinate thereto in such States are subject to the control of the
Gauhati High Court under Article 235 as well as subordinate to the same High Court in terms of
section 3 of the CPC. Section 25 has been inserted in the CPC with a definite purpose of ensuring
that no High Court transfers a suit, appeal or other proceeding pending in a Civil Court in one State
to a Civil Court in another State. The reason for this is that the High Court to which the application
for transfer is made does have the power in law to transfer a suit, appeal or other proceeding to a
Civil Court subordinate to it but it does not have any power in law to transfer any of the above to a
Civil Court which is subordinate to another High Court. The same situation that Durgesh Sharma
(supra) had to deal with, where the Civil Courts subordinate to the High Court of Madhya Pradesh
and the Bombay High Court were involved. This Court had the occasion to hold that if two courts are
subordinate to different High Courts, one High Court has no power, jurisdiction or authority to
transfer a case pending in any court subordinate to that High Court to a court subordinate to
another High Court and it is only the Supreme Court which may order the transfer. The reason for
such conclusion seems to be obvious that the High Court, to which an application for transfer is
made, does neither enjoy any power of superintendence under Article 227 over the Civil Court to
which the transfer is sought nor can such Civil Court be said to be a court over which the High Court
exercises any control of the nature referred to in Article 235. Also, in such a case, the Civil Court
beyond the territory in relation to which the High Court exercises jurisdiction cannot be considered
to be a court subordinate to such High Court in the sense section 3 of the CPC is to be understood.

40. The creases that were sought to be ironed out by radically altering section 25 of the CPC and
presenting it in an altogether new avatar have to be given due consideration in the light of the SOR
and the provisions of Chapter V of the Constitution. Bestowing such consideration, we hold that

16

Shah Newaz Khan vs The State Of Nagaland on 28 February, 2023

what is of primordial importance to attract section 25 is the involvement of two civil courts
(transferor and transferee) in the proceedings for transfer, which are not only situate in two
different States, but are also subject to the power of judicial superintendence and administrative
control of the High Courts of each such State.

41. While focusing on section 25, one cannot be completely oblivious of the terms of section
24(1)(b)(ii). As and when it is approached with an application under section 24 for transfer, the
High Court, subject to its satisfaction that the facts and circumstances do warrant an order to be
made, is empowered to “transfer … to any Court subordinate to it”. These words are of immense
significance. In directing a transfer, the High Court can transfer a suit, appeal or other proceeding to
“any Court” but bearing in mind the fetter that any such court, to which the relevant case or matter
is proposed or sought to be transferred, must be subordinate to it and otherwise competent to deal
with the subject matter; if such court is either not subordinate or not competent, the power is not
available to be exercised. However, there is no such fetter in section 24 that power under sub-clause
(ii) of clause (b) of sub-section (1) thereof cannot be exercised if the transferee court, though
subordinate to the High Court, is situate in a different State. Similar is the case with clause (a) of
sub-section (1) of section 24. The power is available so long the Civil Court continues to remain
subordinate to it under Article 227 read with Article 235 and under section 3 of the CPC. To this
extent, the High Court enjoys a supreme power which is not even subject to the power of the
Supreme Court under section 25. The only caveat is that this power of transfer under section
24(1)(a) and 24(1)(b)(ii), however, cannot be exercised by the Gauhati High Court, say for transfer
of a civil suit from a court in Assam or Nagaland to a Civil Court in Tripura or Manipur or
Meghalaya because the said States, from 2012, are no longer part of the Gauhati High Court and are
since having High Courts of their own.

42. It is time all concerned realize that a High Court ~ howsoever big or small, old or new ~ is as
much a Constitutional Court as this Court is and enjoys wide ranging powers vested in it by law. No
doubt, the power under section 25 is a special power, but the common High Courts of the country
ought not to read section 24 of the CPC in a manner as if the power of the Supreme Court under
section 25 to order an inter-State transfer is available to be exclusively exercised by it in all cases of
inter-State transfer, thereby denuding the common High Courts of the country of their jurisdiction
by mere reference to involvement of an inter-State transfer and without anything more being looked
at.

43. The States of Assam and Nagaland by reason of the provisions of the 1962 Act, then the 1971 Act
and finally the Amendment Act have the Gauhati High Court as their common High Court and it is
the Gauhati High Court that enjoys power of judicial superintendence over all courts within the
territories of these two States. Gauhati High Court also exercises administrative control over all
district courts and courts subordinate to them. Although the States of Assam and Nagaland in the
political map of India have well demarcated areas, for the purpose of administration of justice, both
States are mandatorily subject to the jurisdiction of the Gauhati High Court. Having regard to the
special nature of jurisdiction that is vested in a common High Court like the Gauhati High Court,
there cannot be a truncation of the power available under clauses (a) and (b) of section 24(1), which
includes suo motu power.

17

Shah Newaz Khan vs The State Of Nagaland on 28 February, 2023

44. Secondly, we are inclined to the view that should the contention advanced by Mr. Balgopal be
accepted, the same is bound to lead to anomalous and incongruous results. If a common High Court,
such as the Gauhati High Court, is satisfied that a situation for withdrawing a civil suit from a court,
say in Nagaland, does exist, section 24(1)(b)(i) of the CPC confers power on the Gauhati High Court
to withdraw such suit and dispose of the same itself. We are conscious that the verb employed in the
first part of section 24(1)(b(i) is ‘withdraw’ and not ‘transfer’; also, that clause (b) of sub- section (1)
of section 24 employs the verbs ‘withdraw’, ‘transfer’ and ‘retransfer’ in the three sub-clauses for
achieving the specified ends. However, would it mean that withdrawal of a case does never involve a
transfer? The verb ‘transfer’, inter alia, means to move, or to make somebody/something move,
from one place to another. Once, for whatever reason, the movement of a file from one place to
another is involved, may be by reason of withdrawal, a transfer in the broader sense does take place.
Now, the principal seat of the Gauhati High Court being at Guwahati, in the State of Assam, were to
exercise the power conferred by section 24(1)(b(i), the effect thereof upon such a withdrawal is that
the suit would stand transferred to the principal seat at Guwahati from the Civil Court in Nagaland
and, possibly, assigned a separate registration number for the purpose of administrative
convenience, whereafter three options in terms of section 24(1)

(b) are open to the High Court for further course of action for taking the suit to its logical
conclusion. Once the suit is withdrawn from the court in Nagaland and placed before the High Court
at its principal seat in Guwahati, Assam, would not that be a case of an inter-State transfer? The
answer cannot possibly but be in the affirmative. The other aspect requiring consideration in this
regard is whether disposal of the civil suit by the Gauhati High Court, if the same were withdrawn
from the subordinate court, constitute a transfer from one Civil Court to another Civil Court. The
High Courts are Constitutional Courts and not a ‘Civil Court’ in the sense the term is understood, so
to encompass a transfer from one Civil Court to another Civil Court. However, if at all such a suit
were withdrawn and finally disposed of by the Gauhati High Court at its principal seat, it would
necessarily be in the exercise of its ordinary civil jurisdiction and the procedure to be followed would
undoubtedly be guided by the provisions of the CPC. In a sense, the High Court would step into the
shoes of the Civil Court from which the suit has been withdrawn. Could the provisions in section 25
of the CPC, in such circumstances, be cited to abrogate the Constitutional and statutory power of the
Gauhati High Court to withdraw a civil suit from a Civil Court in Nagaland and to decide the same?
In course of hearing, we had invited the attention of Mr. Balgopal to this situation and sought his
response. He could not have and rightly did not dispute that in such a situation, the power vested in
the Gauhati High Court by the Constitution as well as the CPC cannot be abrogated. Thus, exercise
of the power that section 24(1)(b)(i) confers on the Gauhati High Court in a given case, would
ultimately entail a transfer of the civil suit from the State of Nagaland to the High Court, having its
principal seat at Guwahati in the State of Assam. Such a situation is not and cannot be controlled by
section 25, and on a harmonious reading of sections 24 and 25, it has to be held that section 25 does
not in all cases fetter the power of a common High Court to order inter-State transfer of a suit,
appeal or other proceeding. Otherwise, it would be a fallacy to believe that while an inter-State
transfer would be permissible in terms of sub-clause (i) but not sub-clause (ii) of clause (b) of
sub-section (1) of section 24. We reiterate, section 25 would essentially have to be read as barring
transfer of any suit, appeal or other proceeding from a Civil Court in one State to a Civil Court in
another State if such States have their own High Courts but not in the case of a common High Court

18

like the Gauhati High Court.

Shah Newaz Khan vs The State Of Nagaland on 28 February, 2023

45. A similar power of withdrawal of any case involving, inter alia, a substantial question of law as to
interpretation of the Constitution is conferred on the Gauhati High Court by Article 228 of the
Constitution. If a situation of the nature contemplated by Article 228 does exist, the principal seat of
the Gauhati High Court at Guwahati may withdraw such case from any of the three States of
Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh and decide which of the two courses of action is to be
opted. That would also constitute an inter-State transfer. Obviously, section 25 cannot operate as a
bar for the Gauhati High Court to exercise a power conferred on it by the Constitution.

46. Finally, in our opinion, an approach to construe section 25 of the CPC has to be fair, pragmatic,
reasonable and realistic. Any construction of section 25 which would impede “access to justice”,
considered to be a Fundamental Right, has to be eschewed. A narrow interpretation of section 25
imposing a bar for entertainment of an application under section 24 for transfer of a suit, appeal or
other proceeding by a common High Court like the Gauhati High Court inter-se the four States in
relation to which it exercises jurisdiction could place a heavy burden and might pose an
insurmountable obstacle for litigants of the far-flung areas of the North-East, if they were made to
approach this Court for such transfer on the specious ground that the Civil Court to which the same
is proposed to be transferred is in a State other than the State in which the suit has been instituted.
An interpretation of the law that seeks to address the mischief, that is consistent with the
Constitution and promotes constitutional objectives and that which responds to the needs of the
nation must be adopted. If “access to justice” has to be real, it becomes the moral responsibility of
the Supreme Court, the supreme guardians/protectors of the rights of people guaranteed by the
Constitution and the laws, not to construe the substantive part in section 25 of the Code in a
pedantic manner to bring about a situation that would thwart the initiative of making “access to
justice” real.

47. What remains is the contention advanced by Mr. Sharma. We are not impressed, to say the least.
Although sections 22 to 25 of the CPC deal with transfers, sections 22 and 23 can be invoked in
situations of the nature contemplated in section 22 by a defendant, and by none else, and the court
which is empowered to entertain such an application is the court referred to in section 23. Section
22, in our view, permits transfer on application of the doctrine of forum conveniens and it has no
applicability on facts and in the circumstances where the application for transfer is at the instance of
the plaintiffs. CONCLUSION

48. In view of the aforesaid discussions, the issue is answered by concluding that:

(i) a true and proper interpretation of section 25 of the CPC leads us to the conclusion
that the same applies to inter-State transfer of a suit, appeal or other proceeding
where both States have a High Court in terms of Article 214 of the Constitution and
not to a transfer where both States have a common High Court under Article 231
thereof; and

19

Shah Newaz Khan vs The State Of Nagaland on 28 February, 2023

(ii) the power under section 24 of the CPC can be exercised by the High Court even
for inter-State transfer of a suit, appeal or other proceeding, if it is the common High
Court for two or more States under Article 231 of the Constitution and both the Civil
Courts (transferor and transferee) are subordinate to it.

The questions framed at the beginning of this judgment are answered accordingly.

RELIEF

49. The sequitur of this discussion, with respect, is that the Gauhati High Court while rendering the
judgment and order under challenge proceeded on an erroneous approach, and such approach has
also been found to be flawed in Megha Jain (supra). The impugned judgment and order being
unsustainable in law has to be and is, accordingly, set aside and the civil appeal stands allowed. The
Gauhati High Court shall now proceed to decide the application under section 24 of the CPC afresh,
on its own merits.

50. In view of the aforesaid order, the transfer petition under section 25 of the CPC is rendered
infructuous; hence, it stands dismissed.

51. We request the Gauhati High Court to assign reasonable priority to the application under section
24 of the CPC and to dispose of the same as early as possible, subject to its convenience.

52. Parties shall bear their own costs.

……………………………….J (HRISHIKESH ROY) ...….…………………………J (DIPANKAR DATTA) NEW
DELHI;

28th FEBRUARY, 2023.

20