Shelly Oberoi vs Office Of Lieutenant Governor Of Delhi on 17 February, 2023

Shelly Oberoi vs Office Of Lieutenant Governor Of Delhi on 17
February, 2023

Bench: Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha, Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud

1

Reportable

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

Writ Petition (Civil) No 152 of 2023

Shelly Oberoi & Anr                                                           .... Appellant(s)

Versus

Office of Lieutenant Governor of Delhi & Ors                                  ....Respondent(s)

JUDGMENT

Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, J 1 The jurisdiction of this Court under Article 32 of the
Constitution has been invoked for seeking diverse reliefs pertaining to the constitution of the
Municipal Corporation of Delhi following the elections which took place on 4 December 2022. These
elections were held to elect 250 Councillors. The first petitioner is a prospective candidate for the
post of Mayor. Though over two months have elapsed since the date of the election, the election of
the Mayor has not be held. 2 Chapter II of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act 1957 1 deals with the
at its first meeting in each year elect one of its members to be the Chairperson, who is known as the
Mayor, and another member to be the Deputy Mayor of the 1 “Act” Corporation. Section 3 provides
for the establishment of the Municipal Corporation. Sub-section (3) of Section 3 indicates the
composition of the Corporation. In terms of the provision, a Corporation is to be composed of
Councillors. Besides the Councillors who are directly elected through the voters in the ward
constituencies, there are Councillors who are nominated by the Administrator. Yet others are
represented as ex officio representatives. Clause

(b) of sub-section (3) of Section 3 specifies the persons who shall be represented in a Corporation.
Among them are:

1

Shelly Oberoi vs Office Of Lieutenant Governor Of Delhi on 17 February, 2023

“(i) ten persons, who are not less than 25 years of age and who have special
knowledge or experience in municipal administration, to be nominated by the
Administrator”. The proviso to Section 3(3)(b)(i), however, lays down that “the
persons nominated under this sub-clause shall not have the right to vote in the
meetings of a Corporation”.

3 Chapter V of the Act deals with procedure and the transaction of business by a
Corporation. Section 72(1) provides that a Corporation shall ordinarily hold at least
one meeting in every month for the transaction of business. Section 73 provides that
the first meeting of a Corporation after a general election shall be held as early as
possible after the publication of the results of the election under Section 14 and shall
be convened by the Administrator. Section 74 provides for the notice of meetings and
transaction of business. Section 76(1) stipulates that a Mayor, or in his absence, the
Deputy Mayor shall preside over every meeting of the Corporation. Section 77 makes
provision for the Presiding Officer at a meeting for the election of Mayor. Clause (a)
of Section 77 provides that at a meeting for the election of a Mayor, the Administrator
shall nominate a Councillor who is not a candidate for such an election to preside
over the meeting. Section 78 provides for the method of deciding common questions.

Section 82 empowers the Corporation to make regulations for the transaction of business at its
meetings.

4 Though the jurisdiction of this Court has been invoked for seeking several reliefs, the point of
controversy has narrowed down to two issues. The first issue is whether aldermen, as they are
popularly described, who are nominated by the Administrator under Section 3(3)(b)(i) have the
right to vote at the first meeting of the Corporation where the Mayor would be elected. The second
issue pertains to the order for holding elections, more specifically, whether, as the petitioners assert,
the election to the office of the Mayor shall be held first followed by the elections to the Deputy
Mayor and other members of the Standing Committee, on which meetings the Mayor would preside.
The opposing view point is that all elections would be held simultaneously.

5 We have heard Dr A M Singhvi, senior counsel, with Mr Shadan Farasat, in support of the petition.
Mr Sanjay Jain, Additional Solicitor General, has appeared on behalf of the Municipal Corporation
of Delhi. Mr Tushar Mehta, Solicitor General, appears on behalf of the Lt Governor. Mr Ranjit
Kumar, senior counsel, appears on behalf of the contesting candidate for the post of Mayor. Mr
Maninder Singh, senior counsel, has appeared on behalf of the second respondent.

6 Article 243R of the Constitution is embodied in Part IXA of the Constitution which deals with
Municipalities. In its material terms, Article 243R provides as follows:

“243R. Composition of Municipalities (1) Save as provided in clause (2), all the seats
in a Municipality shall be filled by persons chosen by direct election from the
territorial constituencies in the Municipal area and for this purpose each Municipal
area shall be divided into territorial constituencies to be known as wards.

2

Shelly Oberoi vs Office Of Lieutenant Governor Of Delhi on 17 February, 2023

(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide-

(a) for the representation in a Municipality of-

(i)      persons having special knowledge or experience
in Municipal administration;

(ii)     the members of the House of the People and the
members of the Legislative Assembly of the State

representing constituencies which comprise wholly or partly the Municipal area;

(iii) the members of the Council of States and the members of the Legislative Council
of the State registered electors within tile Municipal area;

(iv) the Chairpersons of the Committees constituted under clause (5) of article 243S:

Provided that the persons referred to in paragraph (i) shall not have the right to vote
in the meetings of the Municipality;

(b) the manner of            election   of   the   Chairperson   of   a
Municipality.”

7 Clause (1) of Article 243R stipulates that all seats in the Municipality shall be filled
in by direct election held from the territorial constituencies in the Municipal area, for
which the Municipal area is divided into wards. An exception, however, is stipulated
in clause (2), in terms of which the legislature of a State may, by law, provide for the
representation in a Municipality of persons fulfilling the descriptions set out in
clauses (i), (ii), (iii) and (iv). Article 243R(2)(a)(i) provides that the legislature of a
State may, by law, provide for the representation in a Municipality of persons having
special knowledge or experience in Municipal administration. However, the proviso
to clause (2) clearly specifies that the persons who are referred to in paragraph (i)
shall not have the right to vote in the meetings of the Municipality. The legislature of
the State may also provide for the manner of election of the Chairperson of the
Municipality. 8 Section 3(3) of the Act is a law as contemplated by Article 243R. In
terms of clause (2) of Article 243R, Section 3(3)(b) provides for the representation in
the Municipality of persons who have special knowledge or experience in Municipal
administration. These persons are nominated by the Administrator. However, in
terms of the proviso to Article 243R(2), a similar restriction is introduced in the
proviso to Section 3(3)(b)(i) of the Act, by which the nominated members do not have
a right to vote in the meetings of the Municipal Corporation. 9 The submission which
has been urged on behalf of the petitioners by Dr A M Singhvi is that the nominated
members of the Corporation do not have the right to vote, including at the election of
the Mayor.

3

Shelly Oberoi vs Office Of Lieutenant Governor Of Delhi on 17 February, 2023

10 On the other hand, It has been urged both by the Solicitor General appearing on
behalf of the Lt Governor and by Mr Sanjay Jain, Additional Solicitor General
appearing on behalf of the Municipal Corporation, that the restriction on the right to
vote in terms of Article 243R(2) as well as the proviso to Section 3(3)(b)

(i) applies only to the regular meetings of the Corporation where the business of the
Municipal Corporation is transacted and would not extend to the first meeting after
the elections are held. Buttressing the submission, it has been urged that Section 73
requires the first meeting of the Corporation to be convened by the Administrator
and Section 35 stipulates that at its first meeting the Corporation shall elect one of its
members as a Mayor and another to be a Deputy Mayor. Hence, it has been
submitted that the prohibition on the exercise of the right to vote which attaches to
the nominated members does not extend to the first meeting of the Corporation. Mr
Ranjit Kumar, senior counsel, alluded to the provisions of clause (b) of Article
243R(2), according to which the state legislature may by the legislation provide for
the manner of electing the Chairperson of a Municipality.

11 We are unable to accept the submission which has been urged on behalf of the
Municipal Corporation and the Lt Governor and by counsel supporting them. The
source of the statutory provision is contained in Article 243R of the Constitution
itself. Part IXA of the Constitution was introduced by the Constitution (Seventy-

fourth Amendment) Act 1992. Article 243R provides for the composition of Municipalities. As
already noted, the Constitution provides for direct election to all the seats in Municipality, save as
specified in clause (2) which enunciates the exceptions. Clause (2) contains provisions, inter alia, for
the representation in a Municipality of persons having special knowledge or experience in Municipal
administration as well as other persons such as members of the House of the People and the
Legislative Assembly and members of the Council of States and the Legislative Council of the States
representing the specific constituency and the Chairpersons of the Committees constituted under
clause (5) of Article 243S. The Constitution has imposed a restriction in terms of which nominated
members who are brought in on account of their special knowledge or experience in Municipal
administration do not have the right to vote. The same restriction finds statutory recognition in
Section 3(3)(b)(i) of the Act. The above provisions indicate that persons who are nominated under
the sub-clause shall not have the right to vote in the meetings of the Corporation. The Constitution
and the Act place value on their experience but the right to vote is not granted to them at meetings
of the Corporation. The meetings of the Corporation would include all meetings, including the first
meeting which is held after the holding of the general election. Section 73 of the Act provides for the
first meeting to be convened by the Administrator as early as possible after the publication of the
results, while Section 35 provides for the election of the Mayor and Deputy Mayor at the first
meeting of the Corporation. The prohibition on nominated members exercising the right to vote in
terms of Section 3(3)(b)(i) shall, therefore, also apply to the first meeting of the Corporation at
which the Mayor and, thereafter, the Deputy Mayor are to be elected.

4

Shelly Oberoi vs Office Of Lieutenant Governor Of Delhi on 17 February, 2023

12 Apart from the above issue, it needs to be emphasized that Regulation 7 of the Delhi Municipal
Corporation (Procedure and Conduct of Business) Regulations 1958 stipulates that as soon as the
Mayor is elected, “he shall preside over the meeting for the transaction of the rest of the business
thereof”. Regulation 8 provides for the election of the Deputy Mayor and stipulates that the
provisions of Regulation 6 shall apply, as far as may be, to the election of the Deputy Mayor, subject
to the modification that any reference to the presiding authority shall be construed as a reference to
the Mayor. These provisions make it abundantly clear that the election of the Mayor has to be held
first. The elected Mayor is then required to preside over the election of the Deputy Mayor as the
presiding authority. Consequently, with this clarification, it must be noted that the election of the
Mayor shall be conducted first in the first meeting of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi. Once the
Mayor is elected, the elected Mayor shall be the presiding authority for the purpose of the election of
the Deputy Mayor.

13 The interpretation which we have placed on the provisions of the statute is in accord with the
judgment of a three-Judge Bench of this Court in Ramesh Mehta v Sanwal Chand Singh2.

14 We may also note, at this stage, that on 2 February 2023, the Urban Development Department of
the Government of NCT of Delhi has issued a notification clarifying that the election of the Mayor,
as required by Section 35 of the Act, shall first be held and the Mayor so elected will then assume the
Chair and proceed to conduct the election of the Deputy Mayor and six members of 2 (2004) 5 SCC
409 the Standing Committee. The aforesaid notification was issued in the context of a meeting
which was to be held on 6 February 2023, which could not be held on that day due to intervening
circumstances.

15 Mr Sanjay Jain has indicated that the same process would be followed at the ensuing meeting for
the election of the Mayor, the Deputy Mayor and the members of the Standing Committee.

16 Hence, we issue the following directions:

(i) At the first meeting of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi, the election shall be
held first for the post of Mayor and at that election, the members who are nominated
in terms of Section 3(3)(b)(i) of the Act shall not have the right to vote;

(ii) Upon the election of the Mayor, the Mayor shall act as the presiding authority for
conducting the election of the Deputy Mayor and the members of the Standing
Committee at which also the prohibition on the exercise of vote by the nominated
members in terms of Section 3(3)(b)(i) shall continue to operate; and

(iii) The notice convening the first meeting of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi
shall be issued within a period of twenty four hours. The notice shall fix the date for
convening the first meeting at which the election of the Mayor, Deputy Mayor and
members of the Standing Committee shall be conducted in terms of the above
directions.

5

Shelly Oberoi vs Office Of Lieutenant Governor Of Delhi on 17 February, 2023

17 The petition is allowed in the above terms.

18 Pending application, if any, stands disposed of.

..…..…....…........……………….…........CJI.

[Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud] …..…..…....…........……………….…........J. [Pamidighantam Sri
Narasimha] …..…..…....…........……………….…........J. [J B Pardiwala] New Delhi;

February 17, 2023

-S-

6