Shyam Kumar Gupta vs Shubham Jain on 2 February, 2023

Shyam Kumar Gupta vs Shubham Jain on 2 February, 2023

Author: Dinesh Maheshwari

Bench: Bela M. Trivedi, Dinesh Maheshwari

1
REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NO.765 OF 2023
(ARISING OUT OF SLP(C) NO. 2542 OF 2023)

SHYAM KUMAR GUPTA & ORS.                                  APPELLANT(S)

VERSUS

SHUBHAM JAIN                                            RESPONDENT(S)

JUDGMENT

DINESH MAHESHWARI, J.

Leave granted.

2. This appeal, by the legal representatives of deceased defendant in the civil suit bearing No. 1 of
2015 for recovery of arrears of rent and for ejectment, is directed against the order dated 21.09.2022
passed by the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad, Lucknow Bench in the petition bearing No.
3536 of 2022, whereby the High Court has declined to interfere with the order dated 01.09.2022
passed by the Court of Additional District and Sessions Judge (POCSO Act)-II, Raebareli, rejecting
an application under Order IX Rule 13 of Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (‘CPC’) for setting aside ex
parte judgment and decree dated 09.03.2016/16.03.2016.

3. Shorn of unnecessary details and briefly put, the relevant Date: 2023.02.08 background aspects
of the matter are that the respondent herein, asserting his capacity as owner and proprietary right
holder, filed the suit aforesaid against the late father of present appellants in the Small Causes
Court, stating that the defendant was a tenant in the suit shop at a monthly rent of Rs. 2,000/- per
month and had failed to make payment of rent from the month of February, 2015 to the month of
May, 2015, amounting to Rs. 8,000/- and 15% municipal tax despite notice.

4. It appears that in the said civil suit, the Trial Court held the service of summons on the defendant
sufficient and proceeded ex parte for want of appearance on behalf of the defendant; and after

1

Shyam Kumar Gupta vs Shubham Jain on 2 February, 2023

taking evidence, on 09.03.2016, decreed the suit with costs, for recovery of arrears of rent in the
sum of Rs. 8,000/- and for eviction of the defendant from the suit shop while also holding the
plaintiff entitled to receive damages from the defendant, for use and occupation of the suit shop, at
the rate of Rs. 2,000/- per month until delivery of actual vacant possession. The operative part of
the judgment dated 09.03.2016 reads as under: -

“The suit of the plaintiff is decreed ex-parte with cost against the defendant for
recovery of the rent Rs. 8,000/- and for eviction of the shop in question and the
defendant is ordered that he to hand over the vacant possession of the plaintiff’s shop
which is at present situated in Municipality House No. 62/3, Ward No. 24, Malikmau
Road, near Beliganj Phatak within the jurisdiction of the Municipality, Pargana,
Tehsil and District Raebareli, the four boundaries of which are – North by: Malikmau
Road, South by:

rest building of the plaintiff, East by: House of the plaintiff, West by: House of
Hariom are situated, within two months. The plaintiff would be entitled to Receive
Rs. 2,000/- per month as the compensation for use of the aforesaid shop during the
suit and till handing over the actual vacant possession and occupation of the said
shop after paying the Court Fee in the Execution Department.”

5. Later on, the defendant, predecessor of the appellants, moved an application under
Order IX Rule 13 CPC alongwith an application under Section 5 of the Limitation Act,
1963 on 20.08.2016. He also moved an application under Section 17 of the Provincial
Small Cause Courts Act, 1887 (‘the Act of 1887’), alongwith a tender seeking
permission to deposit the decretal amount to the tune of Rs. 11,212/-, inclusive of the
amount of costs. An objection was taken by the plaintiff-respondent against the
application so moved by the defendant with the submissions, inter alia, that under
the decree in question, he was entitled not only to the said arrears of rent and costs
but also to damages at the rate of 2,000/- per month until possession continued with
the defendant; and necessary deposit towards damages having not been made, the
application for setting aside ex parte decree was not maintainable. It is noticed that
during pendency of the application aforesaid, the defendant, father of the appellants,
expired on 26.09.2017; and an application was moved by the present appellants on
12.03.2018, for their substitution as applicants in place of the deceased applicant.

6. The Trial Court took note of the respective submissions of the parties and upheld
the objections of the plaintiff-respondent while observing, inter alia, as under: -

“The applicant Mata Prasad by submitting an application 7g2 in the file of the present
Miscellaneous Suit applied for depositing the decretal amount Rs. 8,000/- and cost
of the suit Rs. 3212/- total amount Rs. 11,212/- on which an order was passed by the
Court that the applicant can deposit the amount on which risk. Thus, it is clear that
an amount of Rs. 11,212.00 has been deposited by the applicant Mata Prasad,
whereas it is clear from perusal of the passed in the Small Cause Case no. 01/2015

2

Shyam Kumar Gupta vs Shubham Jain on 2 February, 2023

and the decree dated 25-03-2016 passed in the pursuance of it, an order passed has
passed for paying the due rent from the month of February, 2016 to the month of
May, 2016 (Total four months) @ Rs. 2,000/- per month which is total Rs. 8,000/-
and payment 15% Municipality Tax to be paid @ 9%. Apart from it, it is also
mentioned in the decree that until the defendant gives the possession and occupation
of the shop in question by vacating it to the plaintiff, till then, compensation of use @
Rs. 2000/- per month be given to the plaintiff from the defendant and the cost of the
case be given to the plaintiff from the defendant.

It is clear from integrated perusal of the aforesaid judgment and decree that the
judgement and decree have not been complied by the applicant Mata Prasad. Neither
the Municipality Tax nor the interest accrued on it and nor the compensation for use
till the date of filing the application under Section 13 have been paid by him. Only the
rent due since the month of February to the month of May, 2015 @ Rs. 2,000/- per
month and the cost of the case Rs. 3212/- total amount Rs. 11,212/- has been
deposited by him, the balance amount which was payable by the applicant Mata
Prasad to the Opposite Party in compliance of the aforesaid decree and judgment, in
that regard, neither any amount has been deposited by the applicant Mata Prasad
and nor any permission has been sought from the court by filing any application with
regard to submitting any undertaking about the compliance of it. Hence, it is clear
that Section 17 of the Provincial Small Causes Court Act, 1887 which imposes
compulsory liability on the applicant that the applicant after paying the total amount
due under the ex-parte decree and judgment will file the application under Order 9
Rule 13 C.P.C. Word by word and complete compliance of the aforesaid legal
provision has not been done by the applicant Mata Prasad and nor any
undertaking/guarantee in this regard has been submitted in the Court by him that he
is ready and willing to comply with the aforesaid Judgement and decree. In such
situation, it is the opinion of the Court that the instant Miscellaneous Civil Suit due to
not complying with Section 17 of the Provincial Small Causes Court Act, 1887 is liable
to be dismissed and the preliminary objection application 36g2 filed by the Opposite
Party is liable to be allowed.”

7. Being aggrieved by the aforesaid order dated 01.09.2022, appellants approached
the High Court by filing a petition under Article 227 of the Constitution of India, inter
alia, with the submissions that the defendant had not been served in the said civil
suit, and the plaintiff-

respondent obtained the decree with concealment of facts. Further, it was submitted that father of
the appellants had moved the application immediately after coming to know about ex parte decree,
and complied with the requirements of Section 17 of the Act of 1887. It was also submitted that the
Trial Court had failed to examine if the plaintiff- respondent at all informed the defendant about his
ownership after purchasing the shop in question.

3

Shyam Kumar Gupta vs Shubham Jain on 2 February, 2023

8. The High Court, however, agreed with the Trial Court about non- compliance of the requirements
of Section 17 of the Act of 1887 and, with reference to the decision of this Court in the case of
Kedarnath v. Mohan Lal Kesarwari and Ors.: 2002 ALL CJ 145 [= (2002) 2 SCC 16], proceeded to
dismiss the petition essentially for want of requisite compliance by the defendant, of depositing the
amount due and payable under the decree in question. The High Court, inter alia, observed and held
as under: -

“Having heard learned counsel for the parties and having perused the records, what
emerges is that the SCC Suit filed by the respondent had been decided ex-parte vide
order dated

09.03.2016 against which an application under Order IX Rule 13 of the CPC was filed by the
petitioners. Admittedly, the petitioners did not comply with the provisions of Section 17 of the Act,
1887, which provides that the applicant, at the time of presenting the application, shall deposit in
Court the amount due from him under the decree or in pursuance of the judgment, or give such
security for the performance of the decree or compliance with the judgment as the Court may, on a
previous application made in this behalf, had directed.

Perusal of the impugned order dated 01.09.2022 would indicate that the court below has considered
the violation of Section 17 of the Act, 1887 by specifically recording that the petitioners have failed to
deposit the amount as was due in pursuance to the order dated 09.03.2016.

The Apex Court in the case of Kedar Nath(supra) has held the provisions of Section 17 of the Act,
1887 to be mandatory, as per the observations in the judgment, which, for the sake of convenience,
are reproduced below:-

“In the case at hand, the application for setting aside ex parte decree was not
accompanied by deposit in the court of the amount due and payable by the applicant
under the decree. The applicant also did not move any application for dispensing
with deposit and seeking leave of the court for furnishing such security for the
performance of the decree as the court may have directed. The application for setting
aside the decree was therefore incompetent. It could not have been entertained and
allowed.” Accordingly, considering the law laid down by the Apex Court in the case of
Kedar Nath(supra) and the specific finding given by the court below of the provisions
of Section 17 of the Act, 1887 not having been complied with rather having been
violated by the petitioners, this Court does not find any illegality or infirmity in the
orders impugned. Accordingly, the petition is dismissed.”

9. Being aggrieved by the order so passed by the High Court, the appellants have
approached this Court. While considering the petition leading to this appeal at the
initial stage yesterday, i.e., on 01.02.2023 and after taking note of all the facts and
circumstances of the case, when this Court queried learned counsel for the appellants
regarding the amount towards rent/mesne profits until now due, it was submitted
that appellants were ready and willing to immediately deposit the amount so due

4

Shyam Kumar Gupta vs Shubham Jain on 2 February, 2023

and, at request, the matter was adjourned for a day.

10. It has been pointed out that today, a sum of Rs.1,90,000/-

(Rupees One Lakh Ninety Thousand) has been deposited by the appellants in the Trial Court, in
compliance of this Court’s order dated 01.02.2023, which is said to be the amount further payable
under the decree in question, being that of rent/mesne profits @ Rs. 2,000/- per month, from the
month of June, 2015 to the month of April, 2023. A photostat of the tender presented to the Trial
Court, with endorsement of deposit in the bank today, has also been placed before us.

11. Taking note of the steps so taken by the appellants and in the totality of circumstances, while
granting leave, we have heard learned counsel for the parties finally at this stage itself.

12. Learned counsel for the appellants has essentially submitted that the Trial Court and the High
Court have taken too rigid a view of the matter and have failed to consider that the amount directly
due under the decree in question, being a sum of Rs. 8,000/- towards arrears of rent and another
sum of Rs. 3,212/- towards costs had indeed been deposited by the defendant; and in the given
circumstances, the application for setting aside ex parte decree could not have been dismissed only
for want of deposit of the amount towards further use and occupation of the suit shop. It has also
been submitted that it had not been a case of wilful avoidance of the requirements of Section 17 of
the Act of 1887 and in any case, the appellants, having now deposited the amount towards
rent/mesne profits until the month of April, 2023, deserve an opportunity to contest the suit on
merits. Per contra, learned counsel for the respondent has duly supported the orders impugned and
has contended that for want of specific compliance of the requirements of Section 17 of the Act of
1887 at the time of filing of the application for setting aside ex parte decree, the view as taken by the
Trial Court, duly affirmed by the High Court, cannot said to be unjustified.

13. Having given anxious consideration to the rival submissions and having examined the record, we
are clearly of the view that the impugned orders cannot be approved and the appellants deserve an
opportunity to contest the suit on merits.

14. Section 17 of the Provincial Small Cause Courts Act, 1887, on which reliance has been placed by
the Trial Court and by the High Court while declining the prayer for setting aside ex parte decree,
reads as under: -

“17. Application of the Code of Civil Procedure.—(1) The procedure prescribed in the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), shall save in so far as is otherwise provided
by that Code or by this Act, be the procedure followed in a Court of Small Causes, in
all suits cognizable by it and in all proceedings arising out of such suits:

Provided that an applicant for an order to set aside a decree passed ex parte or for a
review of judgment shall, at the time of presenting his application, either deposit in
the Court the amount due from him under the decree or in pursuance of the
judgment, or give such security for the performance of the decree or compliance with

5

Shyam Kumar Gupta vs Shubham Jain on 2 February, 2023

the judgment as the Court may, on a previous application made by him in this behalf,
have directed. (2) Where a person has become liable as surety under the proviso to
sub-section (1), the security may be realized in manner provided by Section 145 of the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908).” 14.1. Rule 13 of Order IX of the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908 could also be extracted for ready reference as under: -

“13. Setting aside decree ex parte against defendants.- In any case in which a decree is
passed ex parte against a defendant, he may apply to the Court by which the decree
was passed for an order to set it aside; and if he satisfies the Court that the summons
was not duly served, or that he was prevented by any sufficient cause from appearing
when the suit was called on for hearing, the Court shall make an order setting aside
the decree as against him upon such terms as to costs, payment into Court or
otherwise as it thinks fit, and shall appoint a day for proceeding with the suit:

Provided that where the decree is of such a nature that it cannot be set aside as
against such defendant only it may be set aside as against all or any of the other
defendants also:

Provided further that no Court shall set aside a decree passed ex parte merely on the
ground that there has been an irregularity in the service of summons, if it is satisfied
that the defendant had notice of the date of hearing and had sufficient time to appear
and answer the plaintiffs claim.

Explanation. - Where there has been an appeal against a decree passed ex parte
under this rule, and the appeal has been disposed of an any ground other than the
ground that the appellant has withdrawn the appeal, no application shall lie under
this rule for setting aside the ex parte decree.”

15. It could be reasonably noticed that in relation to the suit to which the Act of 1887 applies, an
applicant seeking an order to set aside the decree passed ex parte is required to deposit the amount
due under the decree/judgment or has to furnish security for due performance of the decree or
compliance with the judgment. Even under Order IX Rule 13 CPC, while making an order for setting
aside the decree passed ex parte, the Court may put the defendant to terms as to costs, payment into
Court or otherwise. However, these requirements need to be visualized from a practical standpoint
and cannot be applied as if to penalize the defendant for every mistake, even if the amount payable
is not explicitly quantified in the decree in question.

15.1. For the purpose of the case at hand, as regards the amount payable, a sum of Rs. 8,000/-
towards arrears of rent had been quantified in the decree and another sum of Rs. 3,212/- towards
costs could have been taken as quantified. Of course, the plaintiff was further held entitled to receive
Rs. 2,000/- per month towards rent/mesne profits during the suit and until getting the actual
vacant possession of the suit shop after payment of requisite court fees but, the Trial Court did not
specifically quantify the amount payable by the defendant even until the date of decree. In the given
circumstances, when the defendant, predecessor of the appellants, immediately moved the Court

6

Shyam Kumar Gupta vs Shubham Jain on 2 February, 2023

after noticing the decree in question and deposited the amount directly quantified thereunder i.e.,
the sum of Rs. 8,000/- towards arrears of rent and Rs. 3,212/- towards costs, totalling to Rs.
11,212/-, while seeking the order for setting aside ex parte decree, it had not been a case where the
defendant had ignored the requirements of deposit altogether. Moreover, the decree in question had
not been merely a money decree but had been for eviction too. Looking to the subject-matter of the
suit and the overall circumstances, a practical view was required to be taken and if all any further
deposit or furnishing of security was considered necessary, appropriate orders could have been
passed in that regard. Putting it differently, in terms of Section 17 of the Act of 1887 read with Order
IX Rule 13 CPC, the Court could have extended the time for making deposit if so required, or could
have put the defendant to the terms of security for performance of the decree. 15.2. However, for
what has been noticed and extracted hereinabove, it is apparent that Trial Court and the High Court
have viewed the requirements of Section 17 of the Act of 1887 from such an exacting and rather
impractical standpoint that the bonafide attempt of the defendant to seek a merit decision of the suit
after due contest has been totally ignored. In our view, in the present set of facts and circumstances,
prayer of the defendant to set aside ex parte decree could not have been denied for want of further
deposit in terms of the decree in question. 15.3. The High Court, while dismissing the petition filed
by the appellants and endorsing the views of the Trial Court, has proceeded to rely upon the decision
of this Court in the case of Kedarnath (supra), that the provisions of Section 17 of the Act of 1887 are
held to be mandatory. In our view, reference to the said decision remains inapposite in the present
case. Even if the requirements of Section 17 of the Act of 1887 are held to be mandatory, the present
one had not been a case where the defendant had altogether ignored those requirements. In
Kedarnath (supra), in the very passage reproduced by the High Court, it was clearly noticed that the
applicant did not make any deposit and did not move any application for dispensing with deposit or
seeking leave of the Court for furnishing security. In the backdrop of such facts, showing total non-
compliance of the requirements of Section 17 of the Act of 1887, this Court held the application for
setting aside the decree as incompetent. It is difficult to apply the decision in Kedarnath (supra) to
the facts of the present case.

16. Apart from the above, where we find that the Trial Court and the High Court had taken too
technical and impractical a view of the matter, there is another strong reason for which we are
inclined to accept the prayer for setting aside the decree passed ex parte in this case. As noticed, in
response to the queries of this Court, the appellants have immediately taken bonafide steps and
have deposited the amount which may be relatable to rent/mesne profits until the month of April,
2023. For this bonafide and prompt step (albeit taken after approaching this Court), in our view,
they do deserve an opportunity to contest the suit on merits, particularly when the matter relates to
a shop where the predecessor of the appellants had been continuing as tenant and the
plaintiff-respondent is seeking the decree for eviction only on the ground of default in payment of
rent.

17. Accordingly and in view of the above, this appeal succeeds and is allowed in the manner that
while setting aside the impugned orders dated 01.09.2022 and 21.09.2022, the application filed by
the appellants under Order IX Rule 13 CPC is allowed and thereby, the ex parte judgment and
decree dated 09.03.2016/16.03.2016 are set aside. Consequently, the said suit shall stand restored
for being considered on its own merits.

7

Shyam Kumar Gupta vs Shubham Jain on 2 February, 2023

18. For the purpose of proceedings in the suit, looking to the time that has elapsed, it shall definitely
be required of the Trial Court to assign the same a reasonable priority and to proceed expeditiously,
while curbing against unnecessary delay. Further, in the interest of justice, it is also considered
appropriate and hence provided that it shall be required of the appellants to submit their written
statement(s) on or before 28.02.2023 and thereafter, the Trial Court shall proceed with expedition,
as indicated above.

19. As regards the amount deposited by the appellants, we leave it open for the respondent-plaintiff
to apply for its withdrawal, if so advised; and if any such prayer is made by the plaintiff, the same
may be given due consideration by the Trial Court in accordance with law.

20. The parties through their respective counsel shall stand at notice to appear before the Trial
Court on 28.02.2023.

21. Pending applications also stand disposed of.

………………....................,J.

(DINESH MAHESHWARI) ..……………....................,J.

(BELA M. TRIVEDI) NEW DELHI;

FEBRUARY 02, 2023.

8