State Of Gujarat & Ors. Etc. vs Dr. P A Bhatt & Ors. Etc. on 26 April, 2023

State Of Gujarat & Ors. Etc. vs Dr. P A Bhatt & Ors. Etc. on 26
April, 2023

Author: V. Ramasubramanian

Bench: Pankaj Mithal, V. Ramasubramanian

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 8553-8557 OF 2014

STATE OF GUJARAT & ORS. ETC.                          …APPELLANT(S)

VERSUS

DR. P. A. BHATT & ORS. ETC.                         …RESPONDENT(S)

WITH

CONTEMPT PETITION (C) NO.701 OF 2017
IN
C.A. NO.8556 OF 2014 @ C.A. NOS .8553-8557 OF 2014

CONTEMPT PETITION (C) NO.674 OF 2017
IN
C.A. NO.8555 OF 2014 @ CA NOS. 8553-8557 OF 2014

CONTEMPT PETITION (C) NO.916 OF 2017
IN
C.A. NO.8557 OF 2014 @ CA NOS.8553-8557 OF 2014

JUDGMENT

V. Ramasubramanian, J.

1. These civil appeals arise out of a common order passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of
Gujarat at Ahmedabad confirming the order of the learned Single Judge, holding that the
respondents possessing a degree of BAMS (Bachelor of Ayurved in Medicine and Surgery) should be
treated at par with the doctors holding MBBS degrees and that they are entitled to the benefits of the
recommendations of the Tikku Pay Commission.

1

2. We have heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties.

State Of Gujarat & Ors. Etc. vs Dr. P A Bhatt & Ors. Etc. on 26 April, 2023

3. On the basis of a Memorandum of Settlement dated 21.08.1989 entered into by the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare with the Joint Action Council of Service Doctors Organisation, a
High-Power Committee was constituted on 03.05.1990 with Shri R.K. Tikku as its Chairman, for the
purpose of improving the service conditions and prospects of the doctors in Government service.

4. This Committee held 30 meetings during the period from June-1990 to October-1990 and
submitted its recommendations under a Report dated 31.10.1990. The recommendations contained
in this Report was confined only to service doctors holding MBBS degrees and post-graduate
medical degrees and degrees in super-specialities and those on the teaching and non- teaching sides.

5. By a separate order dated 19.11.1990, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare constituted
another High-Power Committee under the chairmanship of the very same person, namely, Shri R.K.
Tikku, for the purpose of considering the career improvement and cadre restructuring of the
practitioners of Indian Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy. This Committee submitted a separate
Report on 26.02.1991 and it was confined to practitioners of alternative Systems of Medicine,
holding degrees in Ayurved/Unani/Siddha/Homeopathy.

6. The Government of India accepted the recommendations of the Tikku Committee dated
31.10.1990, in respect of allopathic doctors by Office Memorandum dated 14.11.1991. The State of
Gujarat also accepted the recommendations of the Tikku Committee for allopathic doctors and
issued an order in Resolution No.GHS/1094/2842/T dated 17.10.1994. It was stated in the said
order dated 17.10.1994 that adequate number of allopathic doctors was not available in the State and
that therefore, it was necessary to attract talent.

7. After the implementation of the recommendations of the Tikku Committee dated 31.10.1990 in
respect of allopathic doctors, in the State of Gujarat by the Government Resolution dated
17.10.1994, the Local Fund Audit, Ahmedabad sought clarifications, vide letters dated 04.03.1998
and 21.04.1998, as to whether the same benefits are available to non-MBBS medical officers holding
qualifications such as G.A.F.M/LMP.

8. In response, the Health and Family Welfare Department of the Government of Gujarat issued a
Government Resolution bearing No.KRV/1098/726/CH dated 01.01.1999, holding that non-MBBS
medical officers are also entitled to the benefit. Incidentally this letter stated that the
recommendations of the Tikku Committee were extended even to doctors working under the
Employees State Insurance Scheme, vide Government Resolution dated 01.07.1997.

9. The respondents herein who were originally appointed on adhoc basis, under the ‘Community
Health Volunteer Medical Officers Scheme’ floated by the Government of India and who were later
absorbed by the State of Gujarat in May- 1999, filed 4 writ petitions on the file of the High Court of
Gujarat seeking extension of the benefit of higher scales of pay on the basis of the recommendations
of Tikku Pay Commission. A separate writ petition was filed by the Medical Officers (Ayurved)
Association, comprising of persons initially appointed as Medical Officers Class-III. The relief

2

sought by this Association was similar to the one sought in the batch of four writ petitions.

State Of Gujarat & Ors. Etc. vs Dr. P A Bhatt & Ors. Etc. on 26 April, 2023

10. By a common order dated 26.07.2012, a learned Judge of the High Court allowed all the writ
petitions, holding that doctors having degrees in alternative Systems of Medicine are entitled to be
treated at par with doctors holding MBBS degree.

11. The State of Gujarat preferred intra-court appeals. After filing appeals, the State also issued a
Government Resolution dated 31.07.2013 withdrawing the Resolution dated 01.01.1999 by which
the benefit was extended to non-MBBS degree holders. This was because the learned Single Judge
held that discrimination between non-MBBS degree holders working in the ESI Scheme and
non-MBBS degree holders working in other areas was not permissible.

12. But the Division Bench of the High Court dismissed all the intra-court appeals holding, (i) that
both MBBS and non-MBBS doctors form part of the same cadre and hence no discrimination is
permissible within the cadre on the basis of educational qualifications; and (ii) that the non-MBBS
doctors were also discharging the same duties and functions discharged by MBBS doctors and were
even manning primary health centres independently and that therefore they were entitled to equal
pay.

13. Aggrieved by the said order of the Division Bench of the High Court, the State has come up with
the above appeals. On 08.09.2014, this Court granted leave in the special leave petitions and passed
an interim order to the following effect.

“Leave granted.

Having heard learned counsel for the parties, it is directed that the State of Gujarat shall comply
with the order of the High Court up to 50% within two months. Needless to say, it case the appeal is
dismissed, the respondents shall be entitled to the balance 50% with interest, which shall be
determined at the time of final adjudication of the appeal.

Hearing expedited.”

14. Claiming that the above interim direction issued on 08.09.2014 was not complied, a batch of
contempt petitions was filed in the year 2016. Those contempt petitions were disposed of on the
basis of a statement made to the effect that the State will comply with the order by the end of
October, 2016.

15. However, a fresh set of three contempt petitions were filed in the year 2017, complaining of
wilful disobedience of the order dated 08.09.2014. These contempt petitions were directed to be
listed alongwith the main appeals and this is why we have five civil appeals and three contempt
petitions on hand. Preliminary contention

16. The learned counsel for the respondents raised a preliminary issue that the question raised in
these appeals is squarely covered by a recent judgment of this Court in North Delhi Municipal

3

State Of Gujarat & Ors. Etc. vs Dr. P A Bhatt & Ors. Etc. on 26 April, 2023

Corporation vs. Dr. Ram Naresh Sharma1 and that therefore the impugned order of the High Court
does not need a deeper scrutiny. Therefore, it is necessary to address this preliminary issue before
we proceed to consider the rival contentions on merits.

17. In Dr. Ram Naresh Sharma (supra), the only question that arose was as to whether the benefit of
enhancement of age of retirement from 60 years to 65 years, granted in favour of Allopathy doctors,
was available even for Ayurved doctors or not. It was held in the said decision as follows:

“22. The common contention of the appellants before us is that classification of
AYUSH doctors and doctors under CHS in different categories is reasonable and
permissible in law. This however does not appeal to us and we are inclined to agree
with the findings of the Tribunal and the Delhi High Court that the classification is
discriminatory and unreasonable since doctors under both segments are performing
the same function of treating and healing their patients. The only difference is that
AYUSH doctors are using indigenous systems of medicine like Ayurveda, Unani, etc.
and CHS doctors are using Allopathy for tending to their patients. In our
understanding, the mode of treatment by itself under the prevalent scheme of 1 2021
(9) SCALE 47 things, does not qualify as an intelligible differentia.

Therefore, such unreasonable classification and discrimination based on it would surely be
inconsistent with Article 14 of the Constitution. The order of AYUSH Ministry dated 24.11.2017
extending the age of superannuation to 65 Years also endorses such a view. This extension is in tune
with the notification of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare dated 31.05.2016.

23. The doctors, both under AYUSH and CHS, render service to patients and on this core aspect,
there is nothing to distinguish them. Therefore, no rational justification is seen for having different
dates for bestowing the benefit of extended age of superannuation to these two categories of doctors.
Hence, the order of AYUSH Ministry (F.No.D14019/4/2016-E-I(AYUSH)) dated 24.11.2017 must be
retrospectively applied from 31.05.2016 to all concerned respondent-doctors, in the present appeals.
All consequences must follow from this conclusion.”

18. A cursory reading of the portion of the judgment extracted supra, may give an impression as
though the question arising for consideration is no longer res integra and that Allopathy doctors and
Ayurved doctors should be treated on par insofar as all service conditions are concerned. But a
careful reading of the entire judgment shows that the said decision was based upon an order of the
Ministry of Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy (AYUSH) dated
24.11.2017. As seen from paragraph 2 of the said decision, the age of retirement of Allopathy doctors
was increased by an order dated 31.05.2016 issued by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
This was followed by consequential amendment of the Fundamental Rules and Supplementary
Rules, 1922. Since Ayurved doctors were not covered by the Ministry’s order dated 31.05.2016,
Ayurved doctors filed applications before the Administrative Tribunal. The Administrative Tribunal
allowed the applications by an order dated 24.08.2017. The North Delhi Municipal Corporation
(employer) filed writ petitions before the High Court of Delhi challenging the decision of the
Tribunal. During the pendency of the writ petitions, the Ministry of AYUSH issued an order dated

4

State Of Gujarat & Ors. Etc. vs Dr. P A Bhatt & Ors. Etc. on 26 April, 2023

24.11.2017 enhancing the age of retirement of AYUSH doctors also to 65 years, but with effect from
27.09.2017. It is in that context that this Court held as aforesaid in Dr. Ram Naresh Sharma. This
Court did not go into the question whether AYUSH doctors and Allopathy doctors were performing
equal duties and responsibilities so as to be entitled to equal pay.

19. We must remember the fundamental distinction between,

(i) the issue of law that equal work entails equal pay; and

(ii) the issue of fact as to whether two categories of employees are performing equal work or not?
This Court did not go into the factual aspect in Dr. Ram Naresh Sharma as to whether AYUSH
doctors were performing equal work as Allopathy doctors. This Court simply relied upon the order
of the Ministry of AYUSH itself enhancing the age of retirement of AYUSH doctors on par with
Allopathy doctors.

20. In any case, the question of age of retirement stands on a different footing from the service
conditions relating to pay and allowances and revision of pay. Therefore, we do not think that the
issue raised in these appeals can be said to be covered by the decision in Dr. Ram Naresh Sharma.

Other contentions

21. Assailing the impugned order of the High Court, it is contended on behalf of the State that the
recommendations of Tikku Pay Commission for enhancement of the scales of pay were per se
applicable only to MBBS doctors; that the revision of scales of pay in favour of Allopathy doctors was
warranted by the perennial shortage of Allopathy doctors; that the State Government had to fulfil its
Constitutional obligation of providing adequate healthcare infrastructure to the citizens by
recruiting qualified MBBS doctors, but the State could not attract sufficient talent, due to the poor
pay structure; that in contrast, the State was never running short of AYUSH doctors and hence there
was no necessity to lure qualified AYUSH doctors to come to service; that there is no impediment in
law for providing different scales of pay to persons employed in the same cadre, based upon the
qualifications; and that the High Court miserably failed to appreciate the completely different
nature of duties and responsibilities performed by Allopathy doctors and AYUSH doctors and that
therefore the impugned order is wrong, both in law and on facts.

22. In response, it is contended by the learned counsel for the respondents that both Allopathy
doctors and AYUSH doctors are appointed to the post of Medical Officer falling in Class-II of
Gujarat Medical Services; that once persons with different qualifications are appointed to one
unified cadre with a common pay scale and governed by one set of rules, then at a later stage, the
Government cannot make a classification; that all Medical Officers, irrespective of their
qualifications were discharging the same duties and responsibilities; that by the Government
Resolution dated 01.01.1999, the recommendations of the Tikku Pay Commission were made
applicable to non-MBBS degree holders working in the ESI Scheme; that it was only after the
learned Single Judge allowed the writ petitions, that the State issued another Resolution dated
31.07.2013 withdrawing the Resolution dated 01.01.1999; and that the findings of fact recorded by

5

State Of Gujarat & Ors. Etc. vs Dr. P A Bhatt & Ors. Etc. on 26 April, 2023

the learned Single Judge and the Division Bench of the High Court that both categories of doctors
are performing equal work, does not call for any interference under Article 136 of the Constitution
and that therefore the appeals are liable to be dismissed.

23. We have carefully considered the above submissions.

24. Two questions, in our opinion, arise for consideration in these appeals. They are:

(i) Whether different scales of pay can be fixed for officers appointed to the same
cadre, on the basis of educational qualifications possessed by them?

(ii) Whether Allopathy doctors and doctors of indigenous medicine can be said to be
performing “equal work” so as to be entitled to “equal pay”?

Question No.1: Whether different scales of pay can be fixed for officers appointed to the same cadre,
on the basis of the educational qualifications possessed by them?

25. The first issue arising for consideration is as to whether persons appointed to the same post in a
cadre can be given different scales of pay on the basis of educational qualifications?

26. Though the issue is no longer res integra, we shall refer to a few decisions, some of which were
cited before the High Court also.

27. In The State of Mysore vs. P. Narasinga Rao2, which is one of the earliest cases to be considered
by a Constitution Bench of this Court, the classification of two grades of Tracers, one for
matriculates with a higher pay scale and the other for non- matriculates with a lower pay scale, was
held by this Court to be not violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution. In fact, it was a case
where both matriculates as well as non-matriculates were drawing the same scale of pay in the
erstwhile State of Hyderabad, but after the reorganization of States in 1956, two different scales of
pay came to be given to those who were allotted to the new Mysore State. Yet this Court upheld the
classification.

28. In Dr. C. Girijambal vs. Government of Andhra Pradesh3, the holder of a Diploma in Ayurvedic
Medicine (DAM), appointed to the post of Medical Officer, was given a scale of pay lower than the
scale of pay given for the holders of Graduate of the College of Integrated Medicine (GCIM) and
Licentiate in Indigenous Medicine (LIM). When questioned, the Authorities 2 AIR 1968 SC 349 3
(1981) 2 SCC 155 pointed out that a higher scale of pay was available only to those with Class ‘A’
Registration Certificate under the Andhra Ayurvedic and Homeopathic Medical Practitioners’
Registration Act, 1956. Therefore, the Medical Officer filed a writ petition seeking a direction to the
Andhra Board of Ayurveda to register her as Class ‘A’ Practitioner. The High Court allowed the writ
petition and the writ petitioner was granted higher scale of pay with retrospective effect. But when a
revision of the scales of pay of Medical Officers was undertaken in the year 1975, under GOM No.574
dated 20.10.1975, a higher scale of pay was granted to those holding LIM and the petitioner was
granted a lower scale of pay. Her challenge to this classification was rejected by the Administrative

6

State Of Gujarat & Ors. Etc. vs Dr. P A Bhatt & Ors. Etc. on 26 April, 2023

Tribunal and the claim landed up before this Court. While rejecting the claim, this Court clarified
the law pithily in the following words:

“6. Dealing with the first contention we would like to observe at the outset that the
principle of equal pay for equal work cannot be invoked or applied invariably in every
kind of service and certainly it cannot be invoked in the area of professional services
when these are to be compensated. Dressing of any injury or wound is done both by a
doctor as well as a compounder, but surely it cannot be suggested that for doing this
job a doctor cannot be compensated more than the compounder. Similarly, a case in
Court of law is argued both by a senior and a junior lawyer, but it is difficult to accept
that in matter of remuneration both should be treated equally. It is thus clear that in
the field of rendering professional services at any rate the principle of equal pay for
equal work would be inapplicable. In the instant case Medical Officers holding the
qualification of G.C.I.M., or the qualification of L.I.M. or the qualification of D.A.M.,
though in charge of dispensaries run by Zilla Parishads, cannot, therefore, be created
on par with each other and if the State Government or the Zilla Parishads prescribe
different scales of pay for each category of Medical Officers no fault could be found
with such prescription. …”

29. Though the decision in Dr. C. Girijambal (supra) was cited, the High Court, in the
cases on hand, sought to distinguish the same on the ground that in the case of
holders of GCIM, LIM and DAM, the State did not treat them equally in the matter of
proficiency right from the beginning, but that in the case of non-

MBBS degree holders and MBBS degree holders, the cadre remained the same. Therefore, the High
Court held that the ration of the decision in Dr. C. Girijambal was not applicable to the cases on
hand.

30. But we do not think that the High Court was right in distinguishing the decision in Dr. C.
Girijambal. In the said case, the writ petitioner succeeded in the first round of litigation and secured
a Class ‘A’ Registration Certificate as well as the same scale of pay on par with holders of GCIM and
LIM. It was only thereafter when a revision was undertaken that a classification was sought to be
made. In other words, the petitioner in Dr. C. Girijambal reached the same pedestal as that of others
through a court order and it was only subsequently, that she suffered inequal treatment at the time
of revision of pay. Therefore, the distinguishment made by the High Court to the decision in Dr. C.
Girijambal is not well founded.

31. In Mewa Ram Kanojia vs. All India Institute of Medical Sciences4, a person initially appointed to
the post of Teacher Coordinator in a project funded by the Indian Council of Medical Research, was
redesignated as Hearing Therapist, upon his unit getting absorbed with the All India Institute of
Medical Sciences. While implementing the recommendations of the Third Pay Commission, he
sought parity with Speech Therapists and Audiologists. His claim was not considered, forcing him to
approach this Court directly under Article 32 of the Constitution, contending that he was performing
the same duties and functions as that of Speech Therapists and Audiologists. While rejecting his

7

State Of Gujarat & Ors. Etc. vs Dr. P A Bhatt & Ors. Etc. on 26 April, 2023

claim, this Court held that “… it is open to the State to classify employees on the basis of
qualifications, duties and responsibilities of the posts concerned. …”. 4 (1989) 2 SCC 235

32. The decision in Mewa Ram Kanojia (supra) was distinguished by the High Court on the ground
that in the case on hand the Allopathy doctors and Ayurved doctors are performing the same duties
and responsibilities. The question whether they are in fact performing the same duties and functions
will be dealt with by us while answering the second issue arising for consideration before us.

33. In Shyam Babu Verma vs. Union of India5, this Court clarified that though “…the nature of work
may be more or less the same, but scale of pay may vary based on academic qualifications or
experience which justifies the classification. …”. This view has been the consistent view of this court.

34. In the impugned order, the High Court placed reliance on the decision in State of Haryana vs.
Ram Chander6. It was a case where language teachers in Haryana Government Vocational
Education Institute sought parity in pay scale with teachers in higher secondary schools. There was
a finding of fact in that case that the teachers in higher secondary schools were designated as
lecturers and only those with a Master’s Degree were appointed. However, language teachers in
Vocational Education Institutes 5 (1994) 2 SCC 521 6 (1997) 5 SCC 253 possessed only an
undergraduate degree in Arts and an undergraduate degree in Education with Hindi/English as one
of the teaching subjects. Despite finding that the teachers in higher secondary schools had a higher
educational qualification than those in Vocational Education Institutes, the High Court granted
relief to language teachers working in those Institutes and the same was upheld by this Court.
Therefore, the High Court, in the impugned order, placed strong reliance upon this decision.

35. But a careful perusal of the decision in Ram Chander (supra) will show that this Court was
convinced to uphold the judgment of the High Court mainly for the reason that the State itself had
ignored the difference in the educational qualifications. In paragraph 13 of the decision, this Court
held as follows:

“13. In the light of these salient features which are well established on record there
would be no escape from the conclusion that but for the difference in educational
qualifications both these sets of employees are similarly circumscribed. So far as the
educational qualifications' difference is concerned that would have, as noted above,
made some vital difference but for the fact that the appellants themselves in their
own wisdom thought it fit to ignore this difference in the educational qualifications
by offering a uniform time scale of Rs 1640-2900 to all postgraduate lecturers in
higher secondary schools. ….”

36. In Director of Elementary Education, Odisha vs. Pramod Kumar Sahoo7, this Court held that the
classification based upon educational qualification for the grant of higher pay scale, is a valid
classification. This Court relied upon the decision in Shyam Babu Verma (supra).

37. Therefore, it is clear that the classification based upon educational qualification is not violative
of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution. Hence, our answer to Issue No.1 will be in favour of the

8

State Of Gujarat & Ors. Etc. vs Dr. P A Bhatt & Ors. Etc. on 26 April, 2023

State and against the respondents. Question No.2: Whether Allopathy doctors and the respondents
practicing alternative systems of medicine can be said to be performing “equal work” so as to be
entitled to “equal pay”?

38. The second question arising for consideration is as to whether the holders of degrees and
post-graduate degrees in indigenous and other non-Allopathic Systems of Medicine can be said to be
performing equal work as the holders of degrees and postgraduate degrees in Allopathic Systems of
Medicine, so as to be entitled to equal pay?

39. In the writ petition filed by them, it was claimed by the respondents herein that they were doing
the same work as was done by other medical officers holding MBBS degrees and that 7 (2019) 10
SCC 674 they were also serving in various Primary Health Centres/ Community Health Centres.
They also claimed that even as per the job-chart of the General Duty Medical Officers, the duties
performed by both categories of doctors are the same. The respondents further claimed that they
held posts interchangeable with those having MBBS degrees.

40. The Government filed an affidavit before the High Court contending inter alia :-

(i) that while General Hospitals and Government Hospitals come under the Medical
Services Department, PHCs, CHCs and Government dispensaries come under the
Public Health Department;

(ii) that in respect of medical services, doctors with MD/MS or postgraduate
degree/diploma are appointed to Class-I specialist cadre;

(iii) that Homoeopathy doctors are appointed to Class-III posts;

(iv) that Ayurved doctors are appointed to Class-II posts; and

(v) that there are lot of differences between the duties and responsibilities discharged
by both these categories of doctors.

41. In paragraph 9 of the affidavit filed on 23.07.2013, on behalf of the Government before the
Division Bench of the High Court, a comparative chart was provided. It reads as follows:-

Sr. no.           Allopathy Doctors             Ayurved Doctors
1.     MBBS/MD/P.G.Degree/P.G              BAMS/BHMS/MD
Diploma / Specialization
2.      Required to perform emergency      No emergency duty,
duties and trauma cases, surgery   cannot        perform
cases and post mortem cases.       surgery    and    post
mortem.
3.      Have to work in OPD            and No operation work
operation theater.

4. Give IV injections and ART Not applicable injections themselves.

9

5. Medicines given are allopathic. The medicine is based For eg: pain killers on ayurved. For eg:

State Of Gujarat & Ors. Etc. vs Dr. P A Bhatt & Ors. Etc. on 26 April, 2023

Powder to be taken with boiled water

6. Main duty is with respect to Main duty is to emergencies, casualty and OPD advertise/make
patients. people aware about ayurvedic treatment and organizing camps where different vanaspati
are displayed.

7. Nature of treatment thus different Nature of treatment is from ayurved. totally different from
allopathy.

8. Such doctors not easily available. Available in plenty.

9. Therefore bond system applicable No such bond system.

for getting service of atleast 5 years in village.

10. Night Duty No Night Duty

42. Apart from the above comparative chart, the learned Government Pleader also placed before the
High Court, another comparative chart showing the various characteristics of Ayurvedic medicine
and Allopathic medicine. The High Court extracted the said comparative chart in paragraph 5 of the
impugned order. But unfortunately, the said chart is of no assistance to find out whether both these
categories of doctors are performing the same or similar duties and responsibilities, to be entitled to
claim equal pay. The comparative chart extracted in paragraph 5 of the impugned order merely
shows what these two categories of doctors “can do” and the different approaches that the different
systems of medicine have towards persons suffering from various illnesses. But an appreciation of
these characteristics will not empower the Court to direct the Government to treat both categories of
doctors on par. Taking into consideration a comparative chart relating to the characteristics of both
these types of medicine and not taking into consideration the comparative chart which we have
extracted in paragraph 41 above, was the first mistake committed by the High Court in the
impugned order.

43. As seen from paragraph 41 above, Allopathy doctors are required to perform emergency duties
and to provide trauma care. By the very nature of the science that they practice and with the
advancement of science and modern medical technology, the emergency duty that Allopathy doctors
are capable of performing and the trauma care that they are capable of providing, cannot be
performed by Ayurved doctors.

44. It is also not possible for Ayurved doctors to assist surgeons performing complicated surgeries,
while MBBS doctors can assist. We shall not be understood to mean as though one system of
medicine is superior to the other. It is not our mandate nor within our competence to assess the
relative merits of these two systems of medical sciences. As a matter of fact, we are conscious that
the history of Ayurveda dates back to several centuries. The Encyclopaedia Britannica states that the

10

State Of Gujarat & Ors. Etc. vs Dr. P A Bhatt & Ors. Etc. on 26 April, 2023

golden age of Indian medicine from 800 B.C., till 1000 A.D., was marked by the production of two
medical treatises known as "caraka-samhita"

and "susruta-samhita". The Britannica records in page 776 of Volume-23 (15th
Edition) as follows:-

"In surgery, ancient Hindu medicine reached its zenith. Operations performed by
Hindu surgeons included excision of tumours, incision and draining of abscesses,
punctures to release fluid in the abdomen, extraction of foreign bodies, repair of anal
fistulas, splinting of fractures, amputations, cesarean sections, and stitching of
wounds.

A broad array of surgical instruments were used. According to Susruta the surgeon
should be equipped with 20 sharp and 101 blunt instruments of various descriptions.
The instruments were largely of steel. Alcohol seems to have been used as a narcotic
during operations, and bleeding was stopped by hot oils and tar.

Hindu surgeons also operated on cataracts by couching or displacing the lens to
improve vision."

45. In a Book titled "Man and Medicine - A History" authored by Farokh Erach Udwadia, an
Emeritus Professor of Medicine (Allopathy) and published by Oxford University Press (2001
Edition), an interesting event is reported at page No.43. It is about the documented performance of
Rhinoplasty (for which Susruta was famous) witnessed and recorded in 1793 in Pune. A Parsee
gentleman by the name of Cowasjee, who was serving the English Army at the time of the Mysore
War in 1792, was captured by the soldiers of Tipu Sultan. His nose and one hand was cut off. He and
three of his friends, who had met with the same fate, consulted a person who was only a bricklayer
by profession. The bricklayer performed a surgery, which was witnessed by Thomas Cruso and
James Findlay, Senior British Surgeons in Bombay Presidency. They described and drew the skin
graft procedure and the same was published in the Madras Gazette. It was later reproduced in the
October 1794 issue of the Gentleman's Magazine of London. The surgery was described in the
following words:-

"A thin plate of wax is fitted to the stump of the nose so as to make a nose of a good
appearance, it is then flattened and laid on the forehead. A line is drawn around the
wax which is then of no further use and the surgeon then dissects off as much skin as
it had covered, leaving undivided a small slip between the eyes. This slip preserves
the circulation till a union has taken place between the new and old parts.

The cicatrix of the stumps of the nose is next paired off and immediately behind the
new part an incision is made through the skin which passes around both alae, and
goes along the upper lip. The skin now brought down from the forehead and being
twisted half around, is inserted into this incision, so that a nose is formed with a
double hold above and with its alae and septum below fixed in the incision.

11

State Of Gujarat & Ors. Etc. vs Dr. P A Bhatt & Ors. Etc. on 26 April, 2023

A little Terra Japanica (pale catechu) is softened with water and being spread on slips
of cloth, five or six of these are placed over each other to secure the joining. No other
dressing but this cement is used for four days. It is then removed and clothes dipped
in ghee (clarified butter) are applied. The connecting slip of skin is divided about the
twentieth day, when a little more dissection is necessary to improve the appearance
of the new nose. Four, five or six days after the operation, the patient is made to lie on
his back and on the tenth day bits of soft cloth are put into the nostrils to keep them
sufficiently open."

46. The learned author of the Book Mr. Udwadia, goes on to say that the above occurrence caught
the attention of J.C. Carpue, a 30 year old Surgeon in London. He successfully used the same skin
graft procedure for nose repair on a patient in 1814. According to the learned author, J.C. Carpue
reported his successful results in 1816, introducing the "Hindu Surgical Technique" and with it, "The
Indian Nose" to the West.

47. After pointing out that Susruta recommended the use of a facial skin flap for repair of a cleft lip,
the author of the Book states that Carl Ferdinand Von Graefe (1747-1840) popularised the Indian
Surgical Technique of plastic reconstruction of the nose in Germany and Europe.

48. It is common knowledge that smallpox vaccine was invented by Dr. Edward Jenner, an English
Physician in 1798. But on the occasion of the opening ceremony of the King's Institute of Preventive
Medicine in February 1905 at Madras, the then Governor of Madras, Lord Ampthill, said the
following:-

"It is also very probable, so Colonel King assures me, that the ancient Hindus used
animal vaccination secured by transmission of the smallpox virus through the cow,
and he bases this interesting theory on a quotation from a writing by Dhanwantari,
the greatest of the ancient Hindu physicians, which is so striking and so appropriate
to the present occasion that I must take the liberty of reading it to you. It is as
follows:

"Take the fluid of the pock on the udder of the cow or on the arm between the
shoulder and elbow of a human subject on the point of a lancet, and lance with it, the
arm between the shoulders and elbows until the blood appears : then mixing the fluid
with the blood the fever of the smallpox will be produced. This is vaccination pure
and simple. It would seem from it that Jenner's great invention was actually
forestalled by the ancient Hindus."

49. Therefore, we have no doubt that every alternative system of medicine may have its pride of
place in history. But today, the practitioners of indigenous systems of medicine do not perform
complicated surgical operations. A study of Ayurved does not authorise them to perform these
surgeries.

12

State Of Gujarat & Ors. Etc. vs Dr. P A Bhatt & Ors. Etc. on 26 April, 2023

50. Similarly, a post-mortem or autopsy is not carried out by/in the presence of Ayurved doctors.
Section 174 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 19738 deals with the procedure for the police to
inquire and report on suicide, etc. Sub-section (3) of Section 174 mandates that the police officer
shall, subject to such rules as the State Government may prescribe, forward the dead body, with a
view to its being examined, to the nearest Civil Surgeon, or other qualified medical man appointed
in this behalf by the State Government, in certain types of cases such as, (i) suicide by a woman
within seven years of marriage; (ii) death of a woman within seven years of marriage in certain
circumstances; and (iii) cases where there are any doubts regarding the cause of death.

51. Section 176 of Cr.P.C deals with inquiry by Magistrates into cause of death. Sub-section (5) of
Section 176 uses similar words namely “Civil Surgeon or other qualified medical man”. We do not
think that the AYUSH doctors are normally notified as competent to perform post-mortem.

52. It is common knowledge that during out-patient days (OPD) in general hospitals in cities/towns,
MBBS doctors are made to 8For short “Cr.P.C” attend to hundreds of patients, which is not the case
with Ayurved doctors.

53. In the comparative chart extracted in paragraph 41 above, the State of Gujarat have claimed that
IV injections and ART injections cannot be administered by Ayurved doctors.

54. Therefore, even while recognizing the importance of Ayurved doctors and the need to promote
alternative/indigenous systems of medicine, we cannot be oblivious of the fact that both categories
of doctors are certainly not performing equal work to be entitled to equal pay. Hence, Issue No.2 has
to be answered in favour of the appellant-State and against the respondents. Conclusion

55. In view of our answer to both the issues, the Civil Appeals are liable to be allowed and the
impugned order of the High Court is liable to be set aside. As a sequitur, the benefits derived by the
respondents by virtue of the interim order passed by this Court on 08.09.2014, are liable to be
recovered from the respondents. In the normal course, we would not have desired to allow the State
to effect recovery but for the fact that a few doctors have received and a few have not. Among the
Ayurved doctors, we cannot make a classification between those who have already received some
benefits by virtue of the interim order of this Court dated 08.09.2014 and those who have not
received such benefits. Moreover, we cannot overlook the fundamental principle that a benefit
derived by an individual by virtue of an interim order passed by a Court cannot be allowed to be
retained, if the ultimate outcome of the case went against such a person.

56. Therefore, all the appeals are allowed, the impugned order of the High Court is set aside and the
writ petitions filed by the respondents are dismissed. The contempt petitions are also dismissed
along with all interlocutory applications including the impleadment application(s). No costs.

……………………………….. J.

(V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN) ……………………………….. J.

13

State Of Gujarat & Ors. Etc. vs Dr. P A Bhatt & Ors. Etc. on 26 April, 2023

(PANKAJ MITHAL) New Delhi;

April 26, 2023

14