State Of Karnataka Lokayukta Police vs S. Subbegowda on 3 August, 2023

State Of Karnataka Lokayukta Police vs S. Subbegowda on 3
August, 2023

Author: Bela M. Trivedi

Bench: Bela M. Trivedi, Aniruddha Bose

2023 INSC 669                                                                REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1598 OF 2023

STATE OF KARNATAKA LOKAYUKTA POLICE                                .....APPELLANT

VERSUS

S. SUBBEGOWDA                                                    ....RESPONDENT

JUDGMENT

BELA M. TRIVEDI, J.

1. The appellant – State of Karnataka Lokayukta Police by way of instant appeal has assailed the
judgment and order dated 16.08.2018 passed by the High Court of Karnataka at Bengaluru in
Criminal Petition No. 4463 of 2018 whereby the High Court has allowed the said petition by
discharging the respondent (original petitioner-accused) from the offences charged under Section
13(1)

(e) read with Section 13(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (hereinafter referred to as the
said Act), on the ground that the sanction accorded to prosecute the respondent-accused by the
Government was illegal and without jurisdiction.

2. The respondent was working as an Executive Engineer in the Date: 2023.08.03 17:13:39 IST
Reason:

Karnataka Urban Water Supply and Drainage Board, Mandya Division, Mandya
during the period 1983 to 2007. On the basis of the Source Report dated 17.12.2007
submitted by the then Deputy Superintendent of Police, Bengaluru Rural Division,
Karnataka Lokayukta, Bengaluru, a case being Crime No. 22 of 2007 (later numbered
as Crime No. 62 of 2008) came to be registered against the respondent for the
offence under Section 13(1)(e) read with Section 13(2) of the said Act. It was alleged,
inter alia, that the respondent-accused during his tenure in the office as an Executive

1

State Of Karnataka Lokayukta Police vs S. Subbegowda on 3 August, 2023

Engineer had amassed the wealth disproportionate to his known sources of income.
On the completion of the investigation, the Investigating Officer had sent the papers
to the State Government seeking sanction to prosecute the respondent as required in
Section 19(1) of the said Act. The Government of Karnataka on the basis of the
material placed before it, had accorded the requisite sanction by issuing the
Government order dated 13.09.2010. Thereafter the chargesheet came to be filed in
the Court of Principal District and Sessions Judge, Bengaluru Rural District at
Bengaluru wherein it was alleged that respondent had abused his position as a public
s e r v a n t ,   h a d   i n d u l g e d   i n t o   c o r r u p t   p r a c t i c e s   a n d   h a d   a m a s s e d   w e a l t h
disproportionate to his known sources of income. The said case was registered as
Special Case No. 488 of 2011 before the said Court.

3. The respondent-accused filed an application under Section 227 read with 239 of CrPC on
12.10.2011, seeking his discharge from the case contending, inter alia, that neither the contents of
the Source Report nor the other documents constituted any offence as alleged, and that the sanction
under Section 19(1) of the said Act was issued by the Government without any application of mind.
The said application came to be dismissed by the trial court by passing a detailed order on
01.02.2013. Being aggrieved by the said order, the respondent preferred a Criminal Revision
Petition being no. 287 of 2013 before the High Court. The said petition came to be disposed of by the
High Court vide the order dated 05.07.2013 directing the trial court to consider the documents
made available by the respondent during the investigation and produced by the prosecution with the
chargesheet, while framing the charge without being influenced by the order dated 01.12.2013.

4. It appears that in view of the said order passed by the High Court, the respondent-accused again
filed an application under Sections 227 and 239 of CrPC before the trial court seeking his discharge
from the case by contending, inter alia, that the sanction order passed by the Government lacked
application of mind and was given mechanically and that the Investigating Officer had suppressed
the material produced by the respondent offering satisfactory explanations to the assets acquired,
income derived and expenditure incurred by the respondent during period in question. Pertinently,
the respondent did not press for the said application by submitting a memo on 02.12.2014 and
stating therein that the Court may proceed to frame charge against him. The said memo reads as
under-

“IN THE COURT OF THE PRINCIPAL DISTRICT AND SESSIONS JUDGE BANGALORE RURAL
AT BANGALORE BETWEEN:

State by Lokayktha Police, Bangalore Rural. ... Complainant AND:

Subbegowda. … Accused MEMO FILED ON BEHALF OF THE ACCUSED The above
named Accused humbly submits that he will not press the application filed under
Sections 227 and 239 of Cr.P.C., 1973 seeking discharge in the case. It is further
submitted that the Hon'ble Court may proceed to frame charges against the Accused.

02.12.2014

2

State Of Karnataka Lokayukta Police vs S. Subbegowda on 3 August, 2023

Bangalore.                                 Sd/-
Advocate for Accused.”

5. The trial court thereafter framed the charge against the respondent-

accused on 23.12.2014 for the offence of criminal misconduct under Section 13(1)(e) punishable
under Section 13(2) of the said Act in Special Case No. 488 of 2011. The prosecution thereafter
examined as many as 17 witnesses in support of its case, and in the midst of the trial the
respondent-accused again filed third application under Section 227 of CrPC seeking his discharge
from the case on the ground that the respondent was an employee of the Karnataka Urban Water
Supply and Drainage Board and could be removed only by the said Board in view of Rule 10 of
Karnataka Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1957. The State Government
therefore had no jurisdiction to accord the sanction to prosecute the respondent under Section 19(1)
of the said Act. The trial court vide the order dated 05.06.2018 dismissed the said application by
passing a detailed order holding, inter alia, that the third successive application filed by the
respondent-accused for the discharge from the case, when the evidence of 17 witnesses had been
recorded and when the contention based on the sanction was already rejected by the Court earlier,
was liable to be dismissed. The aggrieved respondent filed the Criminal Petition being no. 4463 of
2018 under Section 482 of CrPC before the High Court, which came to be allowed by the High Court
vide the impugned order.

6. In view of the afore-stated undisputed facts the following questions arise for consideration before
this Court:

(i) Whether the High Court in exercise of its powers under Section 482 of CrPC could
have discharged the respondent-

accused from the charges levelled against him for the offences under Section 13(1)(e) punishable
under Section 13(2) of the said Act, despite the fact that the accused had not pressed for his second
application for discharge by submitting the Memo dated 02.12.2014 and despite the fact that after
framing of the charge by the Special Court on 23.12.2014, the trial had proceeded further and the
prosecution had examined 17 witnesses in support of its case?

(ii) Whether the High Court in the criminal petition filed under Section 482 of the CrPC could
reverse the findings recorded by the Special Court with regard to the validity of sanction, ignoring
the bar contained in sub-section (3) read with sub- section (4) of Section 19 of the said Act?

7. As stated earlier, after having not succeeded in the first application seeking discharge under
Section 227 of CrPC, in which the petitioner had raised the issue of sanction by contending that the
sanction was accorded by the Government under Section 19(1) of the said Act without any

3

State Of Karnataka Lokayukta Police vs S. Subbegowda on 3 August, 2023

application of mind, the respondent- accused had filed the second application again seeking his
discharge under Section 227 of CrPC by raising the issue of sanction by contending, inter alia, that
the sanction order was passed mechanically by the Government and that the Investigating Officer
had suppressed the material produced by the respondent offering satisfactory explanations to the
assets acquired by him. Admittedly, the second application was not pressed for by the respondent by
submitting the Memo on 02.12.2014, wherein it was stated that the Court may proceed to frame
charge against him. Thus, by submitting the said Memo, the respondent-accused had specifically not
pressed for his contention with regard to the validity of sanction or error in granting the sanction by
the Government, and he specifically requested the Court to proceed further with the framing of
charge. Considering the said memo, the trial court framed the charge, and the prosecution examined
as many as 17 witnesses in support of its case. At that stage, the respondent submitted the third
application which was in the nature of interlocutory application again seeking the discharge under
Section 227 of CrPC on the ground that there was an error in the sanction order, the Government
being not competent to grant the sanction under Section 19(1) of the said Act. The said application
having been dismissed by the trial court, the High Court could not and should not have entertained
the petition under Section 482 of CrPC, which was in the nature of revision application, and
reversed the findings recorded by the trial court, in view of sub-section (3) read with sub- section (4)
of Section 19 of the said Act.

8. For the ready reference, the relevant part of sub-section (1), (3) and (4) of Section 19 are
reproduced herein below:

“19. Previous sanction necessary for prosecution. — (1) No court shall take cognizance
of an offence punishable under sections 7, 11, 13 and 15 alleged to have been
committed by a public servant, except with the previous sanction save as otherwise
provided in the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 (1 of 2014)—

(a) in the case of a person who is employed, or as the case may be, was at the time of
commission of the alleged offence employed in connection with the affairs of the
Union and is not removable from his office save by or with the sanction of the Central
Government, of that Government;

(b) in the case of a person who is employed, or as the case may be, was at the time of
commission of the alleged offence employed in connection with the affairs of a State
and is not removable from his office save by or with the sanction of the State
Government, of that Government;

(c) in the case of any other person, of the authority competent to remove him from
his office.

(2) ----------

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2
of 1974), —

4

State Of Karnataka Lokayukta Police vs S. Subbegowda on 3 August, 2023

(a) no finding, sentence or order passed by a special Judge shall be reversed or
altered by a Court in appeal, confirmation or revision on the ground of the absence
of, or any error, omission or irregularity in, the sanction required under sub-section
(1), unless in the opinion of that court, a failure of justice has in fact been occasioned
thereby;

(b) no court shall stay the proceedings under this Act on the ground of any error,
omission or irregularity in the sanction granted by the authority, unless it is satisfied
that such error, omission or irregularity has resulted in a failure of justice;

(c) no court shall stay the proceedings under this Act on any other ground and no
court shall exercise the powers of revision in relation to any interlocutory order
passed in any inquiry, trial, appeal or other proceedings.

(4) In determining under sub-section (3) whether the absence of, or any error,
omission or irregularity in, such sanction has occasioned or resulted in a failure of
justice the court shall have regard to the fact whether the objection could and should
have been raised at any earlier stage in the proceedings.

Explanation.— For the purposes of this section,—

(a) error includes competency of the authority to grant sanction;

(b) a sanction required for prosecution includes reference to any requirement that the prosecution
shall be at the instance of a specified authority or with the sanction of a specified person or any
requirement of a similar nature.”

9. Similar provision is contained in Section 465 of CrPC on whether finding or sentence is reversible
by reason of error, omission or irregularity. It reads as under: -

“465. Finding or sentence when reversible by reason of error, omission or
irregularity. -

1. Subject to the provisions hereinbefore contained, no finding sentence or order
passed by a Court of competent jurisdiction shall be reversed or altered by a Court of
appeal, confirmation of revision on account of any error, omission or irregularity in
the complaint, summons, warrant, proclamation, order, judgment or other
proceedings before or during trial or in any inquiry or other proceedings under this
Code, or any error, or irregularity in any sanction for the prosecution unless in the
opinion of that Court, a failure of justice has in fact been occasioned thereby.

2. In determining whether any error, omission or irregularity in any proceeding
under this Code, or any error, or irregularity in any sanction for the prosecution has
occasioned a failure of justice, the Court shall have regard to the fact whether the

5

State Of Karnataka Lokayukta Police vs S. Subbegowda on 3 August, 2023

objection could and should have been raised at an earlier stage in the proceedings.”

10. Having regard to the afore-stated provisions contained in Section 19 of the said Act, there
remains no shadow of doubt that the statute forbids taking of cognizance by the Court against a
public servant except with the previous sanction of the Government/authority competent to grant
such sanction in terms of clauses (a), (b) and (c) to Section 19(1). It is also well settled proposition of
law that the question with regard to the validity of such sanction should be raised at the earliest
stage of the proceedings, however could be raised at the subsequent stage of the trial also. In our
opinion, the stages of proceedings at which an accused could raise the issue with regard to the
validity of the sanction would be the stage when the Court takes cognizance of the offence, the stage
when the charge is to be framed by the Court or at the stage when the trial is complete i.e., at the
stage of final arguments in the trial. Such issue of course, could be raised before the Court in appeal,
revision or confirmation, however the powers of such court would be subject to sub-section (3) and
sub-section (4) of Section 19 of the said Act. It is also significant to note that the competence of the
court trying the accused also would be dependent upon the existence of the validity of sanction, and
therefore it is always desirable to raise the issue of validity of sanction at the earliest point of time. It
cannot be gainsaid that in case the sanction is found to be invalid, the trial court can discharge the
accused and relegate the parties to a stage where the competent authority may grant a fresh sanction
for the prosecution in accordance with the law.

11. The combined reading of sub-section (3) and (4) of Section 19 makes it clear that
notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, no finding, sentence or order passed by the Special
Judge shall be reversed or altered by a Court in appeal, confirmation or revision on the ground of,
the absence of, or any error, omission or irregularity in the sanction required under sub-section (1),
unless in the opinion of the Court, a failure of justice has in fact been occasioned thereby.
sub-section (4) further postulates that in determining under sub- section (3) whether the absence of,
or any error, omission or irregularity in the sanction has occasioned, or resulted in failure of justice,
the Court shall have regard to the fact whether the objection could and should have been raised at an
earlier stage in the proceedings. The explanation to sub-section (4) further provides that for the
purpose of Section 19, error includes “competency of the authority to grant sanction”. Thus, it is
clear from the language employed in sub-section (3) of Section 19 that the said sub-section has
application to the proceedings before the Court in appeal, confirmation or revision, and not to the
proceedings before the Special Judge. The said sub-section (3) clearly forbids the court in appeal,
confirmation or revision, the interference with the order passed by the Special Judge on the ground
that the sanction was bad, save and except in cases where the appellate or revisional court finds that
the failure of justice had occurred by such invalidity.

12. This Court in case of Nanjappa Vs. State of Karnataka1 has very aptly dealt with the intricacies of
Section 19(1) as also Section 19(3) and 19(4) of the said Act as to at what stage the question of
validity of sanction accorded under Section 19(1) of the said Act could be raised, and what are the
powers of the court in appeal, confirmation or revision under sub-section (3) of Section 19 of the
said Act.

6

State Of Karnataka Lokayukta Police vs S. Subbegowda on 3 August, 2023

“22. The legal position regarding the importance of sanction under Section 19 of the Prevention of
Corruption Act is thus much too clear to admit equivocation. The statute forbids 1 (2015) 14 SCC 186
taking of cognizance by the court against a public servant except with the previous sanction of an
authority competent to grant such sanction in terms of clauses (a), (b) and (c) to Section 19(1). The
question regarding validity of such sanction can be raised at any stage of the proceedings. The
competence of the court trying the accused so much depends upon the existence of a valid sanction.
In case the sanction is found to be invalid the court can discharge the accused relegating the parties
to a stage where the competent authority may grant a fresh sanction for the prosecution in
accordance with law. If the trial court proceeds, despite the invalidity attached to the sanction order,
the same shall be deemed to be non est in the eyes of law and shall not forbid a second trial for the
same offences, upon grant of a valid sanction for such prosecution.

23. Having said that there are two aspects which we must immediately advert to. The first relates to
the effect of sub- section (3) to Section 19, which starts with a non obstante clause. Also relevant to
the same aspect would be Section 465 CrPC which we have extracted earlier.

23.1. It was argued on behalf of the State with considerable tenacity worthy of a better cause, that in
terms of Section 19(3), any error, omission or irregularity in the order sanctioning prosecution of an
accused was of no consequence so long as there was no failure of justice resulting from such error,
omission or irregularity. It was contended that in terms of Explanation to Section 4, “error includes
competence of the authority to grant sanction”. The argument is on the face of it attractive but does
not, in our opinion, stand closer scrutiny.

23.2. A careful reading of sub-section (3) to Section 19 would show that the same interdicts reversal
or alteration of any finding, sentence or order passed by a Special Judge, on the ground that the
sanction order suffers from an error, omission or irregularity, unless of course the court before
whom such finding, sentence or order is challenged in appeal or revision is of the opinion that a
failure of justice has occurred by reason of such error, omission or irregularity. Sub-section (3), in
other words, simply forbids interference with an order passed by the Special Judge in appeal,
confirmation or revisional proceedings on the ground that the sanction is bad save and except, in
cases where the appellate or revisional court finds that failure of justice has occurred by such
invalidity. What is noteworthy is that sub- section (3) has no application to proceedings before the
Special Judge, who is free to pass an order discharging the accused, if he is of the opinion that a
valid order sanctioning prosecution of the accused had not been produced as required under Section
19(1).

23.3. Sub-section (3), in our opinion, postulates a prohibition against a higher court reversing an
order passed by the Special Judge on the ground of any defect, omission or irregularity in the order
of sanction. It does not forbid a Special Judge from passing an order at whatever stage of the
proceedings holding that the prosecution is not maintainable for want of a valid order sanctioning
the same. 23.4. The language employed in sub-section (3) is, in our opinion, clear and unambiguous.
This is, in our opinion, sufficiently evident even from the language employed in sub- section (4)
according to which the appellate or the revisional court shall, while examining whether the error,
omission or irregularity in the sanction had occasioned in any failure of justice, have regard to the

7

State Of Karnataka Lokayukta Police vs S. Subbegowda on 3 August, 2023

fact whether the objection could and should have been raised at an early stage. Suffice it to say, that
a conjoint reading of sub-sections 19(3) and (4) leaves no manner of doubt that the said provisions
envisage a challenge to the validity of the order of sanction or the validity of the proceedings
including finding, sentence or order passed by the Special Judge in appeal or revision before a
higher court and not before the Special Judge trying the accused.

23.5. The rationale underlying the provision obviously is that if the trial has proceeded to conclusion
and resulted in a finding or sentence, the same should not be lightly interfered with by the appellate
or the revisional court simply because there was some omission, error or irregularity in the order
sanctioning the prosecution under Section 19(1). Failure of justice is, what the appellate or
revisional court would in such cases look for. And while examining whether any such failure had
indeed taken place, the Court concerned would also keep in mind whether the objection touching
the error, omission or irregularity in the sanction could or should have been raised at an earlier
stage of the proceedings meaning thereby whether the same could and should have been raised at
the trial stage instead of being urged in appeal or revision.”

13. In State of M.P. vs. Bhooraji and Others2, this Court had an occasion to deal with the various
aspects contained in Section 465 of CrPC more particularly to deal with the expression “A failure of
justice has in fact been occasioned” as contained therein. Since, the provisions contained in Section
19(3) of the Prevention of Corruption 2 (2001) 7 SCC 679 Act and in Section 465(1) of CrPC are pari
materia, the observations made in the said decision would be relevant.

“14. We have to examine Section 465(1) of the Code in the above context. It is extracted below:

“465. (1) Subject to the provisions hereinbefore contained, no finding, sentence or
order passed by a court of competent jurisdiction shall be reversed or altered by a
court of appeal, confirmation or revision on account of any error, omission or
irregularity in the complaint, summons, warrant, proclamation, order, judgment or
other proceedings before or during trial or in any enquiry or other proceedings under
this Code, or any error, or irregularity in any sanction for the prosecution, unless in
the opinion of that court, a failure of justice has in fact been occasioned thereby.”

15. A reading of the section makes it clear that the error, omission or irregularity in
the proceedings held before or during the trial or in any enquiry were reckoned by the
legislature as possible occurrences in criminal courts. Yet the legislature disfavoured
axing down the proceedings or to direct repetition of the whole proceedings afresh.
Hence, the legislature imposed a prohibition that unless such error, omission or
irregularity has occasioned “a failure of justice” the superior court shall not quash the
proceedings merely on the ground of such error, omission or irregularity.

16. What is meant by “a failure of justice” occasioned on account of such error,
omission or irregularity? This Court has observed in Shamnsaheb M. Multtani v.
State of Karnataka [(2001) 2 SCC 577: 2001 SCC (Cri) 358] thus:

8

State Of Karnataka Lokayukta Police vs S. Subbegowda on 3 August, 2023

(SCC p. 585, para 23) “23. We often hear about ‘failure of justice’ and quite often the
submission in a criminal court is accentuated with the said expression. Perhaps it is
too pliable or facile an expression which could be fitted in any situation of a case. The
expression ‘failure of justice’ would appear, sometimes, as an etymological chameleon
(the simile is borrowed from Lord Diplock in Town Investments Ltd. v. Deptt. of the
Environment [(1977) 1 All ER 813 : 1978 AC 359 :

(1977) 2 WLR 450 (HL)] ). The criminal court, particularly the superior court should
make a close examination to ascertain whether there was really a failure of justice or
whether it is only a camouflage.”

14. In the instant case, the Special Judge proceeded with the trial, on the second
application for discharge filed by the respondent having not been pressed for by him.
The Special Judge, while dismissing the third application filed by the respondent
seeking discharge after examination of 17 witnesses by the prosecution, specifically
held that the sanction accorded by the government which was a superior authority to
the Karnataka Water Supply Board, of which the respondent was an employee, was
proper and valid. Such findings recorded by the Special Judge could not have been
and should not have been reversed or altered by the High Court in the petition filed
by the respondent challenging the said order of the Special Judge, in view of the
specific bar contained in sub-section (3) of Section 19, and that too without recording
any opinion as to how a failure of justice had in fact been occasioned to the
respondent-accused as contemplated in the said sub-section (3). As a matter of fact,
neither the respondent had pleaded nor the High Court opined whether any failure of
justice had occasioned to the respondent, on account of error if any, occurred in
granting the sanction by the authority.

15. As a matter of fact, such an interlocutory application seeking discharge in the
midst of trial would also not be maintainable. Once the cognizance was taken by the
Special Judge and the charge was framed against the accused, the trial could neither
have been stayed nor scuttled in the midst of it in view of Section 19(3) of the said
Act.

In the instant case, though the issue of validity of sanction was raised at the earlier point of time, the
same was not pressed for. The only stage open to the respondent-accused in that situation was to
raise the said issue at the final arguments in the trial in accordance with law.

16. In that view of the matter, the impugned order passed by the High Court is set aside. It will be
open for the respondent to raise the issue of validity of sanction if he desires to do so, in accordance
with law at the final stage of arguments in the trial. Special Judge is directed to proceed with the
trial from the stage it had stopped, in accordance with the law and as expeditiously as possible.

17. Appeal stands allowed accordingly.

9

State Of Karnataka Lokayukta Police vs S. Subbegowda on 3 August, 2023

…..................................J. [ANIRUDDHA BOSE] …..................................J. [BELA M. TRIVEDI] NEW
DELHI;

03.08.2023

10