State Of Orissa vs Laxmi Narayan Das .(Dead) Thr. Lrs. on 12 July, 2023

State Of Orissa vs Laxmi Narayan Das .(Dead) Thr. Lrs. on 12
July, 2023

Author: Rajesh Bindal

Bench: Hima Kohli, Rajesh Bindal

Civil Appeal No.8072 of 2010

2023 INSC 619                                                       REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8072 OF 2010

State of Orissa & anr.                               … Appellants

Versus

Laxmi Narayan Das (Dead)
thr. LRs & ors.                                     … Respondents

JUDGMENT

Rajesh Bindal, J.

1. The order dated October 30, 2009 passed by the Orissa High Court in Writ Appeal No. 108/2009
is under challenge in the present appeal. Vide aforesaid order, the order passed by the Single Judge
in W.P.(C) No. 9069 of 2008 dated 21.11.2008, was reversed. Reason:

FACTS

2. Briefly the facts of the case available on record are that a writ petition was filed by Laxmi Narayan
Das (dead) through LRs, Satynarayan Das, Birenchi Narayan Das (respondents herein) on
27.6.2008 challenging the order passed by the Settlement Officer in Settlement Appeal No. 537/90
dated 01.03.1990. The writ petition was filed more than 18 years after the impugned order was
passed. The grievance raised was that the objections filed by the writ petitioners during the course of
settlement were not considered by the authority concerned and the land was recorded in the name
of General Administration Department (GAD). Liberty was granted to the writ petitioners to file
representation to the GAD. The grievance was that the representation was filed, however, the same

1

State Of Orissa vs Laxmi Narayan Das .(Dead) Thr. Lrs. on 12 July, 2023

has not been decided. The stand of the learned counsel for the State was also recorded that when
final record of rights was published, it was open to the writ petitioners to file appropriate revision
application under Section 15(b) of the Orissa Survey & Settlement Act, 1958 (for short, ‘the 1958
Act’). The same was not filed. There is no scope for interference in the writ jurisdiction. It was
further submitted that the observation was made by the authority in the order referred to in the writ
petition that the petitioners can make representation to the GAD against the final record of rights, if
so advised. The writ petition was dismissed. Being aggrieved by the same, intra court appeal was
filed by the respondents. The matter was taken in a different direction altogether. In fact, with the
observations made by the Division Bench the record of right, which was prepared way back in the
year 1962, was set aside. The direction was given for consideration of the representation of the
appellants before the High Court and allot them a suitable plot in exchange of their
stitiban/sthitiban land.1 It is the aforesaid order which has been impugned by the State.

ARGUMENTS

3. Learned counsel for the State submitted that the record of rights in the case in hand was finalised
way back in the year 1962. The land at that time was not in occupation of anyone rather wild bushes
were existing on the land. No objection was raised by the land owners. The appeal was filed in the
year 1990, which was disposed of on 1.3.1990. Since it was claimed that the land was stitiban plot, it
was observed that claim could be raised with the GAD. Accordingly, the entry in the name of the
appellant was not possible. After passing of The expression ‘Stitiban/Sthitiban’ signifies the status of
a settled raiyat or homestead of a raiyat (i.e., an agriculturist). See, Abdulla Kabir v. Md. Nasiruddin,
(1989) 2 SCC 361. The expression ‘Raiyat’ is defined as an individual who acquires land primarily for
purposes of cultivation under Section 3(3)(d) of the Orissa Government Land Settlement Act, 1962
and Section 2(26) of the Orissa Land Reforms Act, 1960. the aforesaid order, the respondents kept
quiet. A civil suit came to be filed in the year 2003 for declaration. It was pleaded therein that 0.601
decimal of the land was in possession of the Reserve Bank of India (for short, ‘RBI’) where the staff
quarters had been constructed. It was on account of the allotment thereof by the GAD. However,
finally the relief sought in the suit was that the plaintiffs therein who are the respondents herein,
had become the owners by way of adverse possession of the land, as mentioned in Schedule ‘B’
attached to the Suit and further a declaration was sought that they are owners in possession of the
land as mentioned in the Schedule ‘A’ and their possession needs to be protected. This included the
land which was admittedly allotted to the Reserve Bank of India and on which staff quarters had
already been constructed. The aforesaid suit was dismissed as withdrawn by the respondents on
28.7.2007. Permission was sought to file a fresh suit. However, the same was specifically declined by
the court.

4. Thereafter, the respondents filed a writ petition before the High Court in 2008 praying for a
direction to the respondents therein to record the land in the name of the writ petitioners, which
was transferred to the Reserve Bank of India. It was 0.518 decimals which was allotted to Reserve
Bank of India and 0.083 decimals which was allotted to someone else from plot no. 1506 and 1507
(P), respectively of Mauza Jaidev Vihar. A direction was also sought that in terms of the order dated
1.3.1990 passed by the Settlement Officer, the claim of the petitioner for allotment of an equal
alternative land be considered. The land already in possession of the writ petitioners forming part of

2

State Of Orissa vs Laxmi Narayan Das .(Dead) Thr. Lrs. on 12 July, 2023

plot no. 1474 (P) Mauza Jaidev Vihar be considered and allotted in exchange. While filing the writ
petition, the writ petitioners were silent about the civil suit filed by them praying for a similar relief,
which was dismissed as withdrawn without liberty to file a fresh suit, what to talk of writ petition.

5. Learned counsel for the appellant further argued that the writ petition was disposed of by the
Single Bench while holding that there is no scope for interference in the order of Settlement Officer,
and in case the petitioner has any grievance, he may take appropriate steps against the final record
of rights which was prepared way back in the year 1962. The Division Bench of the High Court had
gone wrong in issuing a direction for allotment of an alternative plot in exchange of the alleged
stitiban land belonging to the respondents when their right was yet to be established.

6. The record of rights was prepared in the year 1962 and there was no challenge thereto. For the
first time, the respondents filed an appeal in the year 1990 which was disposed of on 1.3.1990.
Thereafter, the respondents kept quiet for a period of more than 13 years before they filed the suit.
After the same was dismissed as withdrawn on 28.7.2007 without any liberty to institute fresh suit,
the writ petition was filed in June 2008 claiming the same reliefs. The Division Bench of the High
Court while granting relief to the respondents has indirectly set aside the record of rights which was
prepared way back in the year 1962 without there being any challenge to the same in the writ
petition. To that extent, the order passed by the Division Bench is totally illegal. Unless record of
rights is corrected, no right can accrue to the respondents. In fact, the respondents were fighting a
luxury litigation.

7. It is the admitted case of the respondents themselves that they are in possession of the part of the
plot number 1506, some part of which was allotted to the Reserve Bank of India. Meaning thereby,
that they were aware of the developments which were taking place ever since the record of rights
was prepared. In any case, they cannot deny filing of Settlement Appeal and thereafter civil suit and
the writ petition. In fact, it is a case of forum hunting. Without availing appropriate remedy against
the finalisation of record of rights, in case the respondents were having any grievance, they kept
quiet for decades together, hence no relief would be admissible to them at this stage.

8. It was further submitted that even in the appeal filed against the order passed by the learned
Single Judge, there was no mention of the civil suit filed by the respondents and its withdrawal. It
only transpired at the time of hearing before the Court that there was a civil suit filed by the
respondents. However, this fact was not given due weightage by the Division Bench and the same
was just brushed aside. Otherwise, they could not file the civil suit or the writ petition claiming the
same relief. Though it was sought to be claimed by the respondents that the matter is pending
consideration with the Government and is likely to be compromised as the reason for withdrawal of
the suit. However, the learned Civil Judge had not referred to any reason as it had simpliciter
permitted the respondents to withdraw the suit without permission to file afresh. The observation
by the Division Bench that withdrawal of the suit was with consent of both parties that the
respondents will be allotted an alternative plot was neither here nor there.

9. On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents submitted that the appeal was filed in the
year 1990, raising the issue regarding wrongful preparation of record of rights. The same was

3

State Of Orissa vs Laxmi Narayan Das .(Dead) Thr. Lrs. on 12 July, 2023

disposed of on 1.3.1990 with the observation that the claim regarding the plot of land belonging to
the respondents which was allotted to the Reserve Bank of India for construction of staff quarters,
representation could be made to the GAD. Ever since then, representations were being made.
However, when nothing came out, the civil suit came to be filed. He further submitted that the civil
suit was filed with three prayers, firstly that the plaintiffs therein be declared owners of the portion
of the land in their possession as they had become the owners thereof by way of adverse possession.
Secondly, declaration was sought that they are the owners in possession of the land forming part of
Schedule annexed with the suit and lastly, an injunction be issued against the defendants therein
not to interfere in their possession of the suit land. As during the pendency of the suit, the
representations made by the petitioner therein for allotment of alternative land against the land of
the respondents which was allotted to the Reserve Bank of India and other persons were being
actively considered by the Government therefore, the suit was withdrawn. Official notings were
recorded at different levels wherein positive notes were prepared and opined that the respondents
are entitled to allotment of land in lieu of the land belonging to the respondents which was allotted
to the Reserve Bank of India. However, as there was no positive result, the respondents did not have
any option but to file writ petition seeking direction to the concerned authorities to decide their
claim. The learned Single Judge had failed to consider this issue in right spirit. However, in appeal,
the High Court had considered the genuine claim of the respondents and granted the relief. Learned
counsel for the respondents was fair enough to state that the land in dispute is same even though the
identification numbers have changed with the passage of time in the revenue records.

DISCUSSION

10. Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the relevant records.

11. The case in hand is a classic case in which a litigant had been able to mislead the courts and
authorities at different levels to put life into his stale claim.

12. The facts of the case having chequered history are being summed up in the following table, for
better understanding, when elaborated in latter part of the judgment.

Date                              Comments

-         Record of rights are finalised in accordance with

Section 12 of the Orissa Survey & Settlement Act, 1958.

- Under Section 12 of the 1958 Act draft record of rights is published.

-

Assistant Settlement Officer considers the objections filed by any aggrieved person with reference to
any error in the draft record of rights.

-

4

State Of Orissa vs Laxmi Narayan Das .(Dead) Thr. Lrs. on 12 July, 2023

An appeal filed under Section 12-A of the 1958 Act, within thirty days of the order passed by the
Assistant Settlement Officer under Section 12 of the 1958 Act is maintainable to the Settlement
Officer.

-

Final record of rights is published under Section 12B of the 1958 Act.

- Under Section 15(b) of the 1958 Act, an application lies to the Board of Revenue against an
appellate order passed under Section 12-A of the 1958 Act within one year from the date of final
publication of record of rights under Section 12-B of the 1958 Act.

- The respondents pleaded in the writ petition that they did raise objections at the time of the
finalization of the record of rights, but the same were not considered.

1962 Record of rights was finalised.

January Appeal was filed by the respondents before the Settlement Officer in terms of Section 12-A
of the 1958 Act No such appeal was maintainable, after the publication of final record of rights, as
the only remedy available was under Section 15(b) of the 1958 Act for filing an application before the
Board of Revenue within one year from the date of final publication of record of rights, which was in
the year 1962.

01.3.1990 The aforesaid appeal despite not being maintainable, was entertained and disposed of by
the Settlement Officer leaving it open to the respondents to raise their claim with the General
Administrative Department. It was specifically noted in the aforesaid order that Plot No.1506 had
already been given to the Reserve Bank of India for construction of staff quarters, which already
stood constructed.

2003 A Civil Suit No.48 of 2003 was filed by the plaintiffs before the Court wherein, firstly, a
declaration of title was sought by virtue of adverse possession.

Secondly, an injunction was sought against the GAD. Despite not having possession over the land
already allotted to Reserve Bank of India, the plaintiffs therein in the suit claimed their possession
on that portion of land.

28.07.2007 The aforesaid Civil Suit was dismissed as withdrawn.

Though permission was sought to file a fresh suit. However, no such permission/liberty was
granted. It was pleaded in the application that the matter is pending for consideration with the
Government. June 2008 Writ Petition (C) No. 9069/2008 was filed by the respondents, challenging
the allotment of land to Reserve Bank of India; claiming allotment of land equivalent to the land
given to Reserve Bank of India; for regularising illegal possession of land with the plaintiffs in
exchange of land allotted to Reserve Bank of India.

5

State Of Orissa vs Laxmi Narayan Das .(Dead) Thr. Lrs. on 12 July, 2023

21.11.2008 The aforesaid Writ Petition was disposed of by the High Court The Order recorded that
challenge therein was to the order passed by the Settlement Officer on 01.3.1990. The statement of
the Counsel for the petitioners therein was recorded that objections were filed during the course of
settlement of record of rights, which were finalised without appreciating the same.

The stand of the counsel for the State was recorded that, presently the land was recorded in the
name of Reserve Bank of India. After its transfer to the Bank, staff quarters had already been
constructed thereon. Subsequently, the writ petition was disposed of finally, while granting liberty
to the writ petitioners to take appropriate steps against the final record of rights, if so advised.

Meaning thereby that, no relief as such was granted to the petitioners, as was not even admissible
after such a huge delay.

30.10.2009 Single Judge order was challenged before the Division Bench of the High Court in Writ
Appeal No.108 of 2009 which was disposed of granting various reliefs to the respondents.

This is the order impugned in the present appeal.

13. From the narration of the facts, in the aforesaid table, it is evident that the respondents including
their predecessors-in-interest have been sleeping over their rights for decades. The process for
finalisation of record of rights must have been started much prior to 1962, as final publication of
rights was made at that time. It was stated before the learned Single Bench, that the objections were
filed before finalization of the record of rights. If those objections were not considered at the time of
final publication of record of rights in terms of Section 12-B of the 1958 Act, the appropriate remedy
was to file an application before the Board of Revenue within one year of the final publication of
record of rights under Section 12-B of the 1958 Act.

14. The record of rights was finalised way back in the year 1962. It was admitted by the respondents
that a part of the same plot number, regarding which issue has been raised with reference to its
allotment to the Reserve Bank of India by the GAD, is in possession of the respondents. Meaning
thereby that when the record of rights was prepared, the respondents had enough knowledge of the
fact that there is some error in the same. The claim is that the status of the property in possession of
the respondents was stitiban property and their predecessors-in interest were in possession thereof.
It was claimed that there was no reason for its transfer in the name of Forest Department.

15. Twenty-eight years after the finalisation of record of rights, an appeal was filed before the
Settlement Officer, which was not maintainable as that stage had been crossed. As the land was
recorded in the name of Forest Department, notice was issued to the Forest Department. The
Settlement Appeal was disposed of on 1.3.1990. It was noticed in the order that the changed identity
number of part of land was plot number 1506/1, a part of which had already been given to the
Reserve Bank of India for construction of staff quarters and the quarters had been constructed
thereon. It was observed in the order that in case the same is stitiban plot, the appellant before the
Settlement Officer could raise a claim with the GAD. The prayer before the Settlement Officer to
record their names against plot number 1506 was declined.

6

State Of Orissa vs Laxmi Narayan Das .(Dead) Thr. Lrs. on 12 July, 2023

16. Thereafter, the respondents slept over the matter for more than a decade. After 13 years, a civil
suit was filed in the year 2003. Even at the time of filing of the civil suit i.e., 13 years after the
disposal of the appeal by the Settlement Officer and more than four decades after the record of
rights was finalised, the respondents did not challenge the final record of rights. In fact, if they had
challenged, the same would not have been maintainable. The appropriate remedy was not filing a
civil suit. Even the allotment of land to Reserve Bank of India was not challenged.

17. It was pleaded in the civil suit that the plaintiffs therein are in possession of certain portion of
the government land on which they are residing since 1965, hence, they have become owners thereof
by way of adverse possession. The civil suit was filed with the following prayers: -

“(a) Let it be declared that the Plaintiffs are in peaceful continuous and uninterrupted
physical possession over ‘B’ Schedule property consisting of Plot No.1474 (Part) &
Plot No. 1493 (Part) under Khata No.1427 (GA) admeasuring an area of Ac.0.430
decimals as mentioned in Schedule ‘B’ with hostile animus to the true knowledge of
Defendant and thereby perfected their title, by way of adverse possession, since from
the year 1965 for more than statutory period.

(b) Let it be declared that the plaintiffs are the lawful owner in possession having
right title and interest over ‘A’ Schedule property and the Defendant, has no manner
of right to interfere with the peaceful possession of the Plaintiffs not only over ‘A’
schedule property but also over ‘B’ schedule property.

(c) Let the Defendant his henchmen contractor agents and officials be restrained by
way of permanent injunction, with direction not to interfere or part with the
possession of the Plaintiffs over Plot No.1474 (Part) and Plot No.1493 (Part) under
Khata No.1427 (GA) i.e.’B’ Schedule Property, which being amalgamated to the plots
of the Plaintiffs mentioned in Schedule ‘A’ are very much inside the boundary of the
Plaintiffs.

(d)    ……

(e)    ……”

18. A perusal of the prayer (b) in the suit shows that the plaintiffs therein had not
approached the court with clean hands. On the one hand, it was admitted in the
plaint, that part of the suit land, which is allegedly belonging to the plaintiffs therein,

7

State Of Orissa vs Laxmi Narayan Das .(Dead) Thr. Lrs. on 12 July, 2023

had been allotted by the GAD to the Reserve Bank of India and staff quarters had
been constructed thereon but still it was sought to be declared that the plaintiffs are
owners in possession of that portion of land and their possession need to be
protected. Furthermore, permanent injunction was also sought against the
defendants from interfering in their possession. The Reserve Bank of India, which
was admittedly in possession of the part of the land was not impleaded as a
defendant in the suit. The aforesaid suit was dismissed as withdrawn on 28.07.2007.

The Court passed the following order:-

“This order arises out of the petition filed by the plaintiff to withdraw the suit.

Perused the petition, objection, plaint averment so also the W.S. filed by the
defendant.

I have already heard on the withdrawal petition from both the sides.

Considering the fact and circumstances of the case, the petition for withdrawal is
party allowed.

The suit is withdrawn but no permission as sought for by the plaintiff to file fresh suit
is allowed.”

19. In the application for withdrawal of suit, the plaintiffs stated that the negotiations
are going on with the GAD, hence, they sought permission to withdraw the suit with
liberty to file the same again.

However, no permission was granted by the Court to file fresh suit.

20. When the respondents were not able to put life to their stale claim, a writ petition was filed
bearing W.P.(C) No. 9069 of 2008 before the Orissa High Court. A perusal of the paper book of the
writ petition shows that there was no mention of filing of a civil suit claiming the same relief and
withdrawal thereof. Rather simpliciter a case was sought to be made out on the basis of order dated
01.03.1990 passed in Settlement Appeal No. 537/90 by the Settlement Officer. May be at the cost of
repetition, it is reiterated here that even in the civil suit, the reliance was on the aforesaid order
dated 01.03.1990 passed by the Settlement Officer. The writ petition was disposed of on 21.11.2008.
The stand of the writ petitioners was that they had filed objections during the course of settlement of
record of rights, however, still without appreciating the objections, the land in dispute was recorded
in the name of GAD. This statement of fact by the counsel for the writ petitioners shows that they
were aware of the finalisation of record of rights way back in the year 1962. However, still they kept
quiet and did not avail of the appropriate remedy available to them against the same, in case they
were aggrieved by it. Certain office notings which the respondents obtained under the Right to
Information Act, 2005, have been placed on record with reference to the allotment of alternative
land in exchange. These notings were from the year 2001 onwards. As to whether these notings

8

State Of Orissa vs Laxmi Narayan Das .(Dead) Thr. Lrs. on 12 July, 2023

confer any right on the respondents without there being any order communicated to the
respondents, will be dealt with in the latter part of the judgment.

21. The Division Bench of High Court without appreciating any of the legal issues, the delay in filing
the writ petition despite knowledge of the facts to the writ petitioners or their predecessors-in-
interest, went on to disturb the final records of rights which were finalised way back in the year
1962. Direction was issued to consider the representation of the writ petitioners to allot a suitable
plot of land in exchange of their stitiban land.

22. The issues which require consideration by this Court in the present appeal would be :

(1) Effect of delay and laches in availing the remedies against the final publication of
record of rights.

(2) Maintainability of writ petition when the civil suit filed for same relief was
withdrawn without liberty to file fresh one and on the concealment of material facts
from the Court.

(3) Whether a party can rely on notings in the Government files without having
communication of any order on the basis thereof ?

1. EFFECT OF DELAY AND LACHES IN AVAILING THE REMEDIES AGAINST THE FINAL
PUBLICATION OF RECORD OF RIGHTS

23. Before applying the principles laid down by this Court on delay and laches. We deem it
appropriate to refer the legal position.

24. In P. S. Sadasivaswamy v. State of Tamil Nadu, (1975) 1 SCC 152, it was laid down that a person
aggrieved by an order of promoting a junior over his head should approach the court at least within
six months or at the most a year of such promotion. It is not that there is any period of limitation for
the Courts to exercise their powers under Article 226 nor is it that there can never be a case where
the Courts cannot interfere in a matter after the passage of a certain length of time, but it should be
a sound and wise exercise of discretion for the Courts to refuse to exercise their extraordinary
powers under Article 226 in the case of persons who do not approach it expeditiously for the relief.

25. In New Delhi Municipal Council v. Pan Singh and others, (2007) 9 SCC 278, this Court has
opined that though there is no period of limitation provided for filing a writ petition under Article
226 of the Constitution of India, yet ordinarily a writ petition should be filed within a reasonable
time. In the said case the respondents had filed the writ petition after seventeen years and the court,
as stated earlier, took note of the delay and laches as relevant factors and set aside the order passed
by the High Court which had exercised the discretionary jurisdiction.

26. In State of Uttaranchal and another v. Sri Shiv Charan Singh Bhandari and others, (2013) 12
SCC 179, this Court, while considering the issue regarding delay and laches observed that even if

9

State Of Orissa vs Laxmi Narayan Das .(Dead) Thr. Lrs. on 12 July, 2023

there is no period prescribed for filing the writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India, yet it should be filed within a reasonable time. Relief to a person, who puts forward a stale
claim can certainly be refused relief on account of delay and laches. Anyone who sleeps over his
rights is bound to suffer.

27. In Chennai Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage Board and others v. T. T. Murali Babu,
(2014) 4 SCC 108, this Court opined as under:-

"13. First, we shall deal with the facet of delay. In Maharashtra State Road Transport
Corporation v. Balwant Regular Motor Service, Amravati and others, AIR 1969 SC
329, the Court referred to the principle that has been stated by Sir Barnes Peacock in
Lindsay Petroleum Co. v. Prosper Armstrong Hurd, Abram Farewall, and John
Kemp, (1874) 5 PC 221, which is as follows:-

"Now the doctrine of laches in Courts of Equity is not an arbitrary or a technical
doctrine. Where it would be practically unjust to give a remedy, either because the
party has, by his conduct, done that which might fairly be regarded as equivalent to a
waiver of it, or where by his conduct and neglect he has, though perhaps not waiving
that remedy, yet put the other party in a situation in which it would not be reasonable
to place him if the remedy were afterwards to be asserted in either of these cases,
lapse of time and delay are most material. But in every case, if an argument against
relief, which otherwise would be just, is founded upon mere delay, that delay of
course not amounting to a bar by any statute of limitations, the validity of that
defence must be tried upon principles substantially equitable. Two circumstances,
always important in such cases, are, the length of the delay and the nature of the acts
done during the interval, which might affect either party and cause a balance of
justice or injustice in taking the one course or the other, so far as relates to the
remedy."

15. In State of M. P. and others etc. etc. vs. Nandlal Jaiswal and others etc. etc., AIR 1987 SC 251, the
Court observed that it is well settled that power of the High Courtto issue an appropriate writ under
Article 226 of the Constitution is discretionary and the High Court in exercise of its discretion does
not ordinarily assist the tardy and the indolent or the acquiescent and the lethargic. It has been
further stated therein that if there is inordinate delay on the part of the petitioner in filing a petition
and such delay is not satisfactorily explained, the High Court may decline to intervene and grant
relief in the exercise of its writ jurisdiction. Emphasis was laid on the principle of delay and laches
stating that resort to the extraordinary remedy under the writ jurisdiction at a belated stage is likely
to cause confusion and public inconvenience and bring in injustice.

16. Thus, the doctrine of delay and laches should not be lightly brushed aside. A writ court is
required to weigh the explanation offered and the acceptability of the same. The court should bear in
mind that it is exercising an extraordinary and equitable jurisdiction. As a constitutional court it has
a duty to protect the rights of the citizens but simultaneously it is to keep itself alive to the primary
principle that when an aggrieved person, without adequate reason, approaches the court at his own

10

State Of Orissa vs Laxmi Narayan Das .(Dead) Thr. Lrs. on 12 July, 2023

leisure or pleasure, the court would be under legal obligation to scrutinize whether the lis at a
belated stage should be entertained or not. Be it noted, delay comes in the way of equity. In certain
circumstances delay and laches may not be fatal but in most circumstances inordinate delay would
only invite disaster for the litigant who knocks at the doors of the court. Delay reflects inactivity and
inaction on the part of a litigant “a litigant who has forgotten the basic norms, namely,
"procrastination is the greatest thief of time" and second, law does not permit one to sleep and rise
like a phoenix. Delay does bring in hazard and causes injury to the lis. … … A court is not expected to
give indulgence to such indolent persons- who compete with `Kumbhakarna' or for that matter 'Rip
Van Winkle'. In our considered opinion, such delay does not deserve any indulgence and on the said
ground alone the writ court should have thrown the petition overboard at the very threshold."

28. In State of Jammu & Kashmir vs. R. K. Zalpuri and others, (2015) 15 SCC 602, this Court
considered the issue regarding delay and laches while initiating a dispute before the Court. It was
opined that the issue sought to be raised by the petitioners therein was not required to be addressed
on merits on account of delay and laches.The relevant paras thereof are extracted below:-

"27. The grievance agitated by the respondent did not deserve to be addressed on
merits, for doctrine of delay and laches had already visited his claim like the chill of
death which does not spare anyone even the one who fosters the idea and nurtures
the attitude that he can sleep to avoid death and eventually proclaim "Deo gratias -
thanks to God”.

28. Another aspect needs to be stated. A writ court while deciding a writ petition is
required to remain alive to the nature of the claim and the unexplained delay on the
part of the writ petitioner. Stale claims are not to be adjudicated unless
non-interference would cause grave injustice. The present case, need less to
emphasise, did not justify adjudication. It deserves to be thrown overboard at the
very threshold, for the writ petitioner had accepted the order of dismissal for half a
decade and cultivated the feeling that he could freeze time and forever remain in the
realm of constant present."

29. The aforesaid view was followed by this Court in Union of India and others v. Chaman Rana,
(2018) 5 SCC 798.

30. Subsequently, a Constitution Bench of this Court in Senior Divisional Manager, Life Insurance
Corporation of India Ltd. and others v. Shree Lal Meena, (2019) 4 SCC 479, considering the
principle of delay and laches, opined as under:-

“36. We may also find that the appellant remained silent for years together and that
this Court, taking a particular view subsequently, in Sheel Kumar Jain v. New India
Assurance Company Limited, (2011)12 SCC 197 would not entitle stale claims to be
raised on this behalf, like that of the appellant. In fact the appellant slept over the
matter for almost a little over two years even after the pronouncement of the
judgment.

11

State Of Orissa vs Laxmi Narayan Das .(Dead) Thr. Lrs. on 12 July, 2023

37. Thus, the endeavour of the appellant, to approach this Court seeking the relief, as
prayed for, is clearly a misadventure, which is liable to be rejected, and the appeal is
dismissed.”

31. In Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. and others v. Shyam Kishore Singh - (2020) 3 SCC 411, the issue
regarding the delay and laches was considered by this Court while dismissing the petition filed
belatedly, seeking change in the date of birth in the service record.

32. The issue of delay and laches was considered by this Court in Union of India and others vs. N.
Murugesan and others, (2022) 2 SCC 25. Therein it was observed that a neglect on the part of a
party to do an act which law requires must stand in his way for getting the relief or remedy. The
Court laid down two essential factors i.e. first, the length of the delay and second, the developments
during the intervening period. Delay in availing the remedy would amount to waiver of such right.
Relevant paras 20 to 22 of the above mentioned case are extracted below:

“20. The principles governing delay, laches, and acquiescence are overlapping and
interconnected on many occasions. However, they have their distinct characters and
distinct elements. One can say that delay is the genus to which laches and
acquiescence are species. Similarly, laches might be called a genus to a species by
name acquiescence. However, there may be a case where acquiescence is involved,
but not laches. These principles are common law principles, and perhaps one could
identify that these principles find place in various statutes which restrict the period of
limitation and create non-consideration of condonation in certain circumstances.
They are bound to be applied by way of practice requiring prudence of the court than
of a strict application of law. The underlying principle governing these concepts
would be one of estoppel. The question of prejudice is also an important issue to be
taken note of by the court.

21. The word “laches” is derived from the French language meaning “remissness and
slackness”. It thus involves unreasonable delay or negligence in pursuing a claim
involving an equitable relief while causing prejudice to the other party. It is neglect
on the part of a party to do an act which law requires while asserting a right, and
therefore, must stand in the way of the party getting relief or remedy.

22. Two essential factors to be seen are the length of the delay and the nature of acts
done during the interval. As stated, it would also involve acquiescence on the part of
the party approaching the court apart from the change in position in the
interregnum. Therefore, it would be unjustifiable for a Court of Equity to confer a
remedy on a party who knocks its doors when his acts would indicate a waiver of such
a right. By his conduct, he has put the other party in a particular position, and
therefore, it would be unreasonable to facilitate a challenge before the court. Thus, a
man responsible for his conduct on equity is not expected to be allowed to avail a
remedy.”

12

33. Finally, in paras 37 and 38, it was observed as under :

State Of Orissa vs Laxmi Narayan Das .(Dead) Thr. Lrs. on 12 July, 2023

“37. We have already dealt with the principles of law that may have a bearing on this
case. … there was an unexplained and studied reluctance to raise the issue ....

38. ….Hence, on the principle governing delay, laches … Respondent No. 1 ought not
to have been granted any relief by invoking Article 226 of the Constitution of India.”.

34. If the aforesaid principles of law are applied in the facts of the case in hand from the table of list
of dates as available in para no. 12, it is evident that there is huge delay on the part of the
respondents to avail of their appropriate remedy. Record of rights was finalised in the year 1962. As
a d m i t t e d   i n   t h e   w r i t   p e t i t i o n ,   o b j e c t i o n s   w e r e   f i l e d   b y   t h e   r e s p o n d e n t s   o r   t h e i r
predecessors-in-interest before that. Remedy, after publication of final record of rights, was revision
under Section 15(b) of the 1958 Act, to be filed within one year. No remedy was availed of. Nearly
three decades after finalisation of record of rights, application was filed before the Settlement
Officer, which was not maintainable after final record of rights is published. When no relief was
granted by the Settlement Officer, the respondents kept quite for 13 years before filing a civil suit in
the year 2003. It was dismissed as withdrawn in the year 2007. The writ petition was filed in the
year 2008, which is subject matter of dispute in the present appeal. The aforesaid facts show that
the writ petition to claim relief was filed after 46 years of finalisation of record of rights, which was
highly belated. Hence, the respondents were no entitled to any relief.

2. Maintainability of writ petition when the civil suit filed for same relief was withdrawn without
liberty to file fresh one and on the concealment of material facts from the Court.

35. From the facts on record, it is evident, that the respondents had filed a civil suit in January
2003, claiming that the plaintiffs therein be declared owner of the land which is in their adverse
possession since 1965 as mentioned in Schedule ‘A’, annexed to the plaint. The second prayer was
that the plaintiffs therein be declared lawful owner in possession of the land as mentioned in
Schedule ‘B’ and the defendant therein had no right to interfere with the peaceful possession of the
plaintiffs. The property, as mentioned in Schedule ‘B’, included the same which was the subject
matter of consideration at the time of finalisation of record of rights. Part of which was allotted to
the Reserve Bank of India on which staff quarters had been constructed long back as has been
noticed in Order dated 01.03.1990 passed by the Settlement Officer.

36. After withdrawal of the aforesaid suit, the writ petition was filed to call upon the respondents to
show cause as to how the land owned by the writ petitioners was allotted to the Reserve Bank of
India. The writ petitioners be allotted land equivalent to the same in terms of the observation made
in the order dated 01.03.1990 passed by the Settlement Officer. Both the aforesaid prayers are
co-related. In fact, the real dispute started after the finalisation of the record of rights. Reference in
the writ petition was made to the order passed by the Settlement Officer on 01.03.1990.
Implementation of the aforesaid order, by which apparently no relief was granted to the petitioner,
was sought. The fact remains that at the time of the filing of the writ petition, it was not mentioned
that the writ petitioners had already filed a civil suit claiming the same relief which was dismissed as

13

withdrawn without liberty to file fresh one for the same cause of action.

State Of Orissa vs Laxmi Narayan Das .(Dead) Thr. Lrs. on 12 July, 2023

37. On the question, as to whether after the withdrawal of a suit claiming the same relief without
having permission to institute fresh one for the same relief, a writ petition will be maintainable
before the Court, the guidance is available from the judgment of this Court in M.J. Exporters Private
Limited v. Union of India and others (2021) 13 SCC 543, wherein the principle of constructive res
judicata was applied. The case concerns a litigant who sought to file a fresh writ petition after
withdrawal of the earlier writ petition filed for the same relief without permission to file fresh one.
The Court held that the principles contained in Order 23, Rule 1 CPC are applicable even in writ
proceedings. Para 15 thereof is extracted below:

“15. In these circumstances, we feel that when this issue was raised and abandoned in
the first writ petition which was dismissed as withdrawn, the principles of
constructive res judicata which are laid down under Order 23 Rule 1 of the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908, and which principles are extendable to writ proceedings as
well as held by this in Sarguja Transport Service v. STAT, (1987) 1 SCC 5.”

38. Having regard to the principles laid down in M.J. Exporters Private Limited (supra), in our view,
applying the principles of constructive res judicata, the present writ petition filed by the respondents
after withdrawal of the civil suit, was not maintainable, in the sense that it ought not to have been
entertained. In case the respondents still wanted to justify filing of the writ petition, they should
have at least disclosed complete facts and then justify filing of the writ petition.

39. The writ petition also ought to be dismissed on the ground of concealment of material facts
regarding filing and withdrawal of the civil suit claiming the same relief. Neither in the writ petition
nor in the appeal against the order passed in the writ petition, the respondents disclosed the filing of
civil suit and withdrawal thereof. It only transpired only that at the time of the hearing of the appeal.

40. As to how a litigant who conceals material facts from the Court has to be dealt with, has been
gone into by this Court, time and again in plethora of cases and the consistent opinion is that, he is
not entitled even to be heard on merits.

41. In Abhyudya Sanstha Vs. Union of India and others, (2011) 6 SCC 145, this Court, while declining
relief to the petitioners therein, who did not approach the court with clean hands, opined asunder:

"18. … In our view, the appellants deserve to be non suited because they have not
approached the Court with clean hands. The plea of inadvertent mistake put forward
by the learned senior counsel for the appellants and their submission that the Court
may take lenient view and order regularisation of the admissions already made
sounds attractive but does not merit acceptance. Each of the appellants consciously
made a statement that it had been granted recognition by the NCTE, which
necessarily implies that recognition was granted in terms of Section 14 of the Act read
with Regulations 7 and 8 of the 2007 Regulations. Those managing the affairs of the
appellants do not belong to the category of innocent, illiterate/uneducated persons,

14

State Of Orissa vs Laxmi Narayan Das .(Dead) Thr. Lrs. on 12 July, 2023

who are not conversant with the relevant statutory provisions and the court process.
The very fact that each of the appellants had submitted LPASW No. 82/2019 Page 7
application in terms of Regulation 7 and made itself available for inspection by the
team constituted by WRC, Bhopal shows that they were fully aware of the fact that
they can get recognition only after fulfilling the conditions specified in the Act and
the Regulations and that WRC, Bhopal had not granted recognition to them.
Notwithstanding this, they made bold statement that they had been granted
recognition by the competent authority and thereby succeeded in persuading this
Court to entertain the special leave petitions and pass interim orders. The minimum,
which can be said about the appellants is that they have not approached the Court
with clean hands and succeeded in polluting the stream of justice by making patently
false statement. Therefore, they are not entitled to relief under Article 136 of the
Constitution. This view finds support from plethora of precedents.

42. In Hari Narain v. Badri Das AIR 1963 SC 1558, G. Narayanaswamy Reddy (Dead) by Lrs. and
another v. Govt. of Karnataka and another (1991) 3 SCC 261 and plethora of other cases, this Court
denied relief to the petitioner/appellant on the ground that he had not approached the Court with
clean hands. In Hari Narain v. Badri Das (supra), the Court revoked the leave granted to the
appellant and observed:

"It is of utmost importance that in making material statements and setting forth
grounds in applications for special leave made under Article 136 of the Constitution,
care must be taken not to make any statements which are inaccurate, untrue or
misleading. In dealing with applications for special leave, the Court naturally takes
statements of fact and grounds of fact contained in the petitions at their face value
andit LPASW No. 82/2019 Page 8 would be unfair to betray the confidence of the
Court by making statements which are untrue and misleading. Thus, if at the hearing
of the appeal the Supreme Court is satisfied that the material statements made by the
appellant in his application for special leave are inaccurate and misleading, and the
respondent is entitled to contend that the appellant may have obtained special leave
f r o m   t h e   S u p r e m e   C o u r t   o n   t h e   s t r e n g t h   o f   w h a t   h e   c h a r a c t e r i s e s   a s
misrepresentations of facts contained in the petition for special leave, the Supreme
Court may come to the conclusion that in such a case special leave granted to the
appellant ought to be revoked."

43. In G. Narayanaswamy Reddy v. Govt. of Karnataka's case (supra), this Court while noticing the
fact regarding the stay order passed by the High Court which prevented passing of the award by the
Land Acquisition Officer within the prescribed time period was concealed and in the aforesaid
context, it observed that :

"2. … Curiously enough, there is no reference in the special leave petitions to any of
the stay orders and we came to know about these orders only when the respondents
appeared in response to the notice and filed their counter- affidavit. In our view, the
said interim orders have a direct bearing on the question raised and the

15

State Of Orissa vs Laxmi Narayan Das .(Dead) Thr. Lrs. on 12 July, 2023

non-disclosure of the same certainly amounts to suppression of material facts. On
this ground alone, the special leave petitions are liable to be rejected. It is well settled
in law that the relief under Article 136 of the Constitution is discretionary and a
petitioner who approaches this Court for such relief must come with frank and full
disclosure of facts. If he fails to do so and suppresses material facts, his application is
liable to be dismissed. We accordingly dismiss the special leave petitions."

44. In Dalip Singh v. State of Uttar Pradesh and others (2010) 2 SCC 114, this Court noticed the
progressive decline in the values of life and observed:

"1. For many centuries Indian society cherished two basic values of life i.e. "satya"
(truth) and "ahinsa"

(non- violence). Mahavir, Gautam Buddha and Mahatma Gandhi guided the people to ingrain these
values in their daily life. Truth constituted an integral part of the justice- delivery system which was
in vogue in the pre-

Independence era and the people used to feel proud to tell truth in the courts irrespective of the
consequences. However, post- Independence period has seen drastic changes in our value system.
The materialism has overshadowed the old ethos and the quest for personal gain has become so
intense that those involved in litigation do not hesitate to take shelter of falsehood,
misrepresentation and suppression of facts in the court proceedings.

2. In the last 40 years, a new creed of litigants has cropped up. Those who belong to this creed do
not have any respect for truth. They shamelessly resort to falsehood and unethical means for
achieving their goals. In order to meet the challenge posed by this new creed of litigants, the courts
have, from time to time, evolved new rules and it is now well established that a litigant, who
attempts to pollute the stream of justice or who touches the pure fountain of justice with tainted
hands, is not entitled to any relief, interim or final." (emphasis supplied)

45. In Moti Lal Songara Vs. Prem Prakash @ Pappu and another (2013) 9 SCC 199, this Court,
considering the issue regarding concealment of facts before the Court, observed that "court is not a
laboratory where children come to play”, and opined as under:

"19. The second limb of the submission is whether in the obtaining factual matrix, the
order passed by the High Court discharging the accused-respondent is justified in
law. We have clearly stated that though the respondent was fully aware about the fact
that charges had been framed against him by the learned trial Judge, yet he did not
bring the same to the notice of the revisional court hearing the revision against the
order taking cognizance. It is a clear case of suppression. It was within the special
knowledge of the accused. Any one who takes recourse to method of suppression in a
court of law, is, in actuality, playing fraud with the court, and the maxim supressio
veri, expression faisi , i.e., suppression of the truth is equivalent to the expression of
falsehood, gets attracted. We are compelled to say so as there has been a calculated

16

State Of Orissa vs Laxmi Narayan Das .(Dead) Thr. Lrs. on 12 July, 2023

concealment of the fact before the revisional court. It can be stated with certitude that
the accused- respondent tried to gain advantage by such factual suppression. The
fraudulent intention is writ large. In fact, he has shown his courage of ignorance and
tried to play possum.

20. The High Court, as we have seen, applied the principle "when infrastructure
collapses, the superstructure is bound to collapse". However, as the order has been
obtained by practising fraud and suppressing material fact before a court of law to
gain advantage, the said order cannot be allowed to stand."

(emphasis supplied)

46. In a recent judgment, ABCD Vs. Union of India and others (2020) 2 SCC 52, this Court in a
matter where material facts was concealed, while issuing notice to the petitioner therein, exercising
its suo-motu contempt power, observed as under :

"15. Making a false statement on oath is an offence punishable under Section 181 of
the IPC while furnishing false information with intent to cause public servant to use
his lawful power to the injury of another person is punishable under Section 182 of
the IPC. These offences by virtue of Section 195(1)(a)(i) of the Code can be taken
cognizance of by any court only upon a proper complaint in writing as stated in said
Section. In respect of matters coming under Section 195(1)(b)(i) of the Code, in
Pushpadevi M. Jatia v. M.L. Wadhawan etc., (1987) 3 SCC 367 prosecution was
directed to be launched after primafacie satisfaction was recorded by this Court.

47. It has also been laid down by this Court in Chandra Shashi v. Anil Kumar Verma (1995) 1 SCC
421 that a person who makes an attempt to deceive the court, interferes with the administration of
justice and can be held guilty of contempt of court. In this case, a husband who had filed a fabricated
document to oppose the prayer of his wife seeking transfer of matrimonial proceedings was found
guilty of contempt of court and was sentenced to two weeks imprisonment. It was observed as
under:

"1. The stream of administration of justice has to remain unpolluted so that purity of
court's atmosphere may give vitality to all the organs of the State. Polluters of judicial
firmament are, therefore, required to be well taken care of to maintain the sublimity
of court's environment; so also to enable it to administer justice fairly and to the
satisfaction of all concerned.

2. Anyone who takes recourse to fraud, deflects the course of judicial proceedings; or
if anything is done with oblique motive, the same interferes with the administration
of justice. Such persons are required to be properly dealt with, not only to punish
them for the wrong done, but also to deterothers from indulging in similar acts which
shake the faith of people in the system of administration of justice.

17

State Of Orissa vs Laxmi Narayan Das .(Dead) Thr. Lrs. on 12 July, 2023

* * *

14. The legal position thus is that if the publication be with intent to deceive the court
or one made with an intention to defraud, the same would be contempt, as it would
interfere with administration of justice. It would,in any case, tend to interfere with
the same. This would definitely be so if a fabricated documents is filed with the
aforesaid mens rea. In the case at hand the fabricated document was apparently to
deceive the court; the intention to defraud is writ large. Anil Kumar is, therefore,
guilty of contempt."

48. In K.D. Sharma Vs. Steel Authority of India Limited and others (2008) 12 SCC 481 it was
observed:

"39. If the primary object as highlighted in Kensington Income Tax Commrs., (1917) 1
KB 486 :

86 LJKB 257 : 116 LT 136 (CA) is kept in mind, an applicant who does not come with
candid facts and "clean breast" cannot hold a writ of the court with "soiled hands".

Suppression or concealment of material facts is not an advocacy. It is a jugglery, manipulation,
manoeuvring or misrepresentation, which has no place in equitable and prerogative jurisdiction. If
the applicant does not disclose all the material facts fairly and truly but states them in a distorted
manner and misleads the court, the court has inherent power in order to protect itself and to
prevent an abuse of its process to discharge the rule nisi and refuse to proceed further with the
examination of the case on merits. If the court does not reject the petition on that ground, the court
would be failing in its duty. In fact, such an applicant requires to be dealt with for contempt of court
for abusing the process of the court."

49. In Dhananjay Sharma vs. State of Haryana and others (1995) 3 SCC 757, the filing of a false
affidavit was the basis for initiation of action in contempt jurisdiction and the concerned persons
were punished for the same.

50. If the case of the respondents is considered on factual material, in view of the settled position of
law, as has been referred in previous paras, it is evident that the respondents waived off their right
to challenge the record of rights which stood finalised way back in the year 1962 and till date there
has been no challenge made to the same. Indirectly relief was sought by filing appeal before the
Settlement Officer, which was not maintainable; civil suit which was ultimately withdrawn and then
filed the writ petition and thereafter writ appeal which is the subject-matter of the present
proceedings.

3. WHETHER A PARTY CAN RELY ON NOTINGS IN THE GOVERNMENT FILE WITHOUT
HAVING COMMUNICATION OF ANY ORDER ON THE BASIS THEREOF ?

18

State Of Orissa vs Laxmi Narayan Das .(Dead) Thr. Lrs. on 12 July, 2023

51. The aforesaid legal issue was considered by this Court in Mahadeo and others v. Sovan Devi and
others, (2022) SCC OnLine SC 1118. It was pointed out therein, that an inter-departmental
communications are merely in the process of consideration for an appropriate decision. These
cannot be relied upon as a basis to claim any right. Mere notings in the file do not amount to an
order unless an order is communicated to a party, thus, no right accrues. Relevant paras 14 to 16 are
extracted herein below:

“14. It is well settled that inter-departmental communications are in the process of
consideration for appropriate decision and cannot be relied upon as a basis to claim
any right. This Court examined the said question in a judgment reported as Omkar
Sinha v. Sahadat Khan, (2022) 12 SCC 228. Reliance was placed on Bachhittar Singh
v. State of Punjab, AIR 1963 SC 395 to hold that merely writing something on the file
does not amount to an order. Before something amounts to an order of the State
Government, two things are necessary. First, the order has to be expressed in the
name of the Governor as required by clause (1) of Article 166 and second, it has to be
communicated. As already indicated, no formal order modifying the decision of the
Revenue Secretary was ever made. Until such an order is drawn up, the State
Government cannot, in our opinion, be regarded as bound by what was stated in the
file. The said judgment was followed in K.S.B. Ali v. State of Andhra Pradesh, (2018)
11 SCC 277 and Dyna Technologies Pvt.

Ltd. v. Crompton Greaves Limited, (2019) 20 SCC 1. In Bachhittar Singh, it has been held as under:

“8. What we have now to consider is the effect of the note recorded by the Revenue
Minister of PEPSU upon the file. We will assume for the purpose of this case that it is
an order. Even so, the question is whether it can be regarded as the order of the State
Government which alone, as admitted by the appellant, was competent to hear and
decide an appeal from the order of the Revenue Secretary. Article 166(1) of the
Constitution requires that all executive action of the Government of a State shall be
expressed in the name of the Governor. Clause (2) of Article 166 provides for the
authentication of orders and other instruments made and executed in the name of
the Governor. Clause (3) of that article enables the Governor to make rules for the
more convenient transaction of the business of the Government and for the allocation
among the Ministers of the said business. What the appellant calls an order of the
State Government is admittedly not expressed to be in the name of the Governor. But
with that point we shall deal later. What we must first ascertain is whether the order
of the Revenue Minister is an order of the State Government i.e. of the Governor. In
this connection we may refer to Rule 25 of the Rules of Business of the Government
of PEPSU which reads thus:

“Except as otherwise provided by any other Rule, cases shall ordinarily be disposed of
by or under the authority of the Minister in charge who may by means of standing
orders give such directions as he thinks fit for the disposal of cases in the
Department. Copies of such standing orders shall be sent to the Rajpramukh and the

19

State Of Orissa vs Laxmi Narayan Das .(Dead) Thr. Lrs. on 12 July, 2023

Chief Minister.” According to learned counsel for the appellant his appeal pertains to
the department, which was in charge of the Revenue Minister and, therefore, he
could deal with it. His decision and order would, according to him, be the decision
and order of the State Government. On behalf of the State reliance was, however,
placed on Rule 34 which required certain classes of cases to be submitted to the
Rajpramukh and the Chief Minister before the issue of orders. But it was conceded
during the course of the argument that a case of the kind before us does not fall
within that rule. No other provision bearing on the point having been brought to our
notice we would, therefore, hold that the Revenue Minister could make an order on
behalf of the State Government.

9. The question, therefore, is whether he did in fact make such an order. Merely
writing something on the file does not amount to an order. Before something
amounts to an order of the State Government two things are necessary. The order has
to be expressed in the name of the Governor as required by clause (1) of Article 166
and then it has to be communicated. As already indicated, no formal order modifying
the decision of the Revenue Secretary was ever made. Until such an order is drawn up
the State Government cannot, in our opinion, be regarded as bound by what was
stated in the file. As long as the matter rested with him the Revenue Minister could
well score out his remarks or minutes on the file and write fresh ones.

x x x

11. We are, therefore, of the opinion that the remarks or the order of the Revenue
Minister, PEPSU are of no avail to the appellant.”

15. This Court in Municipal Committee v. Jai Narayan & Co., 2022 SCC OnLine SC
376 held that a noting recorded in the file is merely a noting simpliciter and nothing
more. It merely represents expression of an opinion by the particular individual. It
was held as under:

“16. This Court in a judgment reported as State of Uttaranchal v. Sunil Kumar Vaish,
(2011) 8 SCC 670 held that a noting recorded in the file is merely a noting simpliciter
and nothing more. It merely represents expression of opinion by the particular
individual. By no stretch of imagination, such noting can be treated as a decision of
the Government. It was held as under:

“24. A noting recorded in the file is merely a noting simpliciter and nothing more. It
merely represents expression of opinion by the particular individual. By no stretch of
imagination, such noting can be treated as a decision of the Government. Even if the
competent authority records its opinion in the file on the merits of the matter under
consideration, the same cannot be termed as a decision of the Government unless it is
sanctified and acted upon by issuing an order in accordance with Articles 77(1) and
(2) or Articles 166(1) and (2). The noting in the file or even a decision gets culminated

20

State Of Orissa vs Laxmi Narayan Das .(Dead) Thr. Lrs. on 12 July, 2023

into an order affecting right of the parties only when it is expressed in the name of the
President or the Governor, as the case may be, and authenticated in the manner
provided in Article 77(2) or Article 166(2). A noting or even a decision recorded in the
file can always be reviewed/reversed/overruled or overturned and the court cannot
take cognizance of the earlier noting or decision for exercise of the power of judicial
review.

(See: State      of        Punjab v. Sodhi       Sukhdev
Singh,     AIR        1961      SC     493, Bachhittar
Singh v. State        of     Punjab, AIR       1963      SC

395, State of Bihar v. Kripalu Shankar, (1987) 3 SCC 34, Rajasthan Housing Board v.
Shri Kishan, (1993) 2 SCC 84, Sethi Auto Service Station v. DDA, (2009) 1 SCC 180
and Shanti Sports Club v. Union of India (2009) 15 SCC

705).”

17. Thus, the letter seeking approval of the State Government by the Deputy
Commissioner is not the approval granted by him, which could be enforced by the
plaintiff in the court of law.”

16. The basis of the claim of the writ petitioner is a letter written by the Secretary of
the Soldier Welfare Department to the District Collector, Udaipur on 19.03.1971 for
allotment of land. The Rules contemplate that if the possession is not taken within 6
months, the allotment shall be deemed to have been cancelled.

Firstly, the inter-departmental communication dated 19.03.1971 cannot be treated to be a letter of
allotment. Alternatively, even if it is considered to be a letter of allotment, the writ petitioner could
not claim possession on the basis of such communication after more than 30 years in terms of the
Rules applicable for allotment of land to the disabled ex-servicemen.” (emphasis supplied)

52. Reference can also be made to an another judgment of this Court in Municipal Committee,
Barwala, District Hisar, Haryana through its Secretary/President v. Jai Narayan and Company and
another, 2022 SCC OnLine SC 376, wherein the Court took a similar view.

53. Admittedly, in the case in hand there is no order passed by the Government and conveyed to the
respondents for allotment of any land, hence, no relief was admissible to them only relying on the
official notings.

CONCLUSION :

54. Considering the factual circumstances and the law laid down by this Court, the answer to the
three issues framed in para no.22 is as under:

21

State Of Orissa vs Laxmi Narayan Das .(Dead) Thr. Lrs. on 12 July, 2023

(i) There is a huge delay on the part of the respondents to avail of their appropriate remedy against
the final publication of record of rights. Hence, the respondents are not entitled to any relief.

(ii) On the application of principle of constructive res judicata, the writ petition filed by the
respondents after withdrawal of the civil suit was not maintainable as no liberty was granted. In case
still filing of writ petition was to be justified, at least complete facts need to be disclosed for the
purpose, which were missing. In the writ petition there was no mention regarding filing of civil suit
earlier for the same relief and withdrawal thereof. A litigant can be non-suited in case he is found
guilty of concealing material facts from the court or mis-stating the same. Hence, the respondents
are not entitled to any relief.

(iii) There was no order passed by the Government and conveyed to the respondents for allotment of
any land in their favour. Hence, the respondents are not entitled to any relief solely based on the
official notings.

RELIEF

55. For the reasons mentioned above, we find merit in the appeal. The same is allowed. The order
passed by the High Court in Writ Appeal No.108/2009 is set aside. Consequently, the writ petition
filed by the respondents is dismissed. There shall be no order as to costs.

______________, J.

(Abhay S. Oka) ______________, J.

(Rajesh Bindal) New Delhi July 12, 2023.

22