State Through Central Bureau Of ... vs Hemendhra Reddy Etc. Etc. on 28 April, 2023

State Through Central Bureau Of ... vs Hemendhra Reddy Etc.
Etc. on 28 April, 2023

Author: M.R. Shah

Bench: Surya Kant, M.R. Shah

1

REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS.                    OF 2023
(ARISING OUT OF SLP (CRL.) NOS. 7628-7630 OF 2017)

STATE THROUGH CENTRAL                                  .…. APPELLANT
BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION

VERSUS

HEMENDHRA REDDY & ANOTHER. ETC. ….. RESPONDENT(S)

JUDGMENT

J. B. PARDIWALA, J.:

1. Leave granted.

2. Since the issues raised in all the captioned appeals are the same those were taken
up for hearing analogously and are being disposed of by this common judgment and
order.

3. The principal question of law that falls for the consideration of this Court in the
present litigation is whether the High Court was justified in quashing the entire
prosecution instituted by the CBI against the accused persons for the alleged offences
on the ground that the CBI could not have undertaken further investigation under
sub section (8) of Section 173 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short, ‘the
CrPC’) and filed a chargesheet having once already submitted a final report under sub
section (2) of the Section 173 of the CrPC (closure report)? In other words, whether
the High Court was right in taking the view that the Special Court could not have

1

State Through Central Bureau Of ... vs Hemendhra Reddy Etc. Etc. on 28 April, 2023

taken cognizance upon the chargesheet filed by the CBI based on further
investigation having once already filed a closure report in the past and the same
having been accepted by the court concerned at the relevant point of time?

FACTUAL MATRIX

4. The respondent No. 3 herein D. Dwarakanadha Reddy (Accused No. 1) joined the services of the
Customs Department as a Preventive Officer in the year 1993.

5. In January, 2003, the respondent No. 3 was promoted as an Appraiser in Customs Department.

6. On 30.06.2006, the office of Superintendent of Police (CBI) was in receipt of the following
information:

(i) D. Dwarakanadha Reddy (A-1) was holding the post of Appraiser, Customs
Department since 2004, and his main income was his salary.

(ii) His wife D. Sujana Reddy (A-2) has no agricultural land in her name and does
business in the name of M/s Sujana Engineers.

(iii) That the couple had acquired assets worth Rs. 64, 41, 690.92 lakh between
01.04.2001 and 31.03.2005, however their combined income during the said period
was Rs. 50, 95, 371.57/-, comprising of salary income of A-1, agricultural income of
A-2, business income of A-2, bank interest, housing loan from the Andhra Bank,
capital gain on sale of property, rewards given to A-

1 etc.

(iv) During the period between 01.04.2001 and 31.03.2005, they incurred expenditure of Rs. 12, 74,
347.16/-, leaving them with the savings of Rs. 38, 21, 024.41/-.

(v) Therefore, their total disproportionate assets were worth Rs. 26, 20, 666.51/- as on 31.03.2005.

In such circumstances referred to above, an FIR in RC MA 1 2006 A 0027 was registered by the CBI
under Section 13(1)(e) read with Section 13(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (for short,
‘the 1988 Act’) along with Section 109 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short, ‘the IPC’).

7. On 24.12.2008, the CBI/ACB filed an application before the Principal Special Judge for CBI
Cases, Chennai, with a prayer to close the proceedings and return the documents for the purpose of
regular departmental action against the accused No. 1 (respondent No. 3). The application stated
inter alia as follows:

“After completion of investigation it has come to light that the accused cannot be
prosecuted. Hence, Final Report u/s. 173 Cr.PC is being filed which may be

2

State Through Central Bureau Of ... vs Hemendhra Reddy Etc. Etc. on 28 April, 2023

accepted.”

8. It was further prayed that the documents seized during the course of investigation be returned so
that the same could be used in the regular departmental action that may be initiated against the
accused No. 1.

9. The aforesaid application filed by the CBI was taken up by the Special Court and the following
order dated 29.01.2009 came to be passed:

“ORDER This petition is filed by the Petitioner/Complainant u/s. 173 Cr.PC praying
to close the FIR and to retain the documents collected during the investigation to be
used in the Regular Departmental Action against A1 .

1. Heard the learned Public Prosecutor. Perused the FIR, report and connected
records. Reason stated in the report is convincing.

Hence Final Report is accepted and FIR is closed and permitted to retain the documents collected
during the investigation to be used in the regular Departmental Action against A1.

Pronounced by me in the Open Court, this the 29th day of January 2009.

Principal Spl. Judge for CBI Cases”

10. On 24.02.2012, departmental proceedings were initiated against the accused No. 1.

11. It appears from the materials on record that at the end of the departmental proceedings, the
possession of disproportionate assets could not be established. However, an administrative warning
was issued to the accused No. 1 for the lapse on his part to intimate his department the fact of
having obtained a loan of Rs. 3, 00, 000/- (Rupees Three Lakh) from the Andhra Bank jointly along
with his wife. An administrative warning was also issued in regard to not intimating the correct
expense incurred by the accused No. 1 towards the construction of the house.

12. On 26.06.2013, the CBI filed the Crl. MP 3833/2013 in RC MA 1 2006 A0027 under Section
173(8) of the CrPC, seeking to reopen and undertake further investigation of the case, stating inter
alia as follows:

“…the prosecution had filed final report under Section 173 Cr.P.C. before this Hon’ble
Court on 24.12.2008 with a prayer to close the FIR as a mistake of fact…” “… It is
humbly submitted that now new evidences emerged to prove the allegation levelled
against the above said accused persons and to substantiate the charge of possession
of the disproportionate to the known sources of income of A-1 and A-2. Hence, it is
just and necessary to re-open and further investigate the above case U/s. 173(8)
Cr.P.C. in the interest of justice.”

3

State Through Central Bureau Of ... vs Hemendhra Reddy Etc. Etc. on 28 April, 2023

13. The Special Court allowed the aforesaid application vide order dated 28.06.2013, holding inter
alia as under:

“Heard. According to the prosecution, the prosecution is in possession of new
evidences to substantiate the allegation of possession of disproportionate assets to
the known sources of income against the accused persons. Hence, it is just and
proper to order for re-opening of the case.”

14. On 01.03.2014, the CBI issued a letter/summons No. RC 27/A/2006/
CBI/ACB/Chennai/0799 to the Deputy Commissioner of Customs, CIV-

Vigilance Customs House, Chennai, requiring the presence of the respondent No.3 D.
Dwarakanadha Reddy in connection with the investigation in RC 27(A)/06.

15. On 13.03.2014, respondent No. 3 filed Crl. O.P. of No. 6371 of 2014 before the Madras High
Court seeking quashing of the proceedings related to the summons dated 1.03.2014. The respondent
No. 3 stated that he had attended the summons and during the interrogation he was asked to
produce documents which were “either not in existence or not available with the petitioner or
already available with CBI”.

16. On 21.03.2014, the CBI filed its counter affidavit to the above referred petition filed by the
respondent No. 3, stating specifically that:

“3. It is submitted that in the year 2013 CBI received certain information/materials
warranting the re-opening of the investigation of this closed case. Accordingly Shri G.
Palaniappan, Inspector of Police, CBI/ACB, Chennai filed a petition in the Hon'ble
Court of Principal Special Judge for CBI Cases, Chennai seeking the orders of the said
court for re- opening of investigation and the Hon'ble Court of PSJ, Chennai had
issued order dt. 28.06.2.013 ordering the re-opening investigation of this case.”

17. The High Court vide its order dated 11.09.2014 rejected the Crl. O.P. No. 6371 of 2014, holding
inter alia as under:

(i) In the year 2013, the CBI came into possession of certain fresh materials
warranting the re-opening of the investigation against the accused persons.

(ii) Under 173(8) of the CrPC, a police officer can carry on further investigation even
after a report under Section 173(2) of the CrPC is submitted, in view of Section 173(8)
of the CrPC and held in Vinay Tyagi v. Irshad Ali alias Deepak and Others reported in
(2013) 5 SCC 762, with the only rider being that the police should seek formal
permission from the Court.

(iii) Acceptance of the final report by the Magistrate does not debar him from taking
cognizance if on further investigation, fresh material comes to light.

4

State Through Central Bureau Of ... vs Hemendhra Reddy Etc. Etc. on 28 April, 2023

(iv) In the CBI counter, it is stated that fresh material was received in the year 2013
which warranted reopening of the investigation.

(v) The Magistrate’s power to order further investigation under Section 156(3) of the
CrPC does not conflict with the power of the police to investigate further in light of
Section 173(8) of the CrPC, and therefore the Magistrate can order reopening of the
investigation.

(vi) This can of course only be done when fresh material comes to the knowledge of
the investigating officer which he did not have before as in the present case.

(vii) Since the CBI has collected fresh material connected with the case which were
not available earlier, it cannot be said that the Special Court has acted beyond its
jurisdiction in reopening the investigation.

18. On 17.12.2014, the CBI filed its detailed chargesheet against the respondent Nos. 1, 2 and 3
respectively alleging inter alia as follows:

(i) That the Respondent No.1, Hemendra Reddy, the brother-in-law of D. Sujana
(A-2) was a farmer at Chenna Reddy Garu Palli, Chithoor Dist.

(ii)The Respondent No.3, was found to be in possession of assets/pecuniary
resources in his name and in the names of his family members D. Sujana and
Hemendra Reddy to the tune of Rs. 61, 11, 989/- as against their known sources of
income of Rs. 59, 90, 135/-

during the period between 01.01.1998 and 30.06.2005.

19. On 2.06.2015, the respondent No. 2 herein filed Crl. O.P. No. 15873 of 2015 before the Madras
High Court, seeking quashing of the chargesheet.

20. On 27.04.2015, the respondent No. 1 herein filed Crl. O.P. No. 11101 of 2015, seeking quashing of
the chargesheet.

21. On 14.09.2015, the CBI filed its counter to all the aforesaid petitions.

22. On 15.12.2015, the High Court allowed the Crl. O.P. No. 11101 of 2015 and Crl. O.P. No. 15873 of
2015 respectively by a common order, holding inter alia as follows:

(i) That on receipt of a final report under Section 173 of the CrPC, the Magistrate has
three options – either to accept the report and close the case, to disagree with the
report and proceed with the case or to order further investigation under Section
156(3) of the CrPC.

5

State Through Central Bureau Of ... vs Hemendhra Reddy Etc. Etc. on 28 April, 2023

(ii) That the Magistrate is only empowered to direct “further investigation” and not to
direct a “re-investigation/ de-novo investigation”.

(iii) In terms of the judgment in Vinay Tyagi (supra) no investigation agency is
empowered to conduct a fresh, de-novo or reinvestigation once a report under
Section 173(2) of the CrPC is filed.

(iv) The petition seeking “re-opening”/ “further investigation” was filed after a lapse
of 4 years.

(v) In order to empower the Magistrate to permit further investigation, something
should have been pending before the Magistrate, but no matter was pending as the
investigation had already been closed.

(vi) The Special Court thus had no power to grant permission to conduct a further
investigation.

(vii) The judgment of Vinay Tyagi (supra) had not been brought to the attention of
the High Court at the time of deciding Crl. O.P. No. 6371 of 2014.

23. It appears that the respondent No. 3 herein also filed Crl. O.P. No. 411 of 2016, seeking quashing
of the chargesheet. The High Court vide order dated 08.01.2016 allowed the Crl. O.P. No. 411 of
2016 filed by D. Dwarakanadha Reddy in terms of the order passed by it dated 15.12.2015, holding
that the same principles and reasonings would apply to the petition filed by the D. Dwarakanadha
Reddy too.

24. Thus, the High Court ultimately quashed the entire prosecution, essentially on the ground that
the Special Court (CBI) had no jurisdiction/power to grant permission to the CBI to conduct further
investigation. In other words, the High Court took the view that the chargesheet filed against the
accused persons was the outcome of the materials collected during the course of the further
investigation, which by itself was illegal and, therefore, the criminal proceedings would not be
maintainable in the eye of law. It appears that the High Court was also cognizant of the fact that a
Co- ordinate Bench had earlier set at rest all the issues vide order dated 11.09.2014 passed in the Crl.
O.P. No. 6371 of 2014. However, the same was not looked into on the ground that the said order
passed by the Co-ordinate Bench was per incuriam and, therefore, not binding to another
Co-ordinate Bench.

25. In such circumstances referred to above, the CBI is herein before this Court with the present
appeals.

SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE CBI

26. Mr. Jayant K. Sud, the learned Additional Solicitor General of India, appearing for the CBI
vehemently submitted that the High Court committed a serious error in passing the impugned

6

State Through Central Bureau Of ... vs Hemendhra Reddy Etc. Etc. on 28 April, 2023

orders thereby leading to a serious miscarriage of justice.

27. The learned counsel further submitted that the law is well settled that further investigation can
be undertaken under sub section (8) of Section 173 of the CrPC even after the closure report is filed
and accepted by the court concerned. He would submit that new material/evidence surfaced and
came in the hands of the CBI on the basis of which an appropriate application was filed before the
Special Court, seeking permission to undertake the further investigation. He further submitted that
the application filed by the CBI was duly considered and the Special Court permitted the CBI to
re-open the case and undertake further investigation.

28. The learned counsel further submitted that the respondent No. 3 (Accused No. 1) had
questioned the entire action on the part of the CBI in seeking to re-open the case and undertake
further investigation before the High Court by filing Crl. O.P. No. 6371 of 2014 and the High Court
by a detailed order had declined to interfere. According to the learned counsel, the order passed by a
Co-ordinate Bench of the High Court in Crl. O.P. No. 6371 of 2014 was binding to another
Co-ordinate Bench and same could not have been over-looked or ignored on the ground that while
deciding Crl. O.P. No. 6371 of 2014, the attention of the High Court was not drawn to the decision of
this Court in the case of Vinit Tyagi (supra). Mr. Sud further submitted that it is not that the
decision of this Court in Vinit Tyagi (supra) was not considered in the earlier round of the litigation
i.e., while deciding Crl. O.P. No. 6371 of 2014 as is evident from para 5 of the order passed by the
High Court dated 11.09.2014 in Crl. O.P. No. 6371 of 2014.

29. In such circumstances as referred to above, the learned counsel prays that there being merit in
all his appeals, those may be allowed and the impugned order be set aside.

SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE ACCUSED PERSONS

30. On the other hand, all the appeals have been vehemently opposed by the learned counsel
appearing for the accused persons, submitting that no error, much less an error of law could be said
to have been committed by the High Court in passing the impugned orders. The learned counsel
would submit that the acceptance of a closure report by the Special Court (CBI) would terminate the
proceedings finally and the same would thereafter operate as a legal bar for the investigating agency
to undertake any further investigation in connection with the alleged offence. The learned counsel
laid much stress on the fact that for the purpose of granting permission to conduct further
investigation, something must be pending before the court concerned in the primary report to
enable to file a supplementary report. In the instant case, according to the learned counsel, nothing
was pending at the time of passing the order under Section 173(8) of the CrPC. It was pointed out
that the FIR was closed and all the evidence collected during the investigation was ordered to be
returned to the CBI for the purpose of departmental proceedings. In such circumstances, according
to the learned counsel, there was no scope for further investigation and even if further investigation
is ordered then it is as good as re-investigation or fresh investigation or de novo investigation, which
is otherwise not permissible in law.

7

State Through Central Bureau Of ... vs Hemendhra Reddy Etc. Etc. on 28 April, 2023

31. The learned counsel submitted that further investigation cannot be ordered at any point of time.
It was argued that in the case on hand, the further investigation was undertaken after a period of
four years from the date of the closure report. If further investigation is permitted to be undertaken
after an indefinite period of time, the same would result in delaying the trial thereby violating the
Article 21 of the Constitution, i.e., the right of the accused to have a speedy trial.

32. The learned counsel further submitted that one additional issue arises in the present litigation
relating to non-compliance of the mandatory requirement under Section 17(Second proviso) of the
1988 Act. According to the learned counsel the chargesheet in C.C.No.13 of 2015 on the file of the
XIII Additional Special Judge for CBI Cases, Chennai, was filed by Mr. Syed Bazlullah
ASP/CBI/ACB/Chennai. Upon perusal of the chargesheet which was served on the accused by the
Magistrate under Section 207 of the CrPC, it was noticed that the same does not include the order
passed by an officer not below the Rank of Superintendent of Police, as mandatorily required under
Section 17(Second proviso) of the 1988 Act, conferring powers to Mr. Syed Bazlullah to investigate
this case in RC MA 1 2006 A 0027 for an offence under Section 13(1)(e) of the 1988 Act, which
thereon got culminated into the chargesheet in C.C.No.13 of 2015. It was argued that the
non-compliance of Section 17(Second proviso) of the 1988 Act is an illegality that vitiates the entire
trial.

33. In support of the aforesaid submissions, reliance has been placed on the following case law:

(i) Vinay Tyagi v. Irshad Ali alias Deepak and Others reported in (2013) 5 SCC 762;

(ii) Vinubhai Haribhai Malaviya v. State of Gujarat reported in (2019) 17 SCC 1; and

(iii) Luckose Zachariah alias Zak Nedumchira Luke and Others v. Joseph Joseph and
Others reported in (2022) SCC Online SC 241.

ANALYSIS

34. Section 169 of the CrPC reads as under:

“169. Release of accused when evidence deficient.— If, upon an investigation under
this Chapter, it appears to the officer in charge of the police station that there is not
sufficient evidence or reasonable ground of suspicion to justify the forwarding of the
accused to a Magistrate, such officer shall, if such person is in custody, release him on
his executing a bond, with or without sureties, as such officer may direct, to appear, if
and when so required, before a Magistrate empowered to take cognizance of the
offence on a police report, and to try the accused or commit him for trial.”

35. The perusal of the aforesaid Section would reveal that the Investigating Officer is under an
obligation to release such person, who is in custody on executing a bond with or without sureties, if
evidence is not sufficient and/or there are no reasonable grounds of suspicion to forward such
person to the Magistrate.

8

State Through Central Bureau Of ... vs Hemendhra Reddy Etc. Etc. on 28 April, 2023

36. The plain reading of Section 169 of the CrPC, therefore, postulates that when the Investigating
Officer reports his action to the learned Magistrate, it will not be a report, however it will be a report
of his action either by the Investigating Officer or by the Officer in-charge of the police station.

37. Section 173 of the CrPC states about the steps to be taken by the Investigating Officer after the
completion of the investigation. The Officer in- charge of the police station is required to forward the
report under said Section to the Magistrate empowered to take cognizance of the offence in
prescribed form.

38. Section 173 of the CrPC reads thus:

“173. Report of police officer on completion of investigation.— (1) Every investigation
under this Chapter shall be completed without unnecessary delay.

(1A) The investigation in relation to an offence under sections 376, 376A, 376AB,
376B, 376C, 376D, 376DA, 376DB or 376E from the date on which the information
was recorded by the officer in charge of the police station.

(2)(i) As soon as it is completed, the officer in charge of the police station shall
forward to a Magistrate empowered to take cognizance of the offence on a police
report, a report in the form prescribed by the State Government, stating--

(a) the names of the parties;

(b) the nature of the information;

(c) the names of the persons who appear to be acquainted with the circumstances of
the case;

(d) whether any offence appears to have been committed and, if so, by whom;

(e) whether the accused has been arrested;

(f) whether he has been released on his bond and, if so, whether with or without
sureties;

(g) whether he has been forwarded in custody under section 170.

(h) whether the report of medical examination of the woman has been attached
where investigation relates to an offence under sections 376, 376A, 376AB, 376B,
376C, 376D, 376DA, 376DB or section 376E of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).

(ii) The officer shall also communicate, in such manner as may be prescribed by the
State Government, the action taken by him, to the person, if any, by whom the

9

State Through Central Bureau Of ... vs Hemendhra Reddy Etc. Etc. on 28 April, 2023

information relating to the commission of the offence was first given.

(3) Where a superior officer of police has been appointed under section 158, the
report shall, in any case in which the State Government by general or special order so
directs, be submitted through that officer, and he may, pending the orders of the
Magistrate, direct the officer in charge of the police station to make further
investigation.

(4) Whenever it appears from a report forwarded under this section that the accused
has been released on his bond, the Magistrate shall make such order for the discharge
of such bond or otherwise as he thinks fit.

(5) When such report is in respect of a case to which section 170 applies, the police
officer shall forward to the Magistrate along with the report—

(a) all documents or relevant extracts thereof on which the prosecution proposes to
rely other than those already sent to the Magistrate during investigation;

(b) the statements recorded under section 161 of all the persons whom the
prosecution proposes to examine as its witnesses. (6) If the police officer is of opinion
that any part of any such statement is not relevant to the subject-matter of the
proceedings or that its disclosure to the accused is not essential in the interests of
justice and is inexpedient in the public interest, he shall indicate that part of the
statement and append a note requesting the Magistrate to exclude that part from the
copies to be granted to the accused and stating his reasons for making such request.
(7) Where the police officer investigating the case finds it convenient so to do, he may
furnish to the accused copies of all or any of the documents referred to in sub-section
(5). (8) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude further investigation in
respect of an offence after a report under sub-

section (2) has been forwarded to the Magistrate and, where upon such investigation, the officer in
charge of the police station obtains further evidence, oral or documentary, he shall forward to the
Magistrate a further report or reports regarding such evidence in the form prescribed; and the
provisions of sub-

sections (2) to (6) shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to such report or reports as they apply in
relation to a report forwarded under sub-section (2).” (Emphasis supplied)

39. Thus, Section 169 of the CrPC is silent in making report to the Magistrate, however the
Investigating Officer is under an obligation to submit its report to the Magistrate under Section 173
of the CrPC. Thus, though Section 169 of the CrPC does not contemplate making a report, it
contemplates of obtaining a bond with or without sureties from the accused to appear if and when so
required before the Magistrate empowered to take cognizance of the offence on a police report and
such report is contemplated under Section 173 of the CrPC. Clauses (d) and (f) of Section 173(2)(i) of

10

State Through Central Bureau Of ... vs Hemendhra Reddy Etc. Etc. on 28 April, 2023

the CrPC read as under:

“173(2)(i) xxx xxx

(d) whether any offence appears to have been committed and, if so, by whom;

xxx xxx xxx

(f) whether he has been released on his bond and, if so, whether with or without
sureties”.

40. Section 173(8) of the CrPC deals with further investigation and supplementary report. In the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (for short, ‘the Old Code’), there was no identical provision to that
of Section 173(8) of the CrPC. The same is a newly added provision in the CrPC. It was added on the
recommendation of the Law Commission in its 41st Report that the right of the police to make
further investigation should be statutorily affirmed.

41. In the Old Code, there was no provision prescribing the procedure to be followed by the police
for fresh investigation, when fresh facts came to light, upon the submission of the police report and
subsequent to taking cognizance by the Magistrate. There was, also, no express provision
prohibiting further investigation by the police.

42. The said omission was sought to be supplied for the first time by a two- Judge Bench of the
Madras High Court as early as in 1919 in Divakar Singh v. A. Ramamurthi Naidu reported in AIR
1919 Mad 751, where it was observed that:

" Another contention is put forward that when a report of investigation has been sent
in under Section 173 of the Cr PC, the police has no further powers of investigation,
but this argument may be briefly met by the remark that the number of investigations
into a crime is not limited by law and that when one has been completed another may
be begun on further information received.".

43. After recognition of the right of the police to make repeated investigations under the Old Code in
Divakar’s case, a three-Judge Bench of this Court in H.N. Rishbud v. State of Delhi reported in AIR
1955 SC 196, held that:-

“It does not follow, however, that the invalidity of the investigation is to be
completely ignored by the Court during trial. When the breach of such a mandatory
provision is brought to the knowledge of the Court at a sufficiently early stage, the
Court, while not declining cognizance, will have to take the necessary steps to get the
illegality cured and the defect rectified, by ordering such reinvestigation as the
circumstances of an individual case may call for. Such a course is not altogether
outside the contemplation of the scheme of the Code as appears from Section 202
under which a Magistrate taking cognizance on a complaint can order investigation

11

State Through Central Bureau Of ... vs Hemendhra Reddy Etc. Etc. on 28 April, 2023

by the police. Nor can it be said that the adoption of such a course is outside the
scope of the inherent powers of the Special Judge, who for purposes of procedure at
the trial is virtually in the position of a Magistrate trying a warrant case.”

44. Some High Courts were also of the view that with the submission of a chargesheet under Section
173, the power of the police to investigate into an offence comes to an end and the Magistrate's
cognizance of the offence started. For instance, in State v. Mehar Singh and Ors. reported in 1974 Crl
LJ 970, a Full Bench of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana held that the police became functus
officio once the Court took cognizance of an offence on the filing of a chargesheet by the police and
thereafter, further investigation by the police was not permissible.

45. It was, however, observed that in light of the decision in H.N. Rishbud (supra), it would be open
to the Magistrate to ‘suspend cognizance’ and direct the police to make further investigation into the
case and submit a report.

46. The said inconsistency and incongruity in the judicial decisions was recognized by the Law
Commission in its 41st Report (under Clause 14.23) and it was recommended that the right of the
police to make further investigation should be statutorily affirmed. Accordingly, in the CrPC, Section
173(8), came to be introduced, which statutorily empowered the police to undertake further
investigation after submission of the final report under Section 173(2) of the CrPC. Conspicuously, it
still did not confer such powers on the Magistrate to direct further and/or fresh investigation after
submission of the final report by the Police.

47. Section 173(8) of the CrPC may be fragmented or dissected as under:

(1) Further investigation can be done in respect of an offence wherein report under
Section 173(2) has been forwarded to the Magistrate; and (2) During further
investigation, the officer-in-charge has power

(a) to obtain further evidence, oral or documentary,

(b) to forward to the Magistrate, a further report or reports regarding such evidence
in the form prescribed, (3) The provisions of sub sections (2) to (6) shall, as far as
may be, apply in relation to such further report or reports.

Sub section (1) of Section 173 of the CrPC provides that every investigation by the police shall be
completed without unnecessary delay and sub section (2) of Section 173 of the CrPC provides that as
soon as such investigation is completed, the officer in charge of the police station shall forward to a
Magistrate empowered to take cognizance of the offence on a police report, a report in the form
prescribed by the State Government.

Under sub section (2) of the Section 173 of the CrPC, a police report (chargesheet or Challan) is filed
by the police after investigation is complete.

12

State Through Central Bureau Of ... vs Hemendhra Reddy Etc. Etc. on 28 April, 2023

Sub section (8) of Section 173 of the CrPC, states that nothing in the section shall be deemed to
preclude any further investigation in respect of an offence after a report under sub-section (2) has
been forwarded to the Magistrate.

Thus, even where chargesheet or Challan has been filed by the police under sub section (2) of
Section 173 of the CrPC, the police can undertake further investigation in respect of an offence under
sub section (8) of Section 173 of the CrPC. (Reference: Article titled “Different Aspects of Section
173(8) of the CrPC” by D. Nageswara Rao, Prl.JCJ, Manthani.) What is the meaning of the term
“Further Investigation”?

48. In Rama Chaudhary Vs. State of Bihar reported in (2009) 6 SCC 346, this Court held that,
“further investigation within the meaning of provision of Section 173(8) CrPC is additional; more; or
supplemental. “Further investigation”, therefore, is the continuation of the earlier investigation and
not a fresh investigation or reinvestigation to be started ab initio wiping out the earlier investigation
altogether.” What are the alternatives before a Magistrate when a “Final Report” is filed?

49. Wherever a final report forwarded by the Investigating Officer to a Magistrate under Section
173(2)(i) of the CrPC is placed before him, several situations may arise. The report may conclude
that an offence appears to have been committed by a particular person and persons, and in such a
case the Magistrate may either:

(1) accept the report and take cognizance of offence and issue process, (2) may
disagree with the report and drop the proceeding or may take cognizance on the basis
of report/material submitted by the investigation officer, (3) may direct further
investigation under Section 156(3) and require police to make a report as per Section
173(8) of the CrPC.

(4) may treat the protest complaint as a complaint, and proceed under Sections 200
and 202 of the CrPC.

What is the prime consideration for “Further Investigation”?

50. As observed in Hasanbhai Valibhai Qureshi v. State of Gujarat and Others reported in (2004) 5
SCC 347, the prime consideration for further investigation is to arrive at the truth and do real and
substantial justice. The hands of investigating agency for further investigation should not be tied
down on the ground of mere delay. In other words, the mere fact that there may be further delay in
concluding the trial should not stand in the way of further investigation if that would help the court
in arriving at the truth and do real and substantial and effective justice.

Difference between “Further Investigation” and “Re-investigation”

51. There is no doubt that “further investigation” and “re-investigation” stand altogether on a
different footing. In Ramchandran v. R. Udhayakumar and Others reported in (2008) 5 SCC 413,
this Court has explained the fine distinction between the two relying on its earlier decision in K.

13

State Through Central Bureau Of ... vs Hemendhra Reddy Etc. Etc. on 28 April, 2023

Chandrasekhar v. State of Kerala and Others reported in (1998) 5 SCC 223. We quote paras 7 and 8
as under:

“7. At this juncture it would be necessary to take note of Section 173 of the Code.
From a plain reading of the above section it is evident that even after completion of
investigation under sub-section (2) of Section 173 of the Code, the police has right to
further investigate under sub-section (8), but not fresh investigation or
reinvestigation. This was highlighted by this Court in K. Chandrasekhar v. State of
Kerala [(1998) 5 SCC 223 : 1998 SCC (Cri) 1291] . It was, inter alia, observed as
follows : (SCC p. 237, para 24) “24. The dictionary meaning of ‘further’ (when used as
an adjective) is ‘additional; more; supplemental’. ‘Further’ investigation therefore is
the continuation of the earlier investigation and not a fresh investigation or
reinvestigation to be started ab initio wiping out the earlier investigation altogether.
In drawing this conclusion we have also drawn inspiration from the fact that
sub-section (8) clearly envisages that on completion of further investigation the
investigating agency has to forward to the Magistrate a ‘further’ report or
reports—and not fresh report or reports—regarding the ‘further’ evidence obtained
during such investigation.”

8. In view of the position of law as indicated above, the directions of the High Court
for reinvestigation or fresh investigation are clearly indefensible. We, therefore,
direct that instead of fresh investigation there can be further investigation if required
under Section 173(8) of the Code. The same can be done by CB CID as directed by the
High Court.” Position of Law on the subject of “Further Investigation”

52. In King-Emperor v. Khwaja Nazir Ahmad, Vol. LXXI Indian Appeals, 203 the Privy Council
delineated the powers of the police to investigate. It was held thus:

“Just as it is essential that every one accused of a crime should have free access to a
Court of justice, so that he may be duly acquitted if found not guilty of the offence
with which he is charged, so it is of the utmost importance that the judiciary should
not interfere with the police in matters which are within their province and into
which the law imposes on them the duty of inquiry. In India, as has been shown,
there is a statutory right on the part of the police to investigate the circumstances of
an alleged cognizable crime without requiring any authority from the judicial
authorities, and it would, as their Lordships think, be an unfortunate result if it
should be held possible to interfere with those statutory rules by an exercise of the
inherent jurisdiction of the Court. The functions of the judiciary and the police are
complementary, not overlapping, and the combination of individual liberty with a
due observance of law and order is only to be obtained by leaving each to exercise its
own function, always, of course, subject to the right of the Courts to intervene in an
appropriate case when moved under Section 491 of the Criminal Procedure Code to
give directions in the nature of Habeas Corpus.”

14

State Through Central Bureau Of ... vs Hemendhra Reddy Etc. Etc. on 28 April, 2023

53. In Sri Bhagwan Samardha Sreepada Vallabha Venkata Vishwanandha Maharaj v.
State of A.P. and Others reported in (1999) 5 SCC 740, it was held in paras 10 and 11:

“10. Power of the police to conduct further investigation, after laying final report, is
recognised under Section 173(8) of the Code of Criminal Procedure. Even after the
court took cognizance of any offence on the strength of the police report first
submitted, it is open to the police to conduct further investigation. This has been so
stated by this Court in Ram Lal Narang v. State (Delhi Admn.) [(1979) 2 SCC 322 :
1979 SCC (Cri) 479 : AIR 1979 SC 1791] . The only rider provided by the aforesaid
decision is that it would be desirable that the police should inform the court and seek
formal permission to make further investigation.

11. In such a situation the power of the court to direct the police to conduct further investigation
cannot have any inhibition. There is nothing in Section 173(8) to suggest that the court is obliged to
hear the accused before any such direction is made. Casting of any such obligation on the court
would only result in encumbering the court with the burden of searching for all the potential
accused to be afforded with the opportunity of being heard. As the law does not require it, we would
not burden the Magistrate with such an obligation.”

54. In Hemant Dhasmana v. Central Bureau of Investigation and Another reported in (2001) 7 SCC
536, it was held:

“15. When the report is filed under the sub-section the Magistrate (in this case the
Special Judge) has to deal with it by bestowing his judicial consideration. If the report
is to the effect that the allegations in the original complaint were found true in the
investigation, or that some other accused and/or some other offences were also
detected, the court has to decide whether cognizance of the offences should be taken
or not on the strength of that report. We do not think that it is necessary for us to vex
our mind, in this case, regarding that aspect when the report points to the offences
committed by some persons. But when the report is against the allegations contained
in the complaint and concluded that no offence has been committed by any person, it
is open to the court to accept the report after hearing the complainant at whose
behest the investigation had commenced. If the court feels on a perusal of such a
report that the alleged offences have in fact been committed by some persons the
court has the power to ignore the contrary conclusions made by the investigating
officer in the final report. Then it is open to the court to independently apply its mind
to the facts emerging therefrom and it can even take cognizance of the offences which
appear to it to have been committed, in exercise of its power under Section 190(1)(b)
of the Code. The third option is the one adumbrated in Section 173(8) of the Code. …

16. Although the said sub-section does not, in specific terms, mention about the
powers of the court to order further investigation, the power of the police to conduct
further investigation envisaged therein can be triggered into motion at the instance of
the court. When any such order is passed by a court which has the jurisdiction to do

15

State Through Central Bureau Of ... vs Hemendhra Reddy Etc. Etc. on 28 April, 2023

so, it would not be a proper exercise of revisional powers to interfere therewith
because the further investigation would only be for the ends of justice. …”

55. In Union Public Service Commission v. S. Papaiah and Others reported in (1997) 7 SCC 614, it
was held in Para 13:

“The Magistrate could, thus in exercise of the powers under Section 173(8) CrPC
direct the CBI to “further investigate” the case and collect further evidence keeping in
view the objections raised by the appellant to the investigation and the “new” report
to be submitted by the investigating officer would be governed by sub-sections (2) to
(6) of Section 173 CrPC.”.

56. This Court in Hasanbhai (supra) held thus:

“12. Sub-section (8) of Section 173 of the Code permits further investigation, and
even dehors any direction from the court as such, it is open to the police to conduct
proper investigation, even after the court took cognisance of any offence on the
strength of a police report earlier submitted. All the more so, if as in this case, the
Head of the Police Department also was not satisfied of the propriety or the manner
and nature of investigation already conducted.

13. In Ram Lal Narang v. State (Delhi Admn.) [(1979) 2 SCC 322 : 1979 SCC (Cri) 479
: AIR 1979 SC 1791] it was observed by this Court that further investigation is not
altogether ruled out merely because cognisance has been taken by the court.

When defective investigation comes to light during course of trial, it may be cured by further
investigation, if circumstances so permitted. It would ordinarily be desirable and all the more so in
this case, that the police should inform the court and seek formal permission to make further
investigation when fresh facts come to light instead of being silent over the matter keeping in view
only the need for an early trial since an effective trial for real or actual offences found during course
of proper investigation is as much relevant, desirable and necessary as an expeditious disposal of the
matter by the courts. In view of the aforesaid position in law, if there is necessity for further
investigation, the same can certainly be done as prescribed by law. The mere fact that there may be
further delay in concluding the trial should not stand in the way of further investigation if that
would help the court in arriving at the truth and do real and substantial as well as effective justice. “

57. In Ram Lal Narang v. State (Delhi Administration) reported in (1979) 2 SCC 322, this Court held
thus:

“21. As observed by us earlier, there was no provision in the CrPC, 1898 which,
expressly or by necessary implication, barred the right of the police to further
investigate after cognizance of the case had been taken by the Magistrate.

16

State Through Central Bureau Of ... vs Hemendhra Reddy Etc. Etc. on 28 April, 2023

Neither Section 173 nor Section 190 lead us to hold that the power of the police to
further investigate was exhausted by the Magistrate taking cognizance of the offence.
Practice, convenience and preponderance of authority, permitted repeated
investigations on discovery of fresh facts. In our view, notwithstanding that a
Magistrate had taken cognizance of the offence upon a police report submitted under
Section 173 of the 1898 Code, the right of the police to further investigate was not
exhausted and the police could exercise such right as often as necessary when fresh
information came to light. Where the police desired to make a further investigation,
the police could express their regard and respect for the court by seeking its formal
permission to make further investigation.”

58. In State of Andhra Pradesh v. A.S. Peter reported in (2008) 2 SCC 383, this Court
held thus:

“9. Indisputably, the law does not mandate taking of prior permission from the
Magistrate for further investigation. Carrying out of a further investigation even after
filing of the charge-sheet is a statutory right of the police. A distinction also exists
between further investigation and reinvestigation. Whereas reinvestigation without
prior permission is necessarily forbidden, further investigation is not.”

59. In Nirmal Singh Kahlon v. State of Punjab and Others reported in (2009) 1 SCC
441, this Court held as follows:

“68. An order of further investigation in terms of Section 173(8) of the Code by the
State in exercise of its jurisdiction under Section 36 thereof stands on a different
footing. The power of the investigating officer to make further investigation in
exercise of its statutory jurisdiction under Section 173(8) of the Code and at the
instance of the State having regard to Section 36 thereof read with Section 3 of the
Police Act, 1861 should be considered in different contexts. Section 173(8) of the Code
is an enabling provision. Only when cognizance of an offence is taken, the learned
Magistrate may have some say. But, the restriction imposed by judicial legislation is
merely for the purpose of upholding the independence and impartiality of the
judiciary. It is one thing to say that the court will have supervisory jurisdiction to
ensure a fair investigation, as has been observed by a Bench of this Court in Sakiri
Vasu v. State of U.P. [(2008) 2 SCC 409 : (2008) 1 SCC (Cri) 440] , correctness
whereof is open to question, but it is another thing to say that the investigating officer
will have no jurisdiction whatsoever to make any further investigation without the
express permission of the Magistrate.”

60. In Vinay Tyagi (supra), it was held that “further investigation” in terms of Section
173(8) of the CrPC can be made in a situation where the investigating officer obtains
further oral or documentary evidence after the final report has been filed before the
Court. The report on such further investigation under Section 173(8) of the CrPC can
be termed as a supplementary report.

17

State Through Central Bureau Of ... vs Hemendhra Reddy Etc. Etc. on 28 April, 2023

61. In Vinay Tyagi (supra), it was held that:

“40.2. A Magistrate has the power to direct “further investigation” after filing of a
police report in terms of Section 173(6) of the Code.

Xxx xxx xxx 40.4. Neither the scheme of the Code nor any specific provision therein
bars exercise of such jurisdiction by the Magistrate.

The language of Section 173(2) cannot be construed so restrictively as to deprive the Magistrate of
such powers particularly in face of the provisions of Section 156(3) and the language of Section
173(8) itself. In fact, such power would have to be read into the language of Section 173(8).

40.5. The Code is a procedural document, thus, it must receive a construction which would advance
the cause of justice and legislative object sought to be achieved. It does not stand to reason that the
legislature provided power of further investigation to the police even after filing a report, but
intended to curtail the power of the court to the extent that even where the facts of the case and the
ends of justice demand, the court can still not direct the investigating agency to conduct further
investigation which it could do on its own. 40.6. It has been a procedure of propriety that the police
has to seek permission of the court to continue “further investigation” and file supplementary
charge-sheet. …”

62. In Vinubhai (supra); a three-Judge Bench of this Court has endeavoured to lay at rest the
controversy enveloping the evasive issue of further investigation directed by the Magistrate. This
Court, speaking through Justice R.F. Nariman, has laid down at Para 38 that:

“ To say that a fair and just investigation would lead to the conclusion that the police
retain the power, subject, of course, to the Magistrate's nod under Section 173(8) to
further investigate an offence till charges are framed, but that the supervisory
jurisdiction of the Magistrate suddenly ceases midway through the pre-trial
proceedings, would amount to a travesty of justice, as certain cases may cry out for
further investigation so that an innocent person is not wrongly arraigned as an
accused or that a prima facie guilty person is not so left out. There is no warrant for
such a narrow and restrictive view of the powers of the Magistrate, particularly when
such powers are traceable to Section 156(3) read with Section 156(1), Section 2(h)
and Section 173(8) CrPC, as has been noticed hereinabove, and would be available at
all stages of the progress of a criminal case before the trial actually commences. It
would also be in the interest of justice that this power be exercised suo motu by the
Magistrate himself, depending on the facts of each case. Whether further
investigation should or should not be ordered is within the discretion of the learned
Magistrate who will exercise such discretion on the facts of each case and in
accordance with law.” It was also clarified that, “The “investigation” spoken of in
Section 156(3) would embrace the entire process, which begins with the collection of
evidence and continues until charges are framed by the Court, at which stage the trial
can be said to have begun.”.

18

State Through Central Bureau Of ... vs Hemendhra Reddy Etc. Etc. on 28 April, 2023

63. Thus, this Court, in conclusion, observed that, “when Section 156(3) states that a Magistrate
empowered under Section 190 may order “such an investigation”, such Magistrate may also order
further investigation under Section 173(8), regard being had to the definition of “investigation”
contained in Section 2(h).”

64. Thus, in view of the law laid down by this Court in the various decisions cited hereinabove, it is
well settled that sub section (8) of Section 173 of the CrPC permits further investigation, and even
dehors any direction from the court, it is open to the police to conduct proper investigation, even
after the court takes cognizance of any offence on the strength of a police report earlier submitted.

65. However, the question before this Court is whether sub section (8) of Section 173 of the CrPC
permits further investigation after the Magistrate has accepted a final report (closure report) under
sub section (2) of Section 173 of the CrPC. The contention raised on behalf of the accused persons is
that acceptance of a closure report would terminate the proceedings finally so as to bar the
investigating agency from carrying out any further investigation in connection with the offence.

66. The learned counsel appearing for the accused persons submitted that an order accepting the
closure report under Section 190(1)(c) of the CrPC is a judicial order and not an administrative
order. Relying on the decision of this Court in Kamlapati Trivedi v. State of West Bengal reported in
1980 (2) SCC 91, it was submitted that when a final report of the police is submitted to the
Magistrate and the Magistrate passes an order (a) agreeing with the report of the police and filing
proceedings; or (b) not agreeing with the police report and holding that the evidence is sufficient to
justify the forwarding of the accused to the Magistrate and takes cognizance of the offence
complained of, such order is a judicial order.

67. We are at one with the aforesaid submission canvassed on behalf of the accused persons.
However, this is not going to make any difference. What is necessary to be examined is as to whether
an order passed under Section 190(1) of the CrPC accepting a final report being a judicial order
would bar further investigation by the police or the CBI as in the present case, in exercise of the
statutory powers under chapter XII of the CrPC?

68. In State of Rajasthan v. Aruna Devi and Others reported in (1995) 1 SCC 1, a complaint was filed
in the Court of Munsif and Judicial Magistrate, First Class, Bilara, against the respondents under
various sections of the IPC. The gravamen of the allegation was that the respondents had, in
pursuance of a conspiracy, transferred some land on the strength of a special power of attorney
bearing forged signature. The Magistrate, after perusal of the complaint, directed an investigation to
be made as contemplated by Section 156(3) of the CrPC. A case was registered thereafter, by the
police and a final report was submitted on 18.07.1981 stating that complaint was false. The report
came to be accepted by the Magistrate on 23.09.1981. It, however, so happened that the
Superintendent of Police had independently ordered further investigation on 24.09.1981 and a
challan came to be filed by police against the respondents, inter alia, under Sections 420 and 467 of
the IPC. The Magistrate took cognizance on 25.06.1984. A challenge was made to this act of the
Magistrate before Sessions Judge, Jodhpur, who dismissed the revision. On further approach to the
High Court, the revision was allowed and the order of cognizance was set aside. The State came in

19

State Through Central Bureau Of ... vs Hemendhra Reddy Etc. Etc. on 28 April, 2023

appeal under Article 136 of the Constitution.

69. This Court observed in paras 3 and 4 respectively as under:

3. A perusal of the impugned judgment of the High Court shows that it took the view
that the Magistrate had no jurisdiction to take cognizance after the final report
submitted by police had been once accepted. Shri Gupta, appearing for the appellant,
contends that this view is erroneous in law inasmuch as Section 173(8) of the Code
permits further investigation in respect of an offence after a report under sub-section
(2) has been submitted.

Sub-section (8) also visualises forwarding of another report to the Magistrate. Further investigation
had thus legal sanction and if after such further investigation a report is submitted that an offence
was committed, it would be open to the Magistrate to take cognizance of the same on his being
satisfied in this regard.

4. Shri Francis for the respondents, however, contends that the order of the Magistrate taking
cognizance pursuant to filing of further report amounted to entertaining second complaint which is
not permissible in law. To substantiate the legal submission, we have been first referred to Pramatha
Nath Taluqdar v. Saroj Ranjan Sarkar [1962 Supp (2) SCR 297 : AIR 1962 SC 876 :

(1962) 1 Cri LJ 770] , in which a three-Judge Bench of this Court dealt with this
aspect. A perusal of the judgment of the majority shows that it took the view that
dismissal of a complaint under Section 203 of the Code is no bar to the entertainment
of a second complaint on the same facts; but the same could be done only in
exceptional circumstances some of which have been illustrated in the judgment.
Further observation in this regard is that a fresh complaint can be entertained, inter
alia, when fresh evidence comes forward. In the present case, this is precisely what
had happened, as on further investigation being made, fresh materials came to light
which led to the filing of further report stating that a case had been made out.

The aforesaid decision of this Court has been rightly referred to and relied upon by the High Court
in its first order dated 11.09.2014.

70. This Court in K. Chandrasekhar (supra) was considering a case, where on the complaint of a
Police Inspector, a case was registered by the Kerala Police against the appellants therein for the
offences punishable under Sections 3 and 4 respectively of the Official Secrets Act, 1923 read with
Section 34 IPC on the allegation that in collusion with some Indians and foreigners they had
committed acts prejudicial to the safety and sovereignty of India. During the investigation, certain
other persons (appellants in accompanying appeals) were arrested. Thereafter, a DIG of Police, who
was the head of the team conducting the investigation, recommended the case for being investigated
by the CBI. Pursuant to such recommendation, the Government of Kerala by a notification dated
02.12.1994 accorded its consent under Section 6 of the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946
(for short, ‘the Act’) for further investigation of the case by the CBI. Accordingly, the CBI took up the

20

State Through Central Bureau Of ... vs Hemendhra Reddy Etc. Etc. on 28 April, 2023

investigation. After completion of the investigation, on 16.04.1996, the CBI filed its report in the
final form under Section 173(2) of the CrPC, stating that the charges were not proved and were false.
Accepting the report, the Magistrate discharged the accused-appellants. Thereafter, on 27.6.1996,
the Government of Kerala issued a notification withdrawing the consent earlier given to the CBI to
investigate the said case. The object of the said notification was to enable a reinvestigation of the
case by a team of State Police Officers. By a mandatory notification dated 08.07.1996, the words
“reinvestigation of the case” were substituted by the words “further investigation of the case”. The
State Government notification dated 27.6.1996 (as amended) was upheld by the High Court. This
Court held that, from a plain reading of Section 173 of the CrPC, it is evident that even after
submission of police report under sub section (2) on completion of investigation, the police has a
right of “further” investigation under sub section (8), but not “fresh investigation” or
“reinvestigation”. The dictionary meaning of “further” (when used as an adjective) is “additional;
more; supplemental”. “Further” investigation, therefore, is the continuation of the earlier
investigation and not a fresh investigation or reinvestigation to be started ab initio wiping out the
earlier investigation altogether. The Court drew inspiration from the fact that sub section (8) clearly
envisages that on completion of further investigation, the investigating agency has to forward to the
Magistrate a “further” report or reports - and not fresh report or reports - regarding the “further”
evidence obtained during such investigation. The Court held that once it is accepted that an
investigation undertaken by CBI pursuant to a consent granted under Section 6 of the Act is to be
completed, notwithstanding withdrawal of the consent, and that “further investigation” is a
continuation of such investigation which culminates in a further police report under Section 173(8),
it necessarily means that withdrawal of consent in the said case would not entitle the State Police to
further investigate into the case. However, the Court further observed thus: “To put it differently, if
any further investigation is to be made, it is the CBI alone which can do so, for it was entrusted to
investigate into the case by the State Government.” (Emphasis supplied). Thus, what was held by the
Court was that after submission of report under Section 173(2) Cr.P.C. reinvestigation or fresh
investigation is not permissible. However, it has been expressly observed that if any further
investigation is to be made, it is the CBI alone which can do so. In other words, further investigation
could be carried out, but that the same could be done by the CBI alone as it was entrusted to
investigate into the case by the State Government and had carried out the investigation and
submitted final report in connection therewith.

71. In S. Papaiah (supra) on a complaint made by the UPSC, investigation had been carried out by
the CBI and final report was submitted under Section 173 of the CrPC before the Metropolitan
Magistrate, before whom the first information report had been lodged, seeking closure of the case.
The CBI in spite of the request made to it by the UPSC did not inform about the filing of the final
report seeking closure of the case to the UPSC. The report was returned by the learned Metropolitan
Magistrate as notice had not been issued to the complainant by the CBI though the CBI had asserted
that it had informed the UPSC regarding the filing of the closure report. The final report was
resubmitted by the CBI to the Court of the Metropolitan Magistrate along with a copy of the notice
sent by the CBI to the UPSC. It appears that the report was again returned by the Metropolitan
Magistrate seeking proof of service of notice on the de facto complainant. While the proceedings of
submission of the final report were pending, the UPSC addressed a letter to the Director of CBI
pointing out that the investigation had not been carried out properly and that the filing of the

21

State Through Central Bureau Of ... vs Hemendhra Reddy Etc. Etc. on 28 April, 2023

closure report was not justified. While the UPSC was awaiting further communication from the CBI
in that behalf, the CBI resubmitted the closure report and the learned Metropolitan Magistrate
accepted the final report submitted by the CBI and closed the file without any opportunity being
provided to the UPSC to have its say. Upon receipt of communication of the order of the court
accepting the closure report, the UPSC filed a petition before the learned Metropolitan Magistrate
submitting that the complaint had not been properly investigated and that it had no notice about the
acceptance of the final report. The Court rejected the petition of the UPSC observing that it had
accepted the final report filed by the CBI on 16.03.1995, since the UPSC had not filed its objections
to the acceptance of the final report and as such, it could not complain. The Court also opined that
since an order accepting final report was a judicial order and not an administrative order, therefore,
it had no power to review such an order passed by it “rightly or wrongly” and that the UPSC could
file a revision petition seeking appropriate orders against the acceptance of the final report from the
revisional court. The revision petition filed by the UPSC was dismissed by the revisional court. In
appeal before this Court, it was held thus:

“13. The appellant brought the contents of communication dated 23.01.1995 to the
notice of the learned Metropolitan Magistrate through its Miscellaneous Petition No.
2040 of 1995 seeking ‘reinvestigation’ but the learned Magistrate, rejected the
petition vide order dated 4.11.1995, observing that ‘rightly or wrongly that court had
passed an order and it had no power to review the earlier order.’ Here, again the
learned Magistrate fell into an error. He was not required to ‘review’ his order. He
could have ordered ‘further investigation’ into the case. It appears that the learned
Metropolitan Magistrate overlooked the provisions of Section 173(8) which have been
enacted to take care of such like situations also.” (Emphasis supplied)

72. After referring to the provisions of Section 173(8) of the CrPC, the Court observed
that the Magistrate could, thus, in exercise of the powers under Section 173(8) of the
CrPC, direct the CBI to “further investigate” the case and collect further evidence
keeping in view the objections raised by the UPSC to the investigation and the “new”
report to be submitted by the Investigating Officer would be governed by
sub-sections (2) to (6) of Section 173 of the CrPC. The Court held that the learned
Magistrate failed to exercise the jurisdiction vested in him by law and his order dated
04.11.1995 cannot be sustained.

73. In the light of the aforesaid decision of the Supreme Court, it appears that though
the order passed by the learned Magistrate accepting a final report under Section 173
is a judicial order, there is no requirement for recalling, reviewing or quashing the
said order for carrying out further investigation under Section 173(8) of the CrPC. As
held by this Court in the said decision, the provisions of Section 173(8) of the CrPC
have been enacted to take care of such like situations also.

74. In N.P. Jharia v. State of M.P. reported in (2007) 7 SCC 358, proceedings had
been initiated against the appellant therein in connection with possession of
pecuniary resources disproportionate to his known sources of income. After

22

State Through Central Bureau Of ... vs Hemendhra Reddy Etc. Etc. on 28 April, 2023

investigation the Special Police Establishment (SPE) submitted a “final report” on
01.03.1990 informing the court that no offence was made out against the appellant.
The final report was accepted by the Special Judge on 17.04.1990. But on 01.07.1992,
the SPE submitted an application before the Special Judge, seeking permission for
further investigation. The Special Judge permitted further investigation. Thereafter,
the sanction for prosecution was obtained from the State Government on 01.03.1995.
The chargesheet was filed in the court on 24.07.1995. On behalf of the appellant, it
was urged that once the final report was submitted there is no scope for further
investigation. The Court held that so far as further investigation was concerned in the
background of Section 173(8) of the CrPC the plea was clearly untenable.

75. In Kari Choudhary v. Mst. Sita Devi and Others reported in (2002) 1 SCC 714, FIR
No. 135 was registered on the basis of a complaint lodged by Sita Devi and
investigation was commenced thereafter. During investigation, the police found that
the murder of the victim, Sugnia Devi was committed pursuant to a conspiracy
hatched by her mother-in-law Sita Devi and her daughters-in-law besides the others.
So, the police sent a report to the court on 30.11.1998 stating that the allegations in
FIR No. 135 were false. The police continued with the investigation after informing
the court that they had registered another FIR as FIR No. 208 of 1998. This Court,
inter alia, held thus:

“11. Learned counsel adopted an alternative contention that once the proceedings
initiated under FIR No. 135 ended in a final report the police had no authority to
register a second FIR and number it as FIR No. 208. Of course the legal position is
that there cannot be two FIRs against the same accused in respect of the same case.
But when there are rival versions in respect of the same episode, they would normally
take the shape of two different FIRs and investigation would be carried on under both
of them by the same investigating agency. Even that apart, the report submitted to
the court styling it as FIR No. 208 of 1998 need be considered as an information
submitted to the court regarding the new discovery made by the police during the
investigation that persons not named in FIR No. 135 are the real culprits. To quash
the proceedings merely on the ground that final report had been laid in FIR No. 135
is, to say the least, too technical. The ultimate object of every investigation is to find
out whether the offences alleged have been committed and, if so, who have
committed it.

12. Even otherwise, the investigating agency is not precluded from further
investigation in respect of an offence in spite of forwarding a report under
sub-section (2) of section 173 of a previous occasion. This is clear from Section 173(8)
of the Code.” (Emphasis supplied)

76. Thus, a conspectus of the aforesaid decisions of this Court rendered in cases
where final reports (closure reports) had already been submitted and accepted makes
the position of law very clear that even after the final report is laid before the

23

State Through Central Bureau Of ... vs Hemendhra Reddy Etc. Etc. on 28 April, 2023

Magistrate and is accepted, it is permissible for the investigating agency to carry out
further investigation in the case. In other words, there is no bar against conducting
further investigation under Section 173(8) of the CrPC after the final report
submitted under Section 173(2) of the CrPC has been accepted. It is also evident, that
prior to carrying out a further investigation under Section 173(8) of the CrPC, it is not
necessary for the Magistrate to review or recall the order accepting the final report.

77. We may summarise our final conclusion as under:

(i) Even after the final report is laid before the Magistrate and is accepted, it is
permissible for the investigating agency to carry out further investigation in the case.
In other words, there is no bar against conducting further investigation under Section
173(8) of the CrPC after the final report submitted under Section 173(2) of the CrPC
has been accepted.

(ii) Prior to carrying out further investigation under Section 173(8) of the CrPC it is
not necessary that the order accepting the final report should be reviewed, recalled or
quashed.

(iv) Further investigation is merely a continuation of the earlier investigation, hence
it cannot be said that the accused are being subjected to investigation twice over.
Moreover, investigation cannot be put at par with prosecution and punishment so as
to fall within the ambit of Clause (2) of Article 20 of the Constitution. The principle of
double jeopardy would, therefore, not be applicable to further investigation.

(v) There is nothing in the CrPC to suggest that the court is obliged to hear the
accused while considering an application for further investigation under Section
173(8) of the CrPC.

ONE DISTURBING PART OF THE PRESENT LITIGATION

78. While recording the facts in the earlier part of our judgment, we have made reference of the
order passed by a Co-ordinate Bench of the High Court dated 11.09.2014 in Crl. O.P. No. 6371 of
2014. All legal issues which we have discussed in the present judgment were looked into by the High
Court and by a reasoned order, the High Court took the view that it was permissible for the CBI to
undertake further investigation and the objections raised on behalf of the accused were not
sustainable in law. We quote some of the relevant observations made by the High Court in its order
dated 11.09.2014:

“5. In my opinion, on the facts and circumstances of the instant case, the above said
decisions are of no help to the petitioner. In the aforesaid decisions, the well settled
principle is restated that Section 173(8) of Cr.P.C enables an officer in charge of a
Police Station/CBI to carry on further investigation even after a report under Section
173(2) of Cr.P.C is submitted to the court. The power to further investigation, after

24

State Through Central Bureau Of ... vs Hemendhra Reddy Etc. Etc. on 28 April, 2023

filing of final report in court and even after the Magistrate has taken cognizance, is
available to the Police in view of the Section 173(8) of Cr.P.C. Further investigation,
therefore, is the continuation of the earlier investigation and not a fresh investigation
or reinvestigation to be started ab initio wiping out the earlier investigation
altogether. This is well settled in the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court reported
in 2013-5-SCC-762 (Tyagi Vs. Irshad Ali). The only rider is provided is that it would
be desirable that the Police should inform the Court and seek formal permission to
make further investigation as observed in Bhagwan Samardha Sreepada Vallabha
Venkata Vishwadaha Maharaj Vs. State of AP (AIR-1999-SC-2332).

6. Although sub section (8) of Section 173 of Cr.P.C does not, in specific terms, mention about the
powers of the court to order further investigation, the power of the police to conduct further
investigation envisaged therein can be triggered into motion at the instance of the court. Therefore,
acceptance of final report by Magistrate does not debar him from taking cognizance of the offence if
no further investigation fresh materials come to light. In such a situation, the power of the court to
direct the police to conduct further investigation cannot have any inhibition. There is nothing in
Section 173(8) of Cr.P.C to suggest that the court is obliged to hear the accused before any such
direction is made.

7. In the instant case, in the counter filed by the Respondent/CBI, it is specifically stated that in the
year 2013, CBI received certain information/materials warranting reopening of the investigation.
Accordingly, the Inspector of Police, CBI/ ACB has filed a petition in Crl. M.P.No.3833/2013 in
respect of the same First Information Report, stating that the prosecution is in possession of new
evidence to substantiate the allegation of possession of disproportionate assets to the known sources
of income against the accused persons. The said petition has been allowed by the learned Principal
Special Judge for CBI Cases, permitting further investigation.

8. In so far as the power of the Magistrate to direct further investigation is concerned, I may point
out her that the power of the Magistrate under Section 156(3) of the code to direct further
investigation is clearly an independent power and does not stand in conflict with the power of the
Police Officer. The power conferred upon the Magistrate under Section 156(3) of the code can be
exercised by the Magistrate even after submission of a report by the Investigating Officer, which
would mean that it would be open to the Magistrate not to accept the conclusion of the Investigating
Officer and direct further investigation. This provision does not, in any way, affect the power of the
Investigating Officer to further investigate the case even after submission of the report as provided
in sub section (8) of Section 173 of the Code. Therefore, considering all these provisions, in my view,
the Magistrate can order reopening of the investigation even after acceptance of the final report
"making closure report".

9. In the instant case, the learned Principal Special Judge for CBI Cases has passed the impugned
order on the petition filed by the Investigating Officer, Inspector, CBI/ACB. It is now clear that sub
section (8) of section 173 of Cr.P.C gives power to the Investigating Officer to reopen the
investigation in the case in which final report had been submitted earlier and after completing the
investigation fresh report has to be submitted before the learned Special Judge under sub section (2)

25

State Through Central Bureau Of ... vs Hemendhra Reddy Etc. Etc. on 28 April, 2023

of Section 173 of the Code. Of course, this can be done only on such fresh materials which did not
come to the knowledge of the Investigating Officer, while he was conducting the investigation and in
my view, exactly the same situation prevailed in this case.

11. The same view has also been taken in the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in State of
Rajasthan Vs. Aruna Devi and others (1995-SCC-Crl-1) wherein it was held that acceptance of final
report by Magistrate does not debar him from taking cognizance of the offence if on further
investigation fresh materials come to light.

12. Mr. N. Chandrasekaran, the learned Special Public Prosecutor has contended that there is no
legal bar to the reopening of the investigation of any case in which closure report has been
submitted if there are sufficient, cogent fresh materials to proceed against the accused persons. I
find all force in his submissions. Having considered the rival contentions of both the parties, I am of
the opinion that in view of the facts that the Inspector CBI/ACB has collected some fresh materials
connected with this case, which were not available to the Investigating Officer earlier, it cannot be
said that the learned Principal Special Judge for CBI cases had acted beyond its jurisdiction by
ordering reopening of the investigation of the case.

13. For the reasons stated above, I find full force in the contentions raised by the learned Special
Public Prosecutor for CBI Cases. I, therefore, do not find any illegality in the impugned order which
warrants any interference by this court.” (Emphasis supplied)

79. It goes without saying that the aforesaid judgment delivered by the learned Single Judge of the
High Court was very much binding to a Co- ordinate Bench when the Crl. O.P. Nos. 15873 and 11101
of 2015 respectively and Crl. O.P. No. 411 of 2016 were heard and decided. These are the matters,
which were filed by the accused persons seeking discharge from the criminal proceedings. We may
reproduce some of the observations made by the Co- ordinate Bench of the High Court in the
impugned order assailed before us:

“9. The legal point involved in the present criminal original petitions is as to whether
the concerned Magistrate is having power of granting fresh investigation, especially
after getting closure report and consequently accepting the same.

10. The Hon'ble Supreme Court, with regard to power of a Magistrate under section
173(8) of the code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, has made a threadbare discussion in
the decision reported in AIR 2015 SC 3566 (Chandra Babu alias Moses V. State
through the Inspector of Police and others). After making elaborate discussion, the
Hon'ble Supreme Court has culled out the powers of Magistrate under the said
Section like thus:

"Now, when the report forwarded by the officer in charge of a police station to the
Magistrate under sub-section (2)(i) of Section 173 comes up for consideration by the
Magistrate, one of two different situations may arise. The report may conclude that
an offence appears to have been committed by a particular person or persons and in

26

State Through Central Bureau Of ... vs Hemendhra Reddy Etc. Etc. on 28 April, 2023

such a case, the Magistrate may do one of three things: (1) he may accept the report
and take cognizance of the offence and issue process, or (2) he may disagree with the
report and drop the proceeding, or (3) he may direct further investigation under
sub-section (3) of section 156 and require the police to make a further report. The
report may on the other hand state that, in the opinion of the police, no offence
appears to have been committed and where such a report has been made, the
Magistrate again has an option to adopt one of three courses: (1) he may accept the
report and drop the proceeding, or (2) he may disagree with the report and taking the
view that there is sufficient ground for proceeding further, take cognizance of the
offence and issue process, or (3) he may direct further investigation to be made by the
police under sub-section (3) of section 156"

11. From a cursory reading of the observations made by the Hon'ble Supreme Court, it is discernible
that after getting a final report under section 173(2) of the said code, the concerned Magistrate is
having power, either to take cognizance or to direct the investigating agency to conduct further
investigation as per section 173(8) of the said code.

12. Even a mere reading of Section 173 of the Code and its sub- clauses, would get to show that after
getting a final report, the concerned Magistrate is having unfettered right of granting further
investigation as envisaged in sub-clause(s) of Section 173 of the said code.

13. But, the legal position involves in the present petitions is otherwise. The legal point is as to
whether after closure of final report, as well as First Information Report, whether the concerned
M a g i s t r a t e   i s   h a v i n g   p o w e r   t o   g r a n t   p e r m i s s i o n   e i t h e r   t o   c o n d u c t   f u r t h e r
investigation/re-investigation/de-novo investigation.

14. At this juncture, it would be condign to look into the real dictionary meaning of "further
investigation". The dictionary meaning of 'further' (when used as an adjective) is additional; more;
supplemental'. ‘Further’ Investigation therefore is the continuation of the earlier investigation and
not a fresh investigation or reinvestigation to be started ab initio wiping out the earlier investigation
altogether. Therefore, it is pellucid that for granting permission to conduct 'further investigation' an
investigation must be pending or to put it in short, some proceeding must be pending before the
concerned court. It is also a settled principle of law that after filing a final report under sub-clause
(2) of Section 173 of the said code, while matter is pending, the investigating officer can collect some
more materials so as to strengthen the accusation made against the concerned accused.

15. As adverted to earlier, in the instant case, the main contention of the petitioners is that already
investigation has been done against the accused 1 and 2 and a closure report has been filed before
the Principal Special Judge for CBI Cases, Chennai and the same has been accepted and
consequently, First Information Report has been dosed. Under the said circumstances, to grant
permission either to conduct 'further investigation' or 'reinvestigation' does not arise.

Xxx xxx xxx

27

State Through Central Bureau Of ... vs Hemendhra Reddy Etc. Etc. on 28 April, 2023

20. After lapse of four years from passing the order mentioned supra in the year 2013, the
respondent, as petitioner, has filed Crl.M.P.No.3833 of 2013, on the file of the Principals Special
Court for CBI Cases, Chennai, herein, it is prayed to permit the petitioner therein to re-open and
further investigation the above case.

Xxx xxx xxx

23. The learned Special Public Prosecutor has advanced his entire argument only on the basis of the
order passed in Criminal Original Petition No.6371 of 2014. In fact, at the time of passing the order
in Crl.O.P.No.6371 of 2014, the decision mentioned supra has not been brought to the knowledge of
this court. Under the said circumstances, this court has erroneously ratified the permission granted
by the Principal Special Judge for CBI cases, Chennai. Therefore, on the basis of the order passed, in
Crl.O.P.No.6371 of 2014 by this court, we cannot come to a conclusion that the order passed by the
Principal Special Judge for CBI Case, Chennai, is valid in law. Further, it has already been pointed
out that the said order has been passed even without power. Since the said order is totally alien to
law, the subsequent proceedings are also bad in law.

24. The present petitions have been filed praying to quash the final report filed in Calendar Case
No.13 of 2015. Since the permission granted to the respondent for conducting re-investigation or
further investigation by the Principal Special Judge for CBI Cases, Chennai is totally illegal and since
the subsequent proceedings are also entirely bad in law, it is needless to say that the final report
filed thereon is also both factually and legally not sustainable. Under the said circumstances, the
legal point raised on the side of the petitioner is really having subsisting force. On that score alone,
these petitions are liable to be allowed.” (Emphasis supplied)

80. Thus, one Co-ordinate Bench of the High Court, virtually sat in appeal over the judgment of
another Co-ordinate Bench and took a contrary view. The learned Single Judge says in his impugned
order that the High Court in its earlier order dated 11.09.2014 referred to above omitted to consider
the decision of this Court in the case of Vinay Tyagi (supra) and therefore, per incuriam whereas, the
decision of this Court in the case of Vinay Tyagi (supra) was very much looked into and has been
referred to in the order dated 11.09.2014. Thus, two contrary views have been taken by different
judges of equal strength of the High Court on the same subject and litigation.

81. We would like to extend a word of caution over here. While it is open to a learned Judge to differ
with a view of a Co-ordinate Bench the sequitur is to make a reference to a larger Bench on papers
being placed before the learned Chief Justice. The learned Judge cannot simply say "with due
respect, I do not agree to the ratio..." or “the decision is per incuriam as a binding judgment of the
Supreme Court has not been considered….” and proceed to take a contrary view as done in the
impugned order. Such an approach would result in conflicting opinions of Co-ordinate Benches,
resulting in judicial chaos and is, thus, improper. This is something atrocious and unacceptable.

82. We may remind the High Court of the observations made by this Court in Official Liquidator v.
Dayanand and Others reported in (2008) 10 SCC 1. In this decision, this Court has emphasised the
adherence to basics of judicial discipline and the need for predictability and a certainty in law. In

28

State Through Central Bureau Of ... vs Hemendhra Reddy Etc. Etc. on 28 April, 2023

that context, certain earlier judgments have been referred to as to whether one Bench of the Court
not following the view of another Co-ordinate Bench has been commented upon as under:

“78. There have been several instances of different Benches of the High Courts not
following the judgments/orders of coordinate and even larger Benches. In some
cases, the High Courts have gone to the extent of ignoring the law laid down by this
Court without any tangible reason. Likewise, there have been instances in which
smaller Benches of this Court have either ignored or bypassed the ratio of the
judgments of the larger Benches including the Constitution Benches. These cases are
illustrative of non-adherence to the rule of judicial discipline which is sine qua non
for sustaining the system. In Mahadeolal Kanodia v. Administrator General of W.B.
[AIR 1960 SC 936 :

(1960) 3 SCR 578] this Court observed : (AIR p. 941, para 19) “19. … If one thing is
more necessary in law than any other thing, it is the quality of certainty. That quality
would totally disappear if Judges of coordinate jurisdiction in a High Court start
overruling one another's decisions. If one Division Bench of a High Court is unable to
distinguish a previous decision of another Division Bench, and holding the view that
the earlier decision is wrong, itself gives effect to that view the result would be utter
confusion. The position would be equally bad where a Judge sitting singly in the High
Court is of opinion that the previous decision of another Single Judge on a question
of law is wrong and gives effect to that view instead of referring the matter to a larger
Bench. In such a case lawyers would not know how to advise their clients and all
courts subordinate to the High Court would find themselves in an embarrassing
position of having to choose between dissentient judgments of their own High Court.”
(emphasis added)

79. In Lala Shri Bhagwan v. Ram Chand [AIR 1965 SC 1767] Gajendragadkar, C.J.
observed : (AIR p. 1773, para 18) “18. … It is hardly necessary to emphasise that
considerations of judicial propriety and decorum require that if a learned Single
Judge hearing a matter is inclined to take the view that the earlier decisions of the
High Court, whether of a Division Bench or of a Single Judge, need to be
reconsidered, he should not embark upon that enquiry sitting as a Single Judge, but
should refer the matter to a Division Bench or, in a proper case, place the relevant
papers before the Chief Justice to enable him to constitute a larger Bench to examine
the question. That is the proper and traditional way to deal with such matters and it
is founded on healthy principles of judicial decorum and propriety.

It is to be regretted that the learned Single Judge departed from this traditional way in the present
case and chose to examine the question himself.” Xxx xxx xxx

82. In Vijay Laxmi Sadho (Dr.) v. Jagdish [(2001) 2 SCC 247] this Court considered whether the
learned Single Judge of the Madhya Pradesh High Court could ignore the judgment of a coordinate
Bench on the same issue and held : (SCC p. 256, para

29

State Through Central Bureau Of ... vs Hemendhra Reddy Etc. Etc. on 28 April, 2023

33) “33. As the learned Single Judge was not in agreement with the view expressed in Devilal case
[Devilal v. Kinkar Narmada Prasad, Election Petition No. 9 of 1980 (MP)] it would have been
proper, to maintain judicial discipline, to refer the matter to a larger Bench rather than to take a
different view. We note it with regret and distress that the said course was not followed. It is well
settled that if a Bench of coordinate jurisdiction disagrees with another Bench of coordinate
jurisdiction whether on the basis of ‘different arguments’ or otherwise, on a question of law, it is
appropriate that the matter be referred to a larger Bench for resolution of the issue rather than to
leave two conflicting judgments to operate, creating confusion. It is not proper to sacrifice certainty
of law. Judicial decorum, no less than legal propriety forms the basis of judicial procedure and it
must be respected at all costs.” Xxx xxx xxx

90. We are distressed to note that despite several pronouncements on the subject, there is
substantial increase in the number of cases involving violation of the basics of judicial discipline.
The learned Single Judges and Benches of the High Courts refuse to follow and accept the verdict
and law laid down by coordinate and even larger Benches by citing minor difference in the facts as
the ground for doing so. Therefore, it has become necessary to reiterate that disrespect to the
constitutional ethos and breach of discipline have grave impact on the credibility of judicial
institution and encourages chance litigation. It must be remembered that predictability and
certainty is an important hallmark of judicial jurisprudence developed in this country in the last six
decades and increase in the frequency of conflicting judgments of the superior judiciary will do
incalculable harm to the system inasmuch as the courts at the grass roots will not be able to decide
as to which of the judgments lay down the correct law and which one should be followed.

91. We may add that in our constitutional set-up every citizen is under a duty to abide by the
Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions. Those who have been entrusted with the task of
administering the system and operating various constituents of the State and who take oath to act in
accordance with the Constitution and uphold the same, have to set an example by exhibiting total
commitment to the constitutional ideals. This principle is required to be observed with greater
rigour by the members of judicial fraternity who have been bestowed with the power to adjudicate
upon important constitutional and legal issues and protect and preserve rights of the individuals
and society as a whole. Discipline is sine qua non for effective and efficient functioning of the
judicial system. If the courts command others to act in accordance with the provisions of the
Constitution and rule of law, it is not possible to countenance violation of the constitutional
principle by those who are required to lay down the law.” (Emphasis supplied) We need to add
nothing more in this context.

DELAY IN TRIAL ON ACCOUNT OF FURTHER INVESTIGATION

83. It was vehemently submitted on behalf of the accused that further investigation if permitted
after such a long lapse of time, would result in delay in trial. For years to come, the sword of
Damocles should not be kept hanging on the neck of the accused persons. In such circumstances, it
was argued before us that keeping in mind that this litigation is now almost more than a decade old,
it will not be in fitness of things to put the accused persons to trial.

30

State Through Central Bureau Of ... vs Hemendhra Reddy Etc. Etc. on 28 April, 2023

84. In the aforesaid context, we may only say that the general rule of criminal justice is that “a crime
never dies”. The principle is reflected in the well-known maxim nullum tempus aut locus occurrit
regi (lapse of time is no bar to Crown in proceeding against offenders). It is settled law that the
criminal offence is considered as a wrong against the State and the Society even though it has been
committed against an individual. Normally, in serious offences, prosecution is launched by the State
and a Court of law has no power to throw away prosecution solely on the ground of delay. Mere
delay in approaching a Court of law would not by itself afford a ground for dismissing the case.
Though it may be a relevant circumstance in reaching a final verdict. (See: Japani Sahoo v. Chandra
Sekhar Mohanty reported in (2007) 7 SCC 394.)

85. The following observations in Hasanbhai (supra), have been made by this Court in reference to
further investigation:

“13. ….if there is necessity for further investigation, the same can certainly be done as
prescribed by law. The mere fact that there may be further delay in concluding the
trial should not stand in the way of further investigation if that would help the court
in arriving at the truth and do real and substantial as well as effective justice. …”

86. Thus, the assurance of a fair trial is to be the first imperative in the dispensation of justice.
[Reference: Commissioner of Police, Delhi and Another v. Registrar, Delhi High Court, New Delhi
reported in (1996) 6 SCC 323]. The need for fair investigation has also been emphasized in Vinay
Tyagi (supra) where it was observed as under:

“48. What ultimately is the aim or significance of the expression “fair and proper
investigation” in criminal jurisprudence? It has a twin purpose: Firstly, the
investigation must be unbiased, honest, just and in accordance with law; secondly,
the entire emphasis on a fair investigation has to be to bring out the truth of the case
before the court of competent jurisdiction. ….”

87. Reference may also be placed on the decision in Pooja Pal v. Union of India and Others reported
in (2016) 3 SCC 135, where the fundamental rights enshrined under Article 21 of the Constitution of
India were discussed in the context of “speedy trial” juxtaposed to “fair trial” in the following
manner:

“83. A “speedy trial”, albeit the essence of the fundamental right to life entrenched in
Article 21 of the Constitution of India has a companion in concept in “fair trial”, both
being inalienable constituents of an adjudicative process, to culminate in a judicial
decision by a court of law as the final arbiter. There is indeed a qualitative difference
between right to speedy trial and fair trial so much so that denial of the former by
itself would not be prejudicial to the accused, when pitted against the imperative of
fair trial. As fundamentally, justice not only has to be done but also must appear to
have been done, the residuary jurisdiction of a court to direct further investigation or
reinvestigation by any impartial agency, probe by the State Police notwithstanding,
has to be essentially invoked if the statutory agency already in charge of the

31

State Through Central Bureau Of ... vs Hemendhra Reddy Etc. Etc. on 28 April, 2023

investigation appears to have been ineffective or is presumed or inferred to be not
being able to discharge its functions fairly, meaningfully and fructuously. As the
cause of justice has to reign supreme, a court of law cannot reduce itself to be a
resigned and a helpless spectator and with the foreseen consequences apparently
unjust, in the face of a faulty investigation, meekly complete the formalities to record
a foregone conclusion. Justice then would become a casualty. Though a court's
satisfaction of want of proper, fair, impartial and effective investigation eroding its
credence and reliability is the precondition for a direction for further investigation or
reinvestigation, submission of the charge-sheet ipso facto or the pendency of the trial
can by no means be a prohibitive impediment. The contextual facts and the attendant
circumstances have to be singularly evaluated and analysed to decide the needfulness
of further investigation or reinvestigation to unravel the truth and mete out justice to
the parties. The prime concern and the endeavour of the court of law is to secure
justice on the basis of true facts which ought to be unearthed through a committed,
resolved and a competent investigating agency.”.

(Emphasis supplied) NON-COMPLIANCE OF THE SECOND PROVISO TO
SECTION 17 OF THE 1988 ACT

88. The Second proviso to Section 17 of the 1988 Act directs that the offence referred to under clause
(e) of sub section (1) of Section 13 of the 1988 Act shall not be investigated without the order of a
police officer not below the rank of a Superintendent of Police. Thus, from the Second proviso, it is
clear that an investigation into the offence referred to in clause (e) of sub section (1) of Section 13 of
the 1988 Act even by any police officer enumerated in clauses

(a) to (c) or any Police Officer authorized in that behalf by the State Government as per the first
proviso, can be undertaken only by an order of the police officer not below the rank of
Superintendent of Police. Thus, the Second proviso is in the nature of additional safe guard for the
public servant who are accused of the offence punishable under Section 13(1)(e) of the 1988 Act
against an investigation by a police officer without the knowledge and consent of superior police
officer not below the rank of Superintendent of Police. A superior police officer of the rank of
Superintendent of Police or any officer higher in rank is required to pass an order before an
investigation, if any, for such offence is commenced. It is needless to point-out that, before directing
such investigation, the Superintendent of Police or an officer superior to him is required to apply his
mind to the information and come to an opinion that the investigation on such allegations is
necessary. The argument canvassed on behalf of the accused persons is that there is no such order of
the police officer not below the rank of Superintendent of Police in the chargesheet. We do not
propose to go into this issue in the present litigation. This issue was not even raised before the High
Court. Even otherwise, this is a question of fact and a matter of record. If it is the case of the accused
that there is no such order on record, the same may be pointed out to the trial court in the course of
the trial. It is for the trial court to verify the record, look into it and take an appropriate call on this
issue in accordance with law.

32

State Through Central Bureau Of ... vs Hemendhra Reddy Etc. Etc. on 28 April, 2023

89. In view of the aforesaid discussion, all the appeals filed by the CBI succeed and are hereby
allowed.

90. The impugned orders passed by the High Court are hereby set aside.

91. The Special Court shall now proceed further with the trial of the accused persons in accordance
with law.

92. Pending applications if any shall stand disposed of.

………..……………..J. (SURYA KANT) …….………………..J. (J.B. PARDIWALA) NEW DELHI;

APRIL 28, 2023.

33