Sundar @ Sundarrajan vs State By Inspector Of Police on 21 March, 2023

Sundar @ Sundarrajan vs State By Inspector Of Police on 21
March, 2023

Bench: Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha, Hima Kohli, Dhananjaya Y
Chandrachud

Reportable

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
INHERENT JURISDICTION

Review Petition (Crl.) Nos. 159-160 of 2013
IN
Criminal Appeal Nos. 300-301 of 2011

Sundar @ Sundarrajan                                           … Petitioner

versus

State by Inspector of Police                              … Respondent

JUDGMENT Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, CJI This judgment consists of the following sections:

A. Prologue – The impact of Mohd. Arif……………….…………………………3 B.
Background ................................................................................................... 8 C. Scope
of Review Jurisdiction ...................................................................... 9 D. Error
Apparent on the Face of the Record? ............................................. 10 D.1 Submissions
of Counsel......................................................................... 10 D.2. Analysis
.................................................................................................. 12 E. Sentencing &
Mitigation ............................................................................. 32 E.1. Lingering Doubt
Theory ......................................................................... 32 E.2. Sentencing & Mitigation
i n   t h e   T r i a l   C o u r t   a n d   t h e   A p p e l l a t e   C o u r t s   . . . . .   3 4   F .   C o n c l u s i o n
.................................................................................................. 50 PART A

1. The applicant is a convict on death row. He has moved this court for a fresh look at
his petition seeking a review of his conviction for the offence of murder and the

1

Sundar @ Sundarrajan vs State By Inspector Of Police on 21 March, 2023

award of the sentence of death. He does so on the basis of the decision of the
Constitution Bench in Mohd. Arif alias Ashfaq v Registrar, Supreme Court of India1.
In Mohd. Arif, this Court has held that review petitions arising from conviction and
the imposition of the sentence of death must be heard in open court and cannot be
disposed of by circulation. The Constitution Bench allowed a period of a month from
the date of judgment to petitioners whose applications seeking review of the
judgment of this Court confirming the award of the sentence of death were rejected
by circulation, where the sentence was yet to be executed.

A. Prologue – The impact of Mohd. Arif

2. In Mohd. Arif, this Court took note of the irreversible nature of the death penalty and of the
possibility of two judicial minds reaching differing conclusions on the question of a case being
appropriate for the award of the death penalty. The judgment of the majority allowed the right to
oral hearing in review for cases involving death penalty:

29. […] death sentence cases are a distinct category of cases altogether. Quite apart
from Article 134 of the Constitution granting an automatic right of appeal to the
Supreme Court in all death sentence cases, and apart from death sentence being
granted only in the rarest of rare cases, two factors have impressed us. The first is the
irreversibility of a death penalty. And the second is the fact that different judicially
trained minds can arrive at conclusions which, on the same facts, can be
diametrically opposed to each other. Adverting first to the second factor mentioned
above, it is well known 1 2014 (9) SCC 737 PART A that the basic principle behind
returning the verdict of death sentence is that it has to be awarded in the rarest of
rare cases. There may be aggravating as well as mitigating circumstances which are to
be examined by the Court. At the same time, it is not possible to lay down the
principles to determine as to which case would fall in the category of rarest of rare
cases, justifying the death sentence. It is not even easy to mention precisely the
parameters or aggravating/ mitigating circumstances which should be kept in mind
while arriving at such a question. Though attempts are made by Judges in various
cases to state such circumstances, they remain illustrative only.

30. […] A sentence is a compound of many factors, including the nature of the offence
as well as the circumstances extenuating or aggravating the offence. A large number
of aggravating circumstances and mitigating circumstances have been pointed out in
Bachan Singh v.

State of Punjab, SCC at pp. 749-50, paras 202 & 206, that a Judge should take into account when
awarding the death sentence. Again, as pointed out above, apart from the fact that these lists are
only illustrative, as clarified in Bachan Singh itself, different judicially trained minds can apply
different aggravating and mitigating circumstances to ultimately arrive at a conclusion, on
considering all relevant factors that the death penalty may or may not be awarded in any given case.

2

Sundar @ Sundarrajan vs State By Inspector Of Police on 21 March, 2023

Experience based on judicial decisions touching upon this aspect amply demonstrate such a
divergent approach being taken. Though, it is not necessary to dwell upon this aspect elaborately, at
the same time, it needs to be emphasised that when on the same set of facts, one judicial mind can
come to the conclusion that the circumstances do not warrant the death penalty, whereas another
may feel it to be a fit case fully justifying the death penalty, we feel that when a convict who has
suffered the sentence of death and files a review petition, the necessity of oral hearing in such a
review petition becomes an integral part of “reasonable procedure”.

(emphasis supplied)

3. A recent study by Project 39A examined all the judgments involving a sentence of death delivered
by the Supreme Court between 2007 and 2021 as part of which it analysed the exercise of the review
jurisdiction in capital PART A cases. 2 It noted that, during the period covered by the study, before
the decision in Mohd. Arif, 14 review petitions were dismissed by circulation and the capital
punishment was confirmed in all of them. Out of these, 13 were re- opened in view of the judgment
which resulted in only 4 re-confirmations of the death penalty. On the other hand, 7 judgments
resulted in commutation of death sentences, 1 in acquittal and 1 case being abated due to the death
of the prisoner. In view of the above data, the impact of the oral hearing of review petitions, due to
the judgment in Mohd. Arif leading to a change in the outcome of a death penalty confirmation is
evident.

4. The Court in Mohd. Arif, however, was not persuaded by the argument of involving two additional
judges beyond the judges who had heard the original appeal during the hearing of the review
petition. It also held that a review must be ordinarily heard by the same bench which originally
heard the criminal appeal. It had noted that:

39. Henceforth, in all cases in which death sentence has been awarded by the High
Court in appeals pending before the Supreme Court, only a bench of three Hon'ble
Judges will hear the same. This is for the reason that at least three judicially trained
minds need to apply their minds at the final stage of the journey of a convict on death
row, given the vagaries of the sentencing procedure outlined above.

At present, we are not persuaded to have a minimum of 5 learned Judges hear all death sentence
cases. Further, […] a review is ordinarily to be heard only by the same bench which originally heard
the criminal appeal. This is obviously for the reason that in order that a review succeeds, errors
apparent on the record have to be found. It is axiomatic that the same learned Judges alleged to
have committed the error be called upon now to rectify such error. We, therefore, turn 2 Exercise of
Review Jurisdiction in Capital Cases in DEATH PENALTY AND THE INDIAN SUPREME COURT
(2007-2021), Project 39A, National Law University Delhi (2022). PART A down [the…] plea that
two additional Judges be added at the review stage in death sentence cases.

(emphasis supplied)

3

Sundar @ Sundarrajan vs State By Inspector Of Police on 21 March, 2023

5. The data analysed by Project 39A indicates that it is not merely the oral hearing of review
petitions that has changed the outcomes. There may also be a correlation between the ultimate
outcome changing and different judges being involved as part of the review process instead of the
same judges who had originally decided the appeal. Post Mohd. Arif, this happens when the judges
who were members of the original bench have demitted office by the time the open court review
comes for hearing. The data involves the 13 review cases re-opened and re-decided post Mohd. Arif
after an oral hearing as well as 10 fresh review cases which were decided post Mohd. Arif. Out of 13
post Mohd. Arif cases which were re-opened, we have already noted that only 4 led to
re-confirmation of the award of the death penalty, while in 7 cases the sentence was commuted to
life imprisonment, 1 resulted in an acquittal and 1 stood abated. Out of the 10 fresh review cases, in 7
the death sentence was confirmed while in 3 the sentence was commuted.

6. In the cases where the sentence of death was commuted to life imprisonment, i.e. 7 cases from the
first lot of 13 re-opened review cases and 3 cases from the second lot of 10 fresh review cases, all of
the benches in review were of a different composition from the bench that decided the appeal. The 1
case which resulted in acquittal also had a different bench in review from the one in appeal. On the
other hand, in the 11 cases which re-confirmed the death sentence, 7 benches had a composition of
one or all the judges being the same as the bench that decided the appeal. The report notes that:

PART A The stage of review is rendered almost superfluous for the purpose envisaged
by the majority, i.e., a further reconsideration of a death sentence, when the same
bench (as in criminal appeal) is called upon to decide the review petition. This is in
fact demonstrated by the data. As predicted by Justice Chelameswar, when heard by
the same bench as the appeal, review petitions resulted in the death sentence being
maintained. 4 out of 11 confirmation judgments rendered at the stage of review had
the same bench. While the remaining 7 confirmation judgments in review were
rendered by benches of different composition, it is relevant to note that in 1 of these
judgments one judge was common to both the benches that decided the review and
the appeal, and in yet another, two judges were common to both benches. On the
other hand, all of the 10 judgments that resulted in commutation at the review stage,
were rendered by benches having a different composition from the bench that
decided the appeal. Therefore, the data suggests that a review petition filed within 30
days of the judgment rendered in appeal, decided by the same bench, will not
demonstrate considerable differences in approaches or outcome, unlike those
decided by a different bench.

(emphasis supplied)

7. While the above data is not conclusive and the correlation may not necessarily equate to
causation, we find it appropriate to mention as the present case is also one of those being re-opened
and re-heard as a result of the decision in Mohd. Arif. We clarify by way of abundant caution that
being both a smaller bench and having not been called upon to consider the impact of different
judges sitting in the review of an appeal confirming the death sentence, we are not deciding on the
merits of the proposition. PART B B. Background

4

Sundar @ Sundarrajan vs State By Inspector Of Police on 21 March, 2023

8. In view of the judgment in Mohd. Arif, the order dated 20 March 2013 in the present case
dismissing the review petition through circulation was recalled and this review petition was heard in
open court.

9. The petitioner was accused of kidnapping and murdering a 7-year-old child.

The petitioner is alleged to have picked up the victim while he was returning from school in the
school van on 27 July 2009. Prosecution witnesses testified to the petitioner having picked up the
victim on his motorbike.

10. Due to the victim’s absence, his mother attempted to find his whereabouts and was informed of
the above sequence of events by one of the witnesses. Accordingly, she proceeded to register a
complaint at Police Station, Kammapuram on the same date. On the same night, she also received a
call on her mobile phone from the petitioner, demanding a ransom of Rs. 5 lakhs for the release of
the victim. Further, another ransom call was made on the succeeding day from a telephone booth.
One of the witnesses is the individual who runs the booth and has testified that the petitioner made
a call enquiring regarding the payment of money.

11. On 30 July 2009 the police raided the house of the petitioner and arrested him along with a
co-accused who was later acquitted. The petitioner made confessional statements on the basis of
which three mobile phone sets, two of which had SIM cards, were recovered. The petitioner
confessed to strangling the deceased, putting his dead body in a gunny bag and throwing it in the
Meerankulam tank. The body of the deceased was recovered from the tank on the basis of the
confessional statement. PART C

12. On the basis of the investigation, the petitioner was charged under Sections 364A, 302 and 201
of the Indian Penal Code. 3 The trial was committed to the Court of the Sessions Judge on 30 July
2010. The Sessions Judge convicted the petitioner for the offences with which he was charged and
sentenced him to (i) death with a fine of Rs.1000 for the offence under section 364A IPC, (ii) death
with a fine of Rs.1000 for the offence under section 302 IPC; and (ii) rigorous imprisonment for
seven years and a fine of Rs.1000 for the offence under section 201 IPC. The co-accused was
acquitted of all the offences.

13. The petitioner’s appeal was dismissed by the High Court of Judicature at Madras by a judgment
dated 30 September 2010. The High Court confirmed both the conviction and the award of the
death sentence.

14. This Court dismissed the appeal of the petitioner and confirmed the judgment of the Madras
High Court on 5 February 2013. Both the High Court and this Court entered into a detailed
appreciation of facts before confirming the conviction.

C. Scope of Review Jurisdiction

5

Sundar @ Sundarrajan vs State By Inspector Of Police on 21 March, 2023

15. Article 137 of the Constitution states that the Supreme Court has the power to review any
judgment pronounced by it subject to provisions of law made by the Parliament or any rules under
Article 145. The Supreme Court Rules 2013 4 have been framed under Article 145 of the
Constitution. Order XLVII Rule 1 of the 2013 Rules provides that the Court may review its own
judgment 3 “IPC” 4 “2013 Rules” PART D

16. or order but no application for review will be entertained in a civil proceeding except on the
ground mentioned in Order XLVII Rule 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure 1908, and in a criminal
proceeding except on the ground of an error apparent on the face of the record.

17. In Mofil Khan v State of Jharkhand 5, a three judge Bench of this Court while discussing the
scope of the power of review held that:

2. […] Review is not rehearing of the appeal all over again and to maintain a review
petition, it has to be shown that there has been a miscarriage of justice (See:

Suthendraraja v. State). An error which is not self-evident and has to be detected by a process of
reasoning can hardly be said to be an error apparent on the face of the record justifying the Court to
exercise its power of review (See: Kamlesh Verma v. Mayavati). An applicant cannot be allowed to
reargue the appeal in an application for review on the grounds that were urged at the time of hearing
of the appeal. Even if the applicant succeeds in establishing that there may be another view possible
on the conviction or sentence of the accused that is not a sufficient ground for review. This Court
shall exercise its jurisdiction to review only when a glaring omission or patent mistake has crept in
the earlier decision due to judicial fallibility. There has to be an error apparent on the face of the
record leading to miscarriage of justice. D. Error Apparent on the Face of the Record?

D.1 Submissions of Counsel

18. We have heard the counsel for the petitioner and for the State of Tamil Nadu.

The counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the following errors are apparent on the face of the
record and call for a review of the judgment dismissing the appeal:

5 2021 SCC OnLineSC 1136 PART D a. There is no proof that the phone number
through which the ransom calls were allegedly made by the petitioner i.e. the number
ending with XXX5961, belongs to the petitioner;

b. That the call detail records show that the above-mentioned number is registered with one
individual with residence in Alathur, Palakkad whom the petitioner has no connection with;

c. That the 15-digit IMEI number for the cell phone, allegedly belonging to the petitioner containing
the SIM with mobile number ending with XXX5961, mentioned in the seizure memo differs from
the IMEI number mentioned in the call detail record;

6

Sundar @ Sundarrajan vs State By Inspector Of Police on 21 March, 2023

d. There is no evidence that the number on which the ransom call was allegedly made to PW1
(mother of the deceased), i.e. the number ending with XXX847, belongs to PW1;

e. PW1 has not stated that calls were made to her on 28 July 2009 and the testimony of PW16, the
operator of the phone booth through which the call was made, cannot be relied upon; and f. The
certificate under Section 65B of the Indian Evidence Act 1872 6 for the call detail records was not
furnished.

19. The counsel for the State of Tamil Nadu strongly resisted the submissions which were urged by
the Petitioner. The counsel submitted that the above grounds do not amount to errors apparent on
the face of the record and do not meet the standard for re-appreciating evidence by this Court in
review 6 “IEA” PART D jurisdiction in the face of concurrent findings of the Trial Court, the High
Court and this Court. The counsel also took us through the relevant exhibits and statements of
prosecution witnesses to counter the grounds raised by the petitioner on merits.

D.2. Analysis

20. We are in agreement with the counsel for the State of Tamil Nadu. The grounds which have been
raised by the petitioner have already been dealt with by the courts which have arrived at concurrent
findings recording the guilt of the petitioner. Further, the case of the prosecution is not founded
only on the alleged calls for ransom but on consistent interlinked evidence as both the High Court
and Supreme Court found in their judgments.

21. Regardless, we consider it appropriate to deal with the contentions of the petitioner.

22. The petitioner has alleged that the number through which the ransom call was allegedly made
did not belong to him. However, on the basis of his statement of 30 July 2009, the cell phone with
the SIM for the mobile number ending with XXX5961 was seized from the petitioner along with 2
other cell phones, the motorbike on which he had kidnapped the victim as well as the victim’s school
bag.

23. Similarly, the contention based on the difference in the IMEI number recorded in the seizure
memo and the call detail records does not affect the prosecution’s case for the following reason. The
difference in the IMEI number recorded in the seizure memo and the call detail record pertains to
the last PART D digit of the 15-digit IMEI number. Every device has a unique IMEI number
identifying the brand owner in the model. The first 8 digits are the Type Allocation Code (TAC)
digits of which the initial 2 digits identify the reporting body and the next 6 identify the brand owner
and device model allocated by the reporting body. The next 6 digits are the unique serial number
assigned to individual devices by the manufacturer. 7

24. These 14 digits in the petitioner’s case match in both the seizure memo and the call detail record.
The last digit in the IMEI number is the ‘Luhn check digit’ based on a function of the other digits
using an algorithm. Technically, the last digit, which is the only digit that is different in the seizure
memo and the call detail record, can be calculated through the algorithm on the basis of the first 14

7

Sundar @ Sundarrajan vs State By Inspector Of Police on 21 March, 2023

digits which are the same in both the documents. As the last digit of an IMEI number is a function of
the first 14 digits, as long as the first 14 digits are a match, it can only lead to one unique device.
Accordingly, it can be conclusively said that a difference in only the last digit of the IMEI number
cannot imply that it represents the IMEI number of a separate device. Therefore, the difference in
the last digit of the IMEI number can reasonably be assumed to be a typographical error and does
not raise a doubt in the prosecution’s case.

25. The arguments regarding non-verification of PW1’s number, non-confirmation with PW1
regarding a call received on the subsequent day as claimed by PW16 have been raised at a belated
stage.

7 GSMA TAC Allocation and IMEI Programming Rules for Device Brand Owners and
Manufacturers, Training Guide (February 2018 v1.0).

PART D

26. PW8 has stated in her testimony that the petitioner called her to enquire regarding the phone
number of PW1 and she told him to cut the phone and call again so she can retrieve the number and
provide the same, as she did on the second call. PW1 has also testified that she received the call for
ransom at about 9:30PM. It was upon the petitioner, at the stage of cross- examination of PW1 to
raise questions regarding the number ending with XXX847 belonging to her or regarding the call
alleged to have been made by the petitioner on 28 July 2009 mentioned by PW16.

27. Finally, the petitioner has argued that the CDRs cannot be relied upon due to the lack of
production of the Section 65B certificate. The call detail records were verified in the testimony of the
Legal Officer of Vodafone, PW11, who himself produced the documents from the computer. He has
in his cross- examination specifically corroborated the details of the calls made between the
petitioner and PW1 and PW8 (from whom the number of PW1 was received after enquiring about it
during the call by petitioner). The call detail records of the mobile number ending with XXX5961
confirm that two calls were made to PW8 at 9:22PM and 9:25PM on 27 July 2009. Immediately
after this he called on the number ending with XXX847 at 9:39PM. However, admittedly the
certificate mentioned under Section 65B of the IEA was not produced.

28. Section 65B was inserted in the IEA along with various other amendments by the Information
Technology Act 2000 8 which took into account digital evidence. Section 65B provides for the
admissibility of electronic records. 8 “IT Act” PART D

29. Section 65B of the IEA is reproduced below:

“65-B. Admissibility of electronic records.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained
in this Act, any information contained in an electronic record which is printed on a
paper, stored, recorded or copied in optical or magnetic media produced by a
computer (hereinafter referred to as “the computer output”) shall be deemed to be
also a document, if the conditions mentioned in this section are satisfied in relation

8

Sundar @ Sundarrajan vs State By Inspector Of Police on 21 March, 2023

to the information and computer in question and shall be admissible in any
proceedings, without further proof or production of the original, as evidence of any
contents of the original or of any fact stated therein of which direct evidence would be
admissible.

(2) The conditions referred to in sub-section (1) in respect of a computer output shall
be the following, namely—

(a) the computer output containing the information was produced by the computer
during the period over which the computer was used regularly to store or process
information for the purposes of any activities regularly carried on over that period by
the person having lawful control over the use of the computer;

(b) during the said period, information of the kind contained in the electronic record
or of the kind from which the information so contained is derived was regularly fed
into the computer in the ordinary course of the said activities;

c) throughout the material part of the said period, the computer was operating
properly or, if not, then in respect of any period in which it was not operating
properly or was out of operation during that part of the period, was not such as to
affect the electronic record or the accuracy of its contents; and

(d) the information contained in the electronic record reproduces or is derived from
such information fed into the computer in the ordinary course of the said activities.

(3) Where over any period, the function of storing or processing information for the
purposes of any activities regularly carried on over that period as mentioned in clause
(a) of sub-section (2) was regularly performed by computers, whether—

(a) by a combination of computers operating over that period; or

(b) by different computers operating in succession over that period; or

(c) by different combinations of computers operating in succession over that period;
or PART D

(d) in any other manner involving the successive operation over that period, in
whatever order, of one or more computers and one or more combinations of
computers, all the computers used for that purpose during that period shall be
treated for the purposes of this section as constituting a single computer; and
references in this section to a computer shall be construed accordingly.

(4) In any proceedings where it is desired to give a statement in evidence by virtue of
this section, a certificate doing any of the following things, that is to say—

9

Sundar @ Sundarrajan vs State By Inspector Of Police on 21 March, 2023

(a) identifying the electronic record containing the statement and describing the
manner in which it was produced;

(b) giving such particulars of any device involved in the production of that electronic
record as may be appropriate for the purpose of showing that the electronic record
was produced by a computer;

(c) dealing with any of the matters to which the conditions mentioned in sub-section
(2) relate, and purporting to be signed by a person occupying a responsible official
position in relation to the operation of the relevant device or the management of the
relevant activities (whichever is appropriate) shall be evidence of any matter stated in
the certificate; and for the purposes of this sub-section it shall be sufficient for a
matter to be stated to the best of the knowledge and belief of the person stating it.

(5) For the purposes of this section—

(a) information shall be taken to be supplied to a computer if it is supplied thereto in
any appropriate form and whether it is so supplied directly or (with or without
human intervention) by means of any appropriate equipment;

(b) whether in the course of activities carried on by any official, information is
supplied with a view to its being stored or processed for the purposes of those
activities by a computer operated otherwise than in the course of those activities, that
information, if duly supplied to that computer, shall be taken to be supplied to it in
the course of those activities;

(c) a computer output shall be taken to have been produced by a computer whether it
was produced by it directly or (with or without human intervention) by means of any
appropriate equipment.

Explanation — For the purposes of this section any reference to information being derived from
other information shall be a reference to its being derived therefrom by calculation, comparison or
any other process.” PART D

30. The petitioner has relied upon the judgment of this court in Arjun Panditrao Khotkar v Kailash
Kushanrao Gorantyal 9 which reiterated the dictum in the decision in Anvar P.V. v P.K. Basheer 10
requiring mandatory compliance with Section 65B of the IEA.

31. One of the earliest decisions on the provision was of a two judge bench of this Court in State
(NCT of Delhi) v Navjot Sandhu 11 where the Court held that Section 65B was only one of the
provisions through which secondary evidence by way of electronic record could be admitted and that
there was no bar on admitting evidence through other provisions. The Court noted that:

10

Sundar @ Sundarrajan vs State By Inspector Of Police on 21 March, 2023

150. According to Section 63, “secondary evidence” means and includes, among other
things, ‘copies made from the original by mechanical processes which in themselves
insure the accuracy of the copy, and copies compared with such copies’. Section 65
enables secondary evidence of the contents of a document to be adduced if the
original is of such a nature as not to be easily movable. It is not in dispute that the
information contained in the call records is stored in huge servers which cannot be
easily moved and produced in the court.

That is what the High Court has also observed at para 276. Hence, printouts taken from the
computers/servers by mechanical process and certified by a responsible official of the
service-providing company can be led in evidence through a witness who can identify the signatures
of the certifying officer or otherwise speak of the facts based on his personal knowledge. Irrespective
of the compliance with the requirements of Section 65-B, which is a provision dealing with
admissibility of electronic records, there is no bar to adducing secondary evidence under the other
provisions of the Evidence Act, namely, Sections 63 and 65. It may be that the certificate containing
the details in sub-section (4) of Section 65-B is not filed in the instant case, but that does not mean
that secondary evidence cannot be given even if the law permits such evidence to be 9 2020 (7) SCC
1 10 2014 (10) SCC 473 11 2005 (11) SCC 600 PART D given in the circumstances mentioned in the
relevant provisions, namely, Sections 63 and 65.

(emphasis supplied)

32. The principle which was enunciated in Navjot Sandhu was overruled by a three judge bench of
this Court in Anvar P.V. where it was held that:

22. The evidence relating to electronic record, as noted hereinbefore, being a special
provision, the general law on secondary evidence under Section 63 read with Section
65 of the Evidence Act shall yield to the same. Generalia specialibus non derogant,
special law will always prevail over the general law. It appears, the court omitted to
take note of Sections 59 and 65-A dealing with the admissibility of electronic record.
Sections 63 and 65 have no application in the case of secondary evidence by way of
electronic record; the same is wholly governed by Sections 65-A and 65-B. To that
extent, the statement of law on admissibility of secondary evidence pertaining to
electronic record, as stated by this Court in Navjot Sandhu case, does not lay down
the correct legal position. It requires to be overruled and we do so. An electronic
record by way of secondary evidence shall not be admitted in evidence unless the
requirements under Section 65-B are satisfied. Thus, in the case of CD, VCD, chip,
etc., the same shall be accompanied by the certificate in terms of Section 65-B
obtained at the time of taking the document, without which, the secondary evidence
pertaining to that electronic record, is inadmissible.

(emphasis supplied)

11

Sundar @ Sundarrajan vs State By Inspector Of Police on 21 March, 2023

33. Accordingly, in terms of the decision in Anvar P.V. for admitting any electronic evidence by way
of secondary evidence, such as CDRs, the requirements of Section 65B would necessarily need to be
satisfied and no other route under the IEA may be adopted for the admission of such evidence.

34. However, a three judge bench in Tomaso Bruno v State of Uttar Pradesh 12 took a different
approach and observed that secondary evidence of the 12 2015 (7) SCC 178 PART D contents of a
document can also be led under Section 65 of the Evidence Act without referring to the decision in
Anvar P.V. It held that:

24. With the advancement of information technology, scientific temper in the
individual and at the institutional level is to pervade the methods of investigation.
With the increasing impact of technology in everyday life and as a result, the
production of electronic evidence in cases has become relevant to establish the guilt
of the Accused or the liability of the Defendant. Electronic documents stricto sensu
are admitted as material evidence. With the amendment to the Evidence Act in 2000,
Sections 65-A and 65-B were introduced into Chapter V relating to documentary
evidence. Section 65-A provides that contents of electronic records may be admitted
as evidence if the criteria provided in Section 65-B is complied with. The computer
generated electronic records in evidence are admissible at a trial if proved in the
manner specified by Section 65-B of the Evidence Act. Sub-section (1) of Section 65-B
makes admissible as a document, paper printout of electronic records stored in
optical or magnetic media produced by a computer, subject to the fulfilment of the
conditions specified in Sub-section (2) of Section 65-B. Secondary evidence of
contents of document can also be led Under Section 65 of the Evidence Act. PW 13
stated that he saw the full video recording of the fateful night in the CCTV camera,
but he has not recorded the same in the case diary as nothing substantial to be
adduced as evidence was present in it.

(emphasis supplied)

35. A two judge bench in Shafi Mohammed v State of Himachal Pradesh 13 strayed even farther
away from Anvar P.V. and held that the Sections 65A and 65B cannot be held to be a complete code
on the subject. It held that:

24. We may, however, also refer to the judgment of this Court in Anvar P.V. v. P.K.
Basheer, delivered by a three-

Judge Bench. In the said judgment in para 24 it was observed that electronic evidence by way of
primary evidence was covered by Section 62 of the Evidence Act to which procedure of Section 65-B
of the Evidence Act was not admissible. However, for the secondary evidence, procedure of Section
65-B of the Evidence Act was required to be followed and a contrary view taken in Navjot 13 2018
(2) SCC 801 PART D Sandhu that secondary evidence of electronic record could be covered under
Sections 63 and 65 of the Evidence Act, was not correct. There are, however, observations in para 14
to the effect that electronic record can be proved only as per Section 65-B of the Evidence Act.

12

Sundar @ Sundarrajan vs State By Inspector Of Police on 21 March, 2023

25. Though in view of the three-Judge Bench judgments in Tomaso Bruno and Ram Singh, it can be
safely held that electronic evidence is admissible and provisions under Sections 65-A and 65-B of
the Evidence Act are by way of a clarification and are procedural provisions. If the electronic
evidence is authentic and relevant the same can certainly be admitted subject to the court being
satisfied about its authenticity and procedure for its admissibility may depend on fact situation such
as whether the person producing such evidence is in a position to furnish certificate under Section
65-B(4).

26. Sections 65-A and 65-B of the Evidence Act, 1872 cannot be held to be a complete code on the
subject. In Anvar P.V., this Court in para 24 clarified that primary evidence of electronic record was
not covered under Sections 65-A and 65-B of the Evidence Act. Primary evidence is the document
produced before the court and the expression “document” is defined in Section 3 of the Evidence Act
to mean any matter expressed or described upon any substance by means of letters, figures or
marks, or by more than one of those means, intended to be used, or which may be used, for the
purpose of recording that matter.

(emphasis supplied)

36. The Court in Shafi Mohammed even diluted the requirement of the Section 65B certificate. This
led to contradictory positions in these cases vis-à-vis the law laid down by Anvar P.V. which was
settled by a reference to a three judge bench of this Court in Arjun Panditrao Khotkar. The Court
reiterated Anvar P.V. and held Tomaso Bruno per incuriam and overruled Shafi Mohammed. It held
that:

73. The reference is thus answered by stating that:

PART D 73.1. Anvar P.V., as clarified by us hereinabove, is the law declared by this
Court on Section 65-B of the Evidence Act. The judgment in Tomaso Bruno, being per
incuriam, does not lay down the law correctly.

Also, the judgment in Shafhi Mohammad and the judgment dated 3-4-2018 reported as Shafhi
Mohd. v. State of H.P., do not lay down the law correctly and are therefore overruled.

73.2. The clarification referred to above is that the required certificate under Section 65-B(4) is
unnecessary if the original document itself is produced. This can be done by the owner of a laptop
computer, computer tablet or even a mobile phone, by stepping into the witness box and proving
that the device concerned, on which the original information is first stored, is owned and/or
operated by him. In cases where the “computer” happens to be a part of a “computer system” or
“computer network” and it becomes impossible to physically bring such system or network to the
court, then the only means of providing information contained in such electronic record can be in
accordance with Section 65-B(1), together with the requisite certificate under Section 65-B(4). The
last sentence in para 24 in Anvar P.V. which reads as “… if an electronic record as such is used as
primary evidence under Section 62 of the Evidence Act …” is thus clarified; it is to be read without
the words “under Section 62 of the Evidence Act,…”. With this clarification, the law stated in para 24

13

Sundar @ Sundarrajan vs State By Inspector Of Police on 21 March, 2023

of Anvar P.V. does not need to be revisited.

(emphasis supplied)

37. Therefore, the law is now settled: a Section 65B certificate is mandatory in terms of this Court’s
judgment in Anvar P.V. as confirmed in Arjun Panditrao Khotkar.

38. However, Anvar P.V. was decided on 18 September 2014. Till then, the interpretation of law in
Navjot Sandhu, which was decided on 4 August 2005 prevailed. In the instant case, the Trial Court
pronounced its judgment on 30 July 2010. Two months later, on 30 September 2010, the High
Court affirmed the decision of the Trial Court to award the death sentence. This Court PART D
dismissed the appeal and confirmed the death sentence on 5 February 2013. Even the review
petition was dismissed in chambers on 20 March 2013 before being re-opened in the instant
proceeding in view of the Constitution Bench’s judgment in Mohd. Arif alias Ashfaq.

39. Accordingly, none of the courts had the benefit of the law laid down vis-à-vis the mandatory
requirement of the Section 65B certificate in Anvar P.V.. The courts as well as the investigative
agency proceeded in accordance with the law that was then prevailing.

40. In Sonu alias Amar v State of Haryana 14 this court considered the impact of the retrospective
application of Anvar P.V. upon trials that had already been held during the period when Navjot
Sandhu held the field and observed that:

37. The interpretation of Section 65-B(4) by this Court by a judgment dated 4-8-2005
in Navjot Sandhu held the field till it was overruled on 18-9-2014 in Anvar case. All
the criminal courts in this country are bound to follow the law as interpreted by this
Court. Because of the interpretation of Section 65-B in Navjot Sandhu, there was no
necessity of a certificate for proving electronic records. A large number of trials have
been held during the period between 4-8-2005 and 18-9-2014. Electronic records
without a certificate might have been adduced in evidence. There is no doubt that the
judgment of this Court in Anvar case has to be retrospective in operation unless the
judicial tool of “prospective overruling” is applied. However, retrospective application
of the judgment is not in the interest of administration of justice as it would
necessitate the reopening of a large number of criminal cases. Criminal cases decided
on the basis of electronic records adduced in evidence without certification have to be
revisited as and when objections are taken by the accused at the appellate stage.
Attempts will be made to reopen cases which have become final.

14 2017 (8) SCC 570 PART D

41. However, it did not decide upon this issue being a two judge bench and kept the question of law
open for it to be decided in an appropriate case. In Arjun Panditrao Khotkar this court did not
consider the question raised in Sonu.

14

Sundar @ Sundarrajan vs State By Inspector Of Police on 21 March, 2023

42. On the other hand, Sonu did deal with the question of whether, at the appellate stage, the
reliance upon CDRs can be reconsidered if the objection was not raised during the trial. As the
counsel for the State of Tamil Nadu has argued, the defense as well did not raise the plea of the
CDRs being inadmissible in the absence of a Section 65B certificate at the trial or at the appellate
stage. On this issue, this Court in Sonu noted that:

32. It is nobody's case that CDRs which are a form of electronic record are not
inherently admissible in evidence.

The objection is that they were marked before the trial court without a certificate as required by
Section 65-B(4). It is clear from the judgments referred to supra that an objection relating to the
mode or method of proof has to be raised at the time of marking of the document as an exhibit and
not later. The crucial test, as affirmed by this Court, is whether the defect could have been cured at
the stage of marking the document. Applying this test to the present case, if an objection was taken
to the CDRs being marked without a certificate, the Court could have given the prosecution an
opportunity to rectify the deficiency. It is also clear from the above judgments that objections
regarding admissibility of documents which are per se inadmissible can be taken even at the
appellate stage. Admissibility of a document which is inherently inadmissible is an issue which can
be taken up at the appellate stage because it is a fundamental issue. The mode or method of proof is
procedural and objections, if not taken at the trial, cannot be permitted at the appellate stage. If the
objections to the mode of proof are permitted to be taken at the appellate stage by a party, the other
side does not have an opportunity of rectifying the deficiencies. The learned Senior Counsel for the
State referred to statements under Section 161 CrPC, 1973 as an example of documents falling under
the said category of inherently inadmissible evidence. CDRs do not fall in the said category of
documents. We are satisfied that an objection that CDRs are unreliable due to violation of the
procedure prescribed in Section PART D 65-B(4) cannot be permitted to be raised at this stage as
the objection relates to the mode or method of proof.

(emphasis supplied)

43. While the Court in Arjun Panditrao Khotkar did not directly deal with the issue of allowing
objections against CDRs, due to a violation of the procedure under Section 65B, being raised at a
belated stage, it kept it open for trial courts, in exceptional cases, to allow the prosecution to provide
such certificate at a later stage. It held that:

54. Therefore, in terms of general procedure, the prosecution is obligated to supply
all documents upon which reliance may be placed to an Accused before
commencement of the trial. Thus, the exercise of power by the courts in criminal
trials in permitting evidence to be filed at a later stage should not result in serious or
irreversible prejudice to the Accused. A balancing exercise in respect of the rights of
parties has to be carried out by the court, in examining any application by the
prosecution Under Sections 91 or 311 of the Code of Criminal Procedure or Section
165 of the Evidence Act. Depending on the facts of each case, and the Court exercising
discretion after seeing that the Accused is not prejudiced by want of a fair trial, the

15

Sundar @ Sundarrajan vs State By Inspector Of Police on 21 March, 2023

Court may in appropriate cases allow the prosecution to produce such certificate at a
later point in time. If it is the Accused who desires to produce the requisite certificate
as part of his defence, this again will depend upon the justice of the case-discretion to
be exercised by the Court in accordance with law.

(emphasis supplied)

44. Therefore, we are inclined to agree with the ratio in Sonu by not allowing the objection which is
raised at a belated stage that the CDRs are inadmissible in the absence of a Section 65B certificate,
especially in cases, where the trial has been completed before 18 September 2014, i.e. before the
pronouncement of the decision in Anvar P.V.. However, we are also mindful PART D of the fact that
the instant matter involves the death sentence having been awarded.

45. Most recently, in Mohd. Arif v State (NCT of Delhi) 15, a three judge Bench of this Court while
deciding a review petition in a case involving the review of a death penalty faced a similar fact
situation where the decisions of the trial court and appellate courts were rendered during the period
when Navjot Sandhu was the prevailing law. In that case as well, the Court took note of it being a
matter involving a death sentence and held that:

“24. Navjot Sandhu was decided on 4.8.2005 i.e., before the judgment was rendered
by the Trial Court in the instant matter. The subsequent judgments of the High Court
and this Court were passed on 13.9.2007 and 10.8.2011 respectively affirming the
award of death sentence. These two judgments were delivered prior to the decision of
this Court in Anvar P.V. which was given on 18.9.2014. The judgments by the trial
Court, High Court and this Court were thus well before the decision in Anvar P.V. and
were essentially in the backdrop of law laid down in Navjot Sandhu. If we go by the
principle accepted in paragraph 32 of the decision in Sonu alias Amar, the matter
may stand on a completely different footing. It is for this reason that reliance has
been placed on certain decisions of this Court to submit that the matter need not be
reopened on issues which were dealt with in accordance with the law then prevailing.
However, since the instant matter pertains to award of death sentence, this review
petition must be considered in light of the decisions made by this Court in Anvar P.V.
and Arjun Panditrao.

25. Consequently, we must eschew, for the present purposes, the electronic evidence
in the form of CDRs which was without any appropriate certificate under Section
65-B(4) of the Evidence Act.” (emphasis supplied) 15 2022 SCC OnLineSC 1509
PART D

46. Accordingly, we too deem it appropriate to consider this review petition by eschewing the
electronic evidence in the form of CDRs as they are without the appropriate certificate under Section
65B even if the law, as it was during the time the trial in the present case was conducted, allowed for
such electronic evidence to be admitted.

16

Sundar @ Sundarrajan vs State By Inspector Of Police on 21 March, 2023

47. Accordingly, we analyse the evidence considered by the High Court and this Court in appeal
without relying upon the CDRs. The High Court took note of the following evidence in its judgment
before arriving at the conclusion of the guilt of the petitioner and confirming his conviction:

18. According to P.W.1 the mother of the deceased child Suresh, the child used to
leave for School every day at about 8.00 A.M. and come back at about 4.30 P.M., and
on the date of occurrence, i.e., 27.7.2009, the child as usual went to the school. From
the evidence of P.W.6, the Correspondent of Sakthi Matriculation School,
Vridhachalam, and also the attendance register, Ex.P3, it would be quite evident that
the child attended the school that day and was returning from the school in the van
meant for that purpose. According to P.W.2, she is also studying along with the
deceased Suresh, and on the day, both were returning from the school in the van and
got down at Karkudal, and at that time A-1 who was standing under a Neem tree
along with the motorbike, came to them and told the child Suresh that both his
mother and grandmother were not doing well and on that false reason, took the child
from the place. The evidence of P.W.2 was much commented by the learned Counsel
for the appellant. But, those contentions cannot be agreed. The learned trial Judge
has categorically pointed out before recording the evidence that the maturity of the
mind of the child, P.W.2, to give evidence was actually tested and found satisfactory,
and then he recorded the evidence.

The child at the time of occurrence, was 10 years old, and at the time of giving evidence, it was aged
11.

[…]

19. It would quite clear that if the evidence of a child witness is cogent and convincing, the Court can
accept that evidence. In the instant case, the evidence of P.W.2 PART D is narrated above. According
to P.W.1, immediately when the child did not return by 4.30 P.M., she entertained suspicion and
went in search of her son, and she immediately met P.W.2, the other child. P.W.2 informed P.W.1
that the child Suresh was taken by a person in a motorbike telling the above reasons. Now, at this
juncture, in order to accept the evidence of P.W.2, the earliest version as found in Ex. P1, in the
considered opinion of the Court, would suffice. A perusal of Ex. P1, the complaint, would clearly
indicate that after the child did not return, P.W.1 met P.W.2 Kamali, the other child, and she was
informed by P.W.2 that the child was taken by a person in a motorbike with the above false reasons.
Thus the earliest version found therein, would clearly indicate that P.W.2 has come with a true
version. That apart, the child was able to identify the motorbike, marked as M.O.5, before the Court.
Despite cross-examination in full, the evidence of P.W.2 the child remained unshaken. Following
the ratio laid down in the above decision by the Apex Court, this Court is of the considered opinion
that the evidence of P.W.2 has got to be accepted.

20. Added further, P.W.2 at the time of the identification parade, was able to identify A-1 properly as
could be seen from the identification parade proceedings Ex. P4. Apart from that, the evidence of
P.W.2 stood fully corroborated by the evidence of P.W.3. P.W.3 was a native of the same village, and

17

Sundar @ Sundarrajan vs State By Inspector Of Police on 21 March, 2023

all these persons were already known to him. P.W.3 was sufficiently matured and aged 41. According
to him, he was actually coming on the way, and when the school van was stopped, P.W.2 and the
deceased Suresh got down, and the child was called by A-1, and on some reason, the child was taken
in the bike which was noticed by him. P.W.3 also took part in the identification parade and has also
identified A-1 properly. Now, the comment made by the learned Counsel for the appellant that as
regards the identification parade, there were infirmities noticed cannot be countenanced in law. As
far as the comment made that there was no requisition made by the Investigating Officer for the test
identification parade or the signature of A-1 was not obtained is concerned, the same cannot be
accepted for the reason that insofar as the identification parade conducted by P.W.10, it was
pursuant to the orders of the Chief Judicial Magistrate only on the requisition made by the
Investigating Officer; otherwise, it could not have taken place at all. The conduct of the
identification parade in order to identify A-1 in which P.Ws. 2 and 3 have participated, was never
denied by the appellant before the trial Court. Under the circumstances, this Court is of the
considered opinion that the test PART D identification parade was properly done, and the trial
Judge was perfectly correct in accepting the evidence adduced by the prosecution in that regard.

21. Apart from the above, it is pertinent to point out the legal position in respect of the identification
parade. It is settled proposition of law that the identification parade is only a corroborative piece of
evidence and the identification done in the Court, is a substantive piece of evidence. The Court must
look into whether at the time when the witnesses saw the accused in the company of the deceased,
such a thing would have caused a dent in their memory. In the instant case, the child was only 7
years old, and both the child and P.W.2 Kamali who was coming along with the child, got down
together, and the appellant/A-1 came there and took the child on the flimsy reason. In such a
situation, naturally the same would have caused a dent in the memory of P.W.2, and and it would
not fail ordinarily, and equally so the memory of P.W.3, a man aged about 41. No doubt, it would
have caused a dent in their memory. Therefore, the trial Judge was perfectly correct in accepting the
evidence of P.Ws.2 and 3.

48. From the above, it is clear that two witnesses, PW2 and PW3, saw the petitioner taking away the
victim on his motorbike after he got down from the school bus while returning. PW2 and PW3 also
identified the petitioner upon his arrest at the time of the test identification parade which was found
to have been properly conducted. Furthermore, both of the witnesses also provided unimpeachable
evidence in their respective cross-examinations before the trial court. The trial court also followed
the proper procedure in taking the testimony of PW2, a child witness, by recording the maturity of
the mind of the child, who even identified the motorbike before the Court.

49. The aforementioned evidence shows that the victim was last seen with the petitioner. In the
appeal before this Court, the petitioner’s counsel seems to have acknowledged that there was enough
evidence to establish kidnapping, in view of the following observations:

PART D

21. We have considered the first contention advanced by the learned counsel for the
appellant, on the basis of the contention noticed in the foregoing paragraph. In the

18

Sundar @ Sundarrajan vs State By Inspector Of Police on 21 March, 2023

veiled submission advanced in the hands of the learned counsel for the appellant, we
find an implied acknowledgement, namely, that learned counsel acknowledges, that
the prosecution had placed sufficient material on the record of the case to
substantiate the factum of kidnapping of the deceased Suresh, at the hands of the
accused-appellant. Be that as it may, without drawing any such inference, we would
still endeavour to determine, whether the prosecution had been successful in
establishing the factum of kidnapping of the deceased Suresh, at the hands of the
accused-

appellant.

(emphasis supplied)

50. This Court in the course of the decision in appeal took note of the evidence discussed above and
held that there was sufficient evidence to hold the petitioner guilty of murder as well:

“27. Since in the facts and circumstances of this case, it has been duly established,
that Suresh had been kidnapped by the accused-appellant; the accused- appellant has
not been able to produce any material on the record of this case to show the release of
Suresh from his custody. Section 106 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 places the
onus on him. In the absence of any such material produced by the accused-appellant,
it has to be accepted, that the custody of Suresh had remained with the
a c c u s e d - a p p e l l a n t ,   t i l l   h e   w a s   m u r d e r e d .   T h e   m o t i v e / r e a s o n   f o r   t h e
accused-appellant, for taking the extreme step was, that ransom as demanded by
him, had not been paid. We are therefore, satisfied, that in the facts and
circumstances of the present case, there is sufficient evidence on the record of this
case, on the basis whereof even the factum of murder of Suresh at the hands of the
accused appellant stands established.

51. Furthermore, as this Court noted, material objects were recovered on the basis of the petitioner’s
statement:

28. We may now refer to some further material on the record of the case, to
substantiate our aforesaid conclusion. In this behalf, it would be relevant to mention,
that when the accused-appellant was detained on PART D 30.7.2009, he had made a
confessional statement in the presence of Kasinathan (PW13) stating, that he had
strangulated Suresh to death, whereupon his body was put into a gunny bag and
thrown into the Meerankulam tank. It was thereafter, on the pointing out of the
accused-

appellant, that the body of Suresh was recovered from the Meerankulam tank. It was found in a
gunny bag, as stated by the accused-appellant. Dr. Kathirvel (PW12) concluded after holding the
post mortem examination of the dead body of Suresh, that Suresh had died on account of
suffocation, prior to his having been drowned. The instant evidence clearly nails the

19

Sundar @ Sundarrajan vs State By Inspector Of Police on 21 March, 2023

accused-appellant as the perpetrator of the murder of Suresh. Moreover, the statement of
Kasinathan (PW13) further reveals that the school bag, books and slate of Suresh were recovered
from the residence of the accused-appellant. These articles were confirmed by Maheshwari (PW1) as
belonging to Suresh. In view of the factual and legal position dealt with hereinabove, we have no
doubt in our mind, that the prosecution had produced sufficient material to establish not only the
kidnapping of Suresh, but also his murder at the hands of the accused-appellant.

52. The evidence in the form of CDRs was merely to corroborate the evidence that had been given
through the depositions of PW1 and PW8. Both of their testimonies stand corroborated not only
through the CDRs but also through the recovery of the mobile phone on the basis of the confessional
statement of the petitioner. The High Court discussed this evidence in the following para:

[…] At this juncture, P.W.13 has categorically spoken to the fact that at the time of
arrest, A-1 came forward to give a confessional statement voluntarily, and the same
was recorded by the Investigator. The admissible part is marked as Ex.P9 pursuant to
which he produced three cell phones out of which it was one which contained the
number through which he made two phone calls to P.W.8 at about 9.22 P.M. and
9.25 P.M. respectively on 27.7.2010, and also at about 9.39 P.M. to P.W.1 making a
demand for ransom. At this juncture, the contentions put forth by the learned
Counsel as to whether one Shankar who made the calls at 9.22 and 9.25 P.M., was
alive or a fictitious person, and the cellphone recovered from A-1, did not belong to
him even as per the documentary evidence have got to be rejected since they do not
carry merit. The cellphone from which all the three calls were made namely two calls
to P.W.8 at about 9.22 and 9.25 PART D P.M. in the name of Shankar and one call at
9.39 P.M. by A-1 to P.W.1, has been recovered, and the particulars of those calls have
been recorded in the cellphone, and it was actually kept by P.W.8 during the relevant
time and also A- 1 during the relevant time. Thus the prosecution has brought to the
notice of the Court that in Ex.P5, the calls were actually found for 71 seconds at 9.22
P.M. and 43 seconds at 9.25 P.M. are found in Ex.P5, and another call which was
made is also found therein which was from M.O.4 cellphone which was recovered
from the appellant/A-1. Out of these three cell phones one cell phone was with the
SIM card and the other two cell phones without SIM card. Now the documentary
evidence produced by the prosecution would go to show that three calls were made
namely two calls to P.W.8 at 9.22 and 9.25 P.M. respectively and after ascertaining
the number of P.W.1, the third call was made to P.W.1. All the documentary evidence
were placed before the trial Court.

Thus it would be quite clear that the evidence of P.W.8 that the appellant/A-1 wanted to know the
number of P.W.1, and then he made a call to P.W.8 and came to know about the number, and
thereafter, he made a call at about 9.39 P.M. to P.W.1 as could be found in the evidence of P.W.1.
Even if Ex. P5, being the CDR, is not relied upon by this Court in the above paragraph, the case of
the prosecution is not weakened as it merely corroborates the documentary evidence and witness
testimonies that remain unblemished regardless. From the above discussion, it is clear that there is
no reason to doubt the guilt of the petitioner.

20

Sundar @ Sundarrajan vs State By Inspector Of Police on 21 March, 2023

53. Therefore, even though none of the grounds raised by the petitioner amount to errors apparent
on the face of the record, in view of the above analysis, it can also be conclusively said that all the
grounds on merits fail to raise any reasonable doubt in the prosecution’s case.

54. Accordingly, we see no reason in the review jurisdiction to interfere with the concurrent findings
of the Trial Court, High Court and this Court vis-à-vis the guilt of the petitioner for kidnapping and
murdering the victim. PART E

55. The counsel for the petitioner has also pressed upon this Court to reconsider the quantum of the
sentence in terms of the capital punishment which has been ordered by the Trial Court and
confirmed in appeal in judgment of the High Court and this Court.

E. Sentencing & Mitigation

56. The counsel for the petitioner argued at length that the death sentence was passed without a
proper mitigation exercise regarding the circumstances of the petitioner.

E.1. Lingering Doubt Theory

57. The counsel for the petitioner submitted that the sentence of death cannot be imposed in such
cases where the conviction is based on circumstantial evidence as a ‘lingering doubt’ regarding the
guilt of the accused persists.

58. However, in Shatrughna Baban Meshram v State of Maharashtra 16, a three judge Bench of this
Court has ruled out the theory of ‘lingering doubt’/ ‘residual doubt’. The Court held:

77. When it comes to cases based on circumstantial evidence in our jurisprudence,
the standard that is adopted in terms of law laid down by this Court as noticed in
Sharad Birdhichand Sarda and subsequent decisions is that the circumstances must
not only be individually proved or established, but they must form a consistent chain,
so conclusive as to rule out the possibility of any other hypothesis except the guilt of
the accused. On the strength of these principles, the burden in such cases is already
of a greater magnitude. Once that burden is discharged, it is implicit that any other
hypothesis or the innocence of the accused, already stands ruled out when the matter
is taken up at the stage of sentence after returning the finding of 16 2021 (1) SCC 596
PART E guilt. So, theoretically the concept or theory of “residual doubt” does not
have any place in a case based on circumstantial evidence. As a matter of fact, the
theory of residual doubt was never accepted by the US Supreme Court as discussed
earlier.

78. However, as summed up in Kalu Khan, while dealing with cases based on
circumstantial evidence, for imposition of a death sentence, higher or stricter
standard must be insisted upon. The approach to be adopted in matters concerning
capital punishment, therefore ought to be in conformity with the principles culled out

21

Sundar @ Sundarrajan vs State By Inspector Of Police on 21 March, 2023

in para 50 hereinabove and the instant matter must therefore be considered in the
light of those principles.

(emphasis supplied)

59. Accordingly, the argument of residual or lingering doubt does not come to the rescue of the
petitioner. Rather, in the course of the appellate decision in the instant case, the standard laid out in
Sharad Birdhichand Sarda and subsequent cases was brought to the notice of this Court and it was
after analysing the facts in reference to these principles that the Court upheld the guilt of the
petitioner. This court noted that:

24. Based on the evidence noticed in the three preceding paragraphs, there can be no
doubt whatsoever, that the accused appellant had been identified through cogent
evidence as the person who had taken away Suresh when he disembarked from
school van on 27.7.2009. The.

factum of kidnapping of Suresh by the accused-appellant, therefore, stands duly established.

[…]

27. […] We are therefore, satisfied, that in the facts and circumstances of the present case, there is
sufficient evidence on the record of this case, on the basis whereof even the factum of murder of
Suresh at the hands of the accused-appellant stands established.

60. This Court has already applied the relevant standard to confirm the guilt of the petitioner in the
appeal in a case which is based on circumstantial PART E evidence and it will not be appropriate for
this Court to once again venture into an assessment of the evidence in the review jurisdiction in view
of its limited scope.

E.2. Sentencing & Mitigation in the Trial Court and the Appellate Courts

61. Counsel for the petitioner argued that even if the petitioner’s guilt was affirmed, the trial court
and appellate courts failed to appropriately consider relevant aggravating and mitigating
circumstances including the possibility of reformation of the petitioner while deciding upon the
sentence. Counsel urged that the petitioner should not have been awarded the death sentence and it
ought to be commuted in view of the failure of the courts to conduct an appropriate mitigation
exercise.

62. In a line of precedent of this Court, there has been a discussion on whether a separate hearing on
the issue of sentence is mandatory after recording the conviction of an accused for an offence
punishable by death. Section 235 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 17 states thus:

235. Judgment of acquittal or conviction.— (1) After hearing arguments and points of
law (if any), the Judge shall give a judgment in the case.

22

Sundar @ Sundarrajan vs State By Inspector Of Police on 21 March, 2023

(2) If the accused is convicted, the Judge shall, unless he proceeds in accordance with the provisions
of Section 360, hear the accused on the question of sentence, and then pass sentence on him
according to law.

63. In Santa Singh v State of Punjab 18, a two judge Bench of this Court highlighted the requirement
of having a separate sentencing hearing in view 17 “CrPC” 18 1976 (4) SCC 190 PART E of Section
235(2) of the CrPC and noted that the stage of sentencing was as important a stage in the process of
administering criminal justice as the adjudication of guilt.

64. The judgment of the majority in the Constitution Bench decision in Bachan Singh v State of
Punjab 19 reiterated the importance of a sentencing hearing. The Court noted that:

151. Section 354(3) of the CrPC, 1973, marks a significant shift in the legislative policy
underlying the Code of 1898, as in force immediately before April 1, 1974, according
to which both the alternative sentences of death or imprisonment for life provided for
murder and for certain other capital offences under the Penal Code, were normal
sentences. Now according to this changed legislative policy which is patent on the
face of Section 354(3), the normal punishment for murder and six other capital
offences under the Penal Code, is imprisonment for life (or imprisonment for a term
of years) and death penalty is an exception.

[…]

152. In the context, we may also notice Section 235(2) of the Code of 1973, because it makes not only
explicit, what according to the decision in Jagmohan's case was implicit in the scheme of the Code,
but also bifurcates the trial by providing for two hearings, one at the pre-

conviction stage and another at the pre-sentence stage.

[…]

163. […] Now, Section 235(2) provides for a bifurcated trial and specifically gives the accused person
a right of pre-sentence hearing, at which stage, he can bring on record material or evidence, which
may not be strictly relevant to or connected with the particular crime under inquiry, but
nevertheless, have, consistently with the policy underlined in Section 354(3) a bearing on the choice
of sentence. The present legislative policy discernible from Section 235(2) read with Section 354(3)
is that in fixing the degree of punishment or 19 1980 (2) SCC 684 PART E making the choice of
sentence for various offences, including one under Section 302, Penal Code, the Court should not
confine its consideration “principally” or merely to the circumstances connected with particular
crime, but also give due consideration to the circumstances of the criminal.

(emphasis supplied)

23

Sundar @ Sundarrajan vs State By Inspector Of Police on 21 March, 2023

65. This requirement of a separate hearing was reiterated in Muniappan v State of Tamil Nadu 20
where the Court noted the importance of complying with the provision for a separate hearing on
sentencing not merely as a formality but in spirit and substance by making a genuine effort to
enquire into information that may have a bearing on the question of sentence.

66. In Allauddin Mian v State of Bihar 21, a two judge Bench of this Court held that a sentencing
hearing is required to satisfy the rules of natural justice; that it is mandatory and is not a mere
formality. The Court noted:

10. …The requirement of hearing the accused is intended to satisfy the rule of natural
justice. It is a fundamental requirement of fair play that the accused who was hitherto
concentrating on the prosecution evidence on the question of guilt should, on being
found guilty, be asked if he has anything to say or any evidence to tender on the
question of sentence. This is all the more necessary since the courts are generally
required to make the choice from a wide range of discretion in the matter of
sentencing. To assist the court in determining the correct sentence to be imposed the
legislature introduced sub-section (2) to Section 235.

The said provision therefore satisfies a dual purpose; it satisfies the rule of natural justice by
according to the accused an opportunity of being heard on the question of sentence and at the same
time helps the court to choose the sentence to be awarded. Since the provision is intended to give
the accused an opportunity to place before the court all the relevant material having a bearing on the
question of sentence there can be no doubt that the provision is salutary 20 1981 (3) SCC 11 21 1989
(3) SCC 5 PART E and must be strictly followed. It is clearly mandatory and should not be treated as
a mere formality.

[…] In a case of life or death as stated earlier, the presiding officer must show a high degree of
concern for the statutory right of the accused and should not treat it as a mere formality to be
crossed before making the choice of sentence. If the choice is made, as in this case, without giving
the accused an effective and real opportunity to place his antecedents, social and economic
background, mitigating and extenuating circumstances, etc., before the court, the court's decision on
the sentence would be vulnerable. We need hardly mention that in many cases a sentencing decision
has far more serious consequences on the offender and his family members than in the case of a
purely administrative decision; a fortiori, therefore, the principle of fair play must apply with greater
vigour in the case of the former than the latter. An administrative decision having civil
consequences, if taken without giving a hearing is generally struck down as violative of the rule of
natural justice. Likewise a sentencing decision taken without following the requirements of
subsection (2) of Section 235 of the Code in letter and spirit would also meet a similar fate and may
have to be replaced by an appropriate order. The sentencing court must approach the question
seriously and must endeavour to see that all the relevant facts and circumstances bearing on the
question of sentence are brought on record. Only after giving due weight to the mitigating as well as
the aggravating circumstances placed before it, it must pronounce the sentence. We think as a
general rule the trial courts should after recording the conviction adjourn the matter to a future date
and call upon both the prosecution as well as the defence to place the relevant material bearing on

24

Sundar @ Sundarrajan vs State By Inspector Of Police on 21 March, 2023

the question of sentence before it and thereafter pronounce the sentence to be imposed on the
offender.

(emphasis supplied)

67. The importance of a separate sentencing hearing being afforded to the accused after recording a
conviction was reiterated in Anguswamy v State PART E of Tamil Nadu 22, Malkiat Singh v State of
Punjab 23 and Dattaraya v State of Maharashtra24.

68. On the other hand, there have also been judgments of this Court where it was held that while the
court may adjourn for a separate hearing, same-day sentencing did not violate the provisions of
Section 235(2) of the CrPC and did not in itself vitiate the sentence. This reasoning was adopted in
the judgments of this Court in Dagdu v State of Maharashtra 25, Tarlok Singh v State of Punjab 26
and Ramdeo Chauhan v State of Assam 27

69. In Suo Motu W.P. (Crl.) No. 1/2022 titled In re: Framing Guidelines Regarding Potential
Mitigating Circumstances to be Considered while Imposing Death Sentences, this Court took note of
the difference in approach in the interpretation of Section 235(2) of CrPC and referred the question
for consideration of a larger bench. While it took note of the conflict on what amounted to ‘sufficient
time’ at the trial court stage to allow for a separate and effective sentencing hearing, it noted that all
the decisions also had the following common ground:

27. The common thread that runs through all these decisions is the express
acknowledgment that meaningful, real and effective hearing must be afforded to the
accused, with the opportunity to adduce material relevant for the question of
sentencing.

22 1989 (3) SCC 33 23 1991 (4) SCC 341 24 2020 (14) SCC 290 25 1977 (3) SCC 68 26
1977 (3) SCC 218 27 2001 (5) SCC 714 PART E

70. In the present case, the judgment of the Trial Court dealing with sentencing indicates that a
meaningful, real and effective hearing was not afforded to the petitioner.

71. The Trial Court did not conduct any separate hearing on sentencing and did not take into
account any mitigating circumstances pertaining to the petitioner before awarding the death
penalty. In the course of its judgment, the trial court merely noted the following, before awarding
the death penalty:

In present day circumstances it has become common of kidnapping of children and
elders for ransom and kidnapped being murdered if expected ransom is not received.
In this situation unless the kidnappers for ransom are punished with extreme
penalty, in future kidnapping of children and elders for ransom would get increased
and the danger of society getting totally spoiled, would have to faced is of no doubt.
Hence having regard to all these it is decided that it would be in the interests of

25

Sundar @ Sundarrajan vs State By Inspector Of Police on 21 March, 2023

justice to award to the 1st accused the extreme penalty. Not only that the court saw
the mother of the deceased boy profusely crying and weeping in court over the death
of her son in court and the scene of onlookers in court having wept also cannot be
forgotten by anyone. Hence it is decided that such offenders have to be punished with
extreme penalty; in the interests of justice.

72. The High Court took into account the gruesome and merciless nature of the act. It reiterated the
precedents stating that the death penalty is to be awarded only in the rarest of rare cases. However,
it did not specifically look at any mitigating circumstances bearing on the petitioner. It merely held
that:

28. In a given case like this, it is an inhuman and a merciless act of gruesome murder
which would shock the conscience of the society. Under the circumstance, showing
mercy or leniency to such accused would be misplacing the mercy. That apart,
showing leniency would be mockery on the criminal system. Therefore, the death
penalty imposed by the trial Judge, has got to be affirmed, and accordingly, it is
affirmed.

PART E

73. This Court examined the aggravating circumstances of the crime in detail. However, as regards
the mitigating circumstances, it noted that:

31. As against the aforesaid aggravating circumstances, learned counsel for the
accused-appellant could not point to us even a single mitigating circumstance. Thus
viewed, even on the parameters laid down by this Court, in the decisions relied upon
by the learned counsel for the accused-appellant, we have no choice, but to affirm the
death penalty imposed upon the accused appellant by the High Court. In fact, we
have to record the aforesaid conclusion in view of the judgment rendered by this
Court in Vikram Singh & Ors. Vs. State of Punjab, (2010) 3 SCC 56, wherein in the
like circumstances (certainly, the circumstances herein are much graver than the
ones in the said case), this Court had upheld the death penalty awarded by the High
Court.

74. The above sequence indicates that no mitigating circumstances of the petitioner were taken into
account at any stage of the trial or the appellate process even though the petitioner was sentenced to
capital punishment.

75. In terms of the aggravating circumstances that were taken note of by this Court in appeal, our
attention has been drawn to the following circumstance:

30. […]

26

Sundar @ Sundarrajan vs State By Inspector Of Police on 21 March, 2023

(vii) The choice of kidnapping the particular child for ransom, was well planned and
consciously motivated. The parents of the deceased had four children – three
daughters and one son. Kidnapping the only male child was to induce maximum fear
in the mind of his parents.

Purposefully killing the sole male child, has grave repercussions for the parents of the deceased.
Agony for parents for the loss of their only male child, who would have carried further the family
lineage, and is expected to see them through their old age, is unfathomable. Extreme misery caused
to the aggrieved party, certainly adds to the aggravating circumstances.

We wish to note that the sex of the child cannot be in itself considered as an aggravating
circumstance by a constitutional court. The murder of a young PART E child is unquestionably a
grievous crime and the young age of such a victim as well as the trauma that it causes for the entire
family is in itself, undoubtedly, an aggravating circumstance. In such a circumstance, it does not and
should not matter for a constitutional court whether the young child was a male child or a female
child. The murder remains equally tragic. Courts should also not indulge in furthering the notion
that only a male child furthers family lineage or is able to assist the parents in old age. Such remarks
involuntarily further patriarchal value judgements that courts should avoid regardless of the
context.

76. In Rajendra Pralhadrao Wasnik v State of Maharashtra 28, a three judge bench of this Court
took note of the line of cases of this Court which underline the importance of considering the
probability of reform and rehabilitation of the convicted accused before sentencing him to death.
The court observed:

43. At this stage, we must hark back to Bachan Singh and differentiate between
possibility, probability and impossibility of reform and rehabilitation. Bachan Singh
requires us to consider the probability of reform and rehabilitation and not its
possibility or its impossibility.

[…]

45. The law laid down by various decisions of this Court clearly and unequivocally mandates that the
probability (not possibility or improbability or impossibility) that a convict can be reformed and
rehabilitated in society must be seriously and earnestly considered by the courts before awarding the
death sentence. This is one of the mandates of the “special reasons” requirement of Section 354(3)
CrPC and ought not to be taken lightly since it involves snuffing out the life of a person. To
effectuate this mandate, it is the obligation on the prosecution to prove to the court, through
evidence, that the probability is that the convict cannot be reformed or 28 2019 (12) SCC 460 PART
E rehabilitated. This can be achieved by bringing on record, inter alia, material about his conduct in
jail, his conduct outside jail if he has been on bail for some time, medical evidence about his mental
make-up, contact with his family and so on. Similarly, the convict can produce evidence on these
issues as well.

27

Sundar @ Sundarrajan vs State By Inspector Of Police on 21 March, 2023

46. If an inquiry of this nature is to be conducted, as is mandated by the decisions of this Court, it is
quite obvious that the period between the date of conviction and the date of awarding sentence
would be quite prolonged to enable the parties to gather and lead evidence which could assist the
trial court in taking an informed decision on the sentence. But, there is no hurry in this regard, since
in any case the convict will be in custody for a fairly long time serving out at least a life sentence.

47. Consideration of the reformation, rehabilitation and reintegration of the convict into society
cannot be overemphasised. Until Bachan Singh, the emphasis given by the courts was primarily on
the nature of the crime, its brutality and severity. Bachan Singh placed the sentencing process into
perspective and introduced the necessity of considering the reformation or rehabilitation of the
convict. Despite the view expressed by the Constitution Bench, there have been several instances,
some of which have been pointed out in Bariyar and in Sangeet v. State of Haryana where there is a
tendency to give primacy to the crime and consider the criminal in a somewhat secondary manner.
As observed in Sangeet “In the sentencing process, both the crime and the criminal are equally
important.” Therefore, we should not forget that the criminal, however ruthless he might be, is
nevertheless a human being and is entitled to a life of dignity notwithstanding his crime. Therefore,
it is for the prosecution and the courts to determine whether such a person, notwithstanding his
crime, can be reformed and rehabilitated. To obtain and analyse this information is certainly not an
easy task but must nevertheless be undertaken. The process of rehabilitation is also not a simple one
since it involves social reintegration of the convict into society. Of course, notwithstanding any
information made available and its analysis by experts coupled with the evidence on record, there
could be instances where the social reintegration of the convict may not be possible. If that should
happen, the option of a long duration of imprisonment is permissible.

(emphasis supplied) PART E

77. The law laid down in Bachan Singh requires meeting the standard of ‘rarest of rare’ for award of
the death penalty which requires the Courts to conclude that the convict is not fit for any kind of
reformatory and rehabilitation scheme. As noted in Santosh Kumar Satishbhushan Bariyar v State
of Maharashtra 29, this requires looking beyond the crime at the criminal as well:

66. The rarest of rare dictum, as discussed above, hints at this difference between
death punishment and the alternative punishment of life imprisonment. The relevant
question here would be to determine whether life imprisonment as a punishment will
be pointless and completely devoid of reason in the facts and circumstances of the
case? As discussed above, life imprisonment can be said to be completely futile, only
when the sentencing aim of reformation can be said to be unachievable. Therefore,
for satisfying the second exception to the rarest of rare doctrine, the court will have to
provide clear evidence as to why the convict is not fit for any kind of reformatory and
rehabilitation scheme. This analysis can only be done with rigour when the court
focuses on the circumstances relating to the criminal, along with other
circumstances. This is not an easy conclusion to be deciphered, but Bachan Singh sets
the bar very high by introduction of the rarest of rare doctrine.

28

(emphasis supplied)

Sundar @ Sundarrajan vs State By Inspector Of Police on 21 March, 2023

78. A similar point was underlined by this Court in Anil v State of Maharashtra30 where the Court
noted that:

33. In Bachan Singh this Court has categorically stated, ‘the probability that the
accused would not commit criminal acts of violence as would constitute a continuing
threat to the society’, is a relevant circumstance, that must be given great weight in
the determination of sentence. This was further expressed in Santosh Kumar
Satishbhushan Bariyar. Many a times, while determining the sentence, the courts
take it for granted, looking into the facts of a particular case, that the accused would
be a menace to the society and there is no possibility of reformation and
rehabilitation, while it is the duty of the court to 29 2009 (6) SCC 498 30 2014 (4)
SCC 69 PART E ascertain those factors, and the State is obliged to furnish materials
for and against the possibility of reformation and rehabilitation of the accused. The
facts, which the courts deal with, in a given case, cannot be the foundation for
reaching such a conclusion, which, as already stated, calls for additional materials.
We, therefore, direct that the criminal courts, while dealing with the offences like
Section 302 IPC, after conviction, may, in appropriate cases, call for a report to
determine, whether the accused could be reformed or rehabilitated, which depends
upon the facts and circumstances of each case.

(emphasis supplied)

79. No such inquiry has been conducted for enabling a consideration of the factors mentioned above
in case of the petitioner. Neither the trial court, nor the appellate courts have looked into any factors
to conclusively state that the petitioner cannot be reformed or rehabilitated. In the present case, the
Courts have reiterated the gruesome nature of crime to award the death penalty. In appeal, this
Court merely noted that the counsel for the petitioner could not point towards mitigating
circumstances and upheld the death penalty. The state must equally place all material and
circumstances on the record bearing on the probability of reform. Many such materials and aspects
are within the knowledge of the state which has had custody of the accused both before and after the
conviction. Moreover, the court cannot be an indifferent by-stander in the process. The process and
powers of the court may be utilised to ensure that such material is made available to it to form a just
sentencing decision bearing on the probability of reform.

80. In Mofil Khan, a three judge bench of this Court was also dealing with a review petition which
was re-opened in view of the decision in Mohd. Arif v Registrar, Supreme Court of India. While
commuting the death sentence to PART E life imprisonment, the Court reiterated the importance of
looking at the possibility of reformation and rehabilitation. Notably, it pointed out that it was the
Court’s duty to look into possible mitigating circumstances even if the accused was silent. The Court
held that:

29

Sundar @ Sundarrajan vs State By Inspector Of Police on 21 March, 2023

9. It would be profitable to refer to a judgment of this Court in Mohd. Mannan v.
State of Bihar in which it was held that before imposing the extreme penalty of death
sentence, the Court should satisfy itself that death sentence is imperative, as
otherwise the convict would be a threat to the society, and that there is no possibility
of reform or rehabilitation of the convict, after giving the convict an effective,
meaningful, real opportunity of hearing on the question of sentence, by producing
material. The hearing of sentence should be effective and even if the accused remains
silent, the Court would be obliged and duty-bound to elicit relevant factors.

10. It is well-settled law that the possibility of reformation and rehabilitation of the
convict is an important factor which has to be taken into account as a mitigating
circumstance before sentencing him to death. There is a bounden duty cast on the
Courts to elicit information of all the relevant factors and consider those regarding
the possibility of reformation, even if the accused remains silent. A scrutiny of the
judgments of the trial court, the High Court and this Court would indicate that the
sentence of death is imposed by taking into account the brutality of the crime.

There is no reference to the possibility of reformation of the Petitioners, nor has the State procured
any evidence to prove that there is no such possibility with respect to the Petitioners. We have
examined the socio-economic background of the Petitioners, the absence of any criminal
antecedents, affidavits filed by their family and community members with whom they continue to
share emotional ties and the certificate issued by the Jail Superintendent on their conduct during
their long incarceration of 14 years. Considering all of the above, it cannot be said that there is no
possibility of reformation of the Petitioners, foreclosing the alternative option of a lesser sentence
and making the imposition of death sentence imperative.

(emphasis supplied) PART E

81. The duty of the court to enquire into mitigating circumstances as well as to foreclose the
possibility of reformation and rehabilitation before imposing the death penalty has been highlighted
in multiple judgments of this Court. Despite this, in the present case, no such enquiry was
conducted and the grievous nature of the crime was the only factor that was considered while
awarding the death penalty.

82. During the course of the hearing of the review petition, this court had passed an order directing
the counsel for the state to get instructions from jail authorities on the following aspects: (i) the
conduct of the petitioner in jail; (ii) information on petitioner’s involvement in any other case; (iii)
details of the petitioner acquiring education in jail; (iv) details of petitioner’s medical records; and
(v) any other relevant information.

83. Through an affidavit dated 26 September 2021, the Sub-Inspector of Police Kammapuram at
Cuddalore District, Tamil Nadu has informed the court that the conduct of petitioner has been
satisfactory and he has not been involved in any other case. Furthermore, he is suffering from
systemic hypertension and availing medication from the prison hospital. The petitioner has also

30

acquired a diploma in food catering during his time in the prison.

Sundar @ Sundarrajan vs State By Inspector Of Police on 21 March, 2023

84. Separately, this Court also received a document dated 8 November 2018 from the
Superintendent of Prisons, Central Prison, Cuddalore-4 in response to the letter from Assistant
Registrar, Supreme Court of India communicating the order seeking instructions from jail
authorities. Notably, this document states that the petitioner tried to escape from prison on 6
November 2013. It is PART E concerning that the Respondent, in the affidavit dated 26 September
2021, has failed to include this information.

85. The non-disclosure of material facts amounts to misleading this Court and to an attempt at
interfering with the administration of justice. In the Suo Motu Contempt Petition (Civil) No 3 of
2021 titled In Re: Perry Kansagra, this Court discussed the line of precedent of this Court dealing
with tendering of affidavits and undertakings containing false statements or suppressing /
concealing material facts amounting to contempt of court:

15. It is thus well settled that a person who makes a false statement before the Court
and makes an attempt to deceive the Court, interferes with the administration of
justice and is guilty of contempt of Court. The extracted portion above clearly shows
that in such circumstances, the Court not only has the inherent power but it would be
failing in its duty if the alleged contemnor is not dealt with in contempt jurisdiction
for abusing the process of the Court.

Accordingly, we deem it appropriate to initiate suo moto contempt proceedings against the
respondent for withholding material information from this Court.

86. As per the written submissions of the petitioner, he was about 24 years old when the judgment
of the Trial Court was rendered on 30 July 2010. He has been in prison since 2009, 13 years. He had
no prior antecedents and the jail authorities have stated that he has not been involved in any other
case. However, the jail authorities have brought to the notice of this Court, the attempt of petitioner
to escape from prison.

87. In the review petition, it has also been submitted that the petitioner could not communicate
mitigating circumstances bearing on his sentencing decision to PART E the lawyer and his relatives,
who being poor and uneducated, could not properly contest the case for him. The fact remains that
no mitigating circumstances were placed before any of the appellate courts.

88. On the basis of these details, it cannot be said that there is no possibility of reformation even
though the petitioner has committed a ghastly crime. We must consider several mitigating factors:
the petitioner has no prior antecedents, was 23 years old when he committed the crime and has
been in prison since 2009 where his conduct has been satisfactory, except for the attempt to escape
prison in 2013. The petitioner is suffering from a case of systemic hypertension and has attempted
to acquire some basic education in the form of a diploma in food catering. The acquisition of a
vocation in jail has an important bearing on his ability to lead a gainful life.

31

Sundar @ Sundarrajan vs State By Inspector Of Police on 21 March, 2023

89. Considering the above factors, we are of the view that even though the crime committed by the
petitioner is unquestionably grave and unpardonable, it is not appropriate to affirm the death
sentence that was awarded to him. As we have discussed, the ‘rarest of rare’ doctrine requires that
the death sentence not be imposed only by taking into account the grave nature of crime but only if
there is no possibility of reformation in a criminal.

90. However, we are also aware that a sentence of life imprisonment is subject to remission. In our
opinion, this would not be adequate in view of the gruesome crime committed by the petitioner.

91. This court has been faced with similar situations earlier where it has noticed that the sentence of
life imprisonment with remission may be inadequate in PART E certain cases. For instance, in
Swamy Shraddananda (2) @ Murali Manohar Mishra v State of Karnataka31 the Court noted that:

92. The matter may be looked at from a slightly different angle. The issue of sentencing has two
aspects. A sentence may be excessive and unduly harsh or it may be highly disproportionately
inadequate. When an appellant comes to this Court carrying a death sentence awarded by the trial
court and confirmed by the High Court, this Court may find, as in the present appeal, that the case
just falls short of the rarest of the rare category and may feel somewhat reluctant in endorsing the
death sentence. But at the same time, having regard to the nature of the crime, the Court may
strongly feel that a sentence of life imprisonment subject to remission normally works out to a term
of 14 years would be grossly disproportionate and inadequate. What then should the Court do? If the
Court’s option is limited only to two punishments, one a sentence of imprisonment, for all intents
and purposes, of not more than 14 years and the other death, the Court may feel tempted and find
itself nudged into endorsing the death penalty. Such a course would indeed be disastrous. A far
more just, reasonable and proper course would be to expand the options and to take over what, as a
matter of fact, lawfully belongs to the Court i.e. the vast hiatus between 14 years’ imprisonment and
death. It needs to be emphasised that the Court would take recourse to the expanded option
primarily because in the facts of the case, the sentence of 14 year’s imprisonment would amount to
no punishment at all.

(emphasis supplied)

92. Accordingly, it is open to this Court to prescribe the length of imprisonment, especially in cases
where the capital punishment is replaced by life imprisonment. Considering the facts of the instant
case, we are of the 31 2008 (13) SCC 767 PART F considered view that the petitioner must undergo
life imprisonment for not less than twenty years without remission of sentence. F. Conclusion

93. For the reasons discussed above, we see no reason to doubt the guilt of the petitioner in
kidnapping and murdering the victim. The exercise of the jurisdiction in review to interfere with the
conviction is not warranted. However, we do take note of the arguments regarding the sentencing
hearing not having been conducted separately in the Trial Court and mitigating circumstances
having not been considered in the appellate courts before awarding the capital punishment to the
petitioner. While weighing this argument, the gruesome nature of the crime of murder of a young
child of merely 7 years of age has also weighed upon us and we do not find that a sentence of life

32

Sundar @ Sundarrajan vs State By Inspector Of Police on 21 March, 2023

imprisonment, which normally works out to a term of 14 years, would be proportionate in the
circumstances.

94. Accordingly, we commute the death sentence imposed upon the petitioner to life imprisonment
for not less than twenty years without reprieve or remission.

95. Separately, a notice is required to be issued to the Inspector of Police, Kammapuram Police
Station, Cuddalore District, State of Tamil Nadu to offer an explanation as to why action should not
be taken for the filing of the affidavit dated 26 September 2021. In this case, prima facie, material
information regarding the conduct of the petitioner in the prison was concealed from this Court.
Accordingly, the Registry is directed to register the matter as a suo motu proceeding for contempt of
court. PART F

96. We dispose of the review petitions in the above terms.

… . . … . . … . . . . … . . . . . . . . … … … … … … . … . . . . . . C J I   [ D r   D h a n a n j a y a   Y   C h a n d r a c h u d ]
…..…..…....…........……………….…........J. [Hima Kohli] …..…..…....…........……………….…........J.
[Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha] New Delhi;

March 21, 2023.

33