Suresh Lataruji Ramteke vs Sau. Sumanbai Pandurang Petkar on 21 September, 2023

Suresh Lataruji Ramteke vs Sau. Sumanbai Pandurang Petkar
on 21 September, 2023

Author: Sanjay Karol

Bench: Abhay S. Oka, Sanjay Karol

2023INSC846

REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL No. 6070 OF 2023
[Arising out of SLP(C)No.20183 of 2022]

SURESH LATARUJI RAMTEKE                                            …APPELLANT(S)

Versus

SAU. SUMANBAI PANDURANG
PETKAR & ORS.                                                     …RESPONDENTS

JUDGMENT

SANJAY KAROL J.,

1. Leave granted.

2. The following questions arise for consideration of this Court:

2.1 Whether in the absence of affording adequate opportunity of hearing to the
parties on addressing the framed substantial questions of law, the High Court could
have proceeded to decide the same in an appeal preferred under section 100 Code of
Civil Procedure (hereinafter “CPC”), particularly, when the findings of fact rendered
by two Courts, were sought to be reversed?

2.2 Whether in the absence of any trial record or without summoning and perusing
the trial record, findings of fact on the issue of plaintiff’s readiness and willingness to
execute the sale deed, could have been reversed by the High Court in exercise of its
appellate jurisdiction under section 100 CPC?

1

Suresh Lataruji Ramteke vs Sau. Sumanbai Pandurang Petkar on 21 September, 2023

3. Though, initially in the defendants’ appeal, which was listed firstly on 26th April
2022, the High Court fixed the matter for preliminary hearing on 29th September
2022, but adjourned it for the next day, i.e., 30th September, 2022 when, after
framing the substantial questions of law, proceeded to hear the appeal and reversed
the findings of fact concurrently recorded by the two Courts in the plaintiff’s favour.

4. Hence, this appeal by special leave, seeks to assail a judgement and order dated
30th September 2022 passed in Second Appeal No.324/2021 by the High Court of
Judicature at Bombay (Nagpur Bench)1 whereby concurrent findings returned by the
Courts below vide judgement dated 3 rd September, 20142 by the Civil Judge Senior
Division, Gadchiroli and vide 1 For Brevity, "Impugned Judgement"

2 Hereafter Referred to as "The Trial Court"

judgement dated 1st October, 20213 by the Principal District Judge, Gadchiroli, were overturned.

THE FACTUAL MATRIX

5. The respondent namely, Sumanbai Pandurang Petkar (defendant in the original suit)4 had agreed
to sell, for a consideration of (cid:132)6,60,000/− the property subject matter of dispute, i.e., 3 acres of land
to the appellant herein (plaintiff in the original suit)5.

6. For transfer, the Divisional Commissioner, Nagpur Division, Nagpur, accorded necessary
permissions. Despite various attempts at execution, the same did not take place, and as such the
plaintiff issued notices to that effect, which were served on the respondents requiring them to be
present at the office of the concerned authority on 16th December, 2009 at 11:30 AM to get the deed
executed. Such notices remained not complied with as the defendants allegedly, tried to evade
coming to the office of the authority for such purpose.

7. It is as such that the case, subject matter of the present lis came to be filed by the Plaintiff.

3 Hereinafter, "First Appellate Court" 4 Hereafter referred to as "the Defendants" 5 Hereafter, "the
Plaintiff"

TRIAL COURT AND FIRST APPELLATE COURT

8. The Trial Court framed 5 issues. A tabular representation of the issues, the
corresponding findings and the reasons therefor, in short, is as below: − S. Issues
Findings Reasons No.

1. Does plaintiff prove that YES PW−1 Suresh and PW−2 defendant no. 1 has
Sudhakar have deposed that entered into an an agreement was entered agreement of
sale suit into in respect of the land land Survey No. 236/2 and their testimonies
remain area 1.19 HR of Navegaon unshaken. Even though in favor of plaintiff for

2

Suresh Lataruji Ramteke vs Sau. Sumanbai Pandurang Petkar on 21 September, 2023

Ulhas Shriniwas Athaale consideration of (PW−3) has not positively Rs.6,60,00/−?
identified the thumb impression as that being the same one affixed by defendant no.
1, namely Sumanbai that does not establish that she had not affixed her thumb
impressions.

2. Does plaintiff prove that YES It is clear that, as per the that on 29.03.2004 answer
to issue one, the defendant no. 1has agreement was entered into, executed the
agreement and it stating that to sell in favour of the Rs.60,000/− stands received
plaintiff and the earnest by the defendant.

money of Rs.60,000/−                     Conclusively, said amount
was paid by the plaintiff                was paid.
to the defendant on the
same day?

2A      Whether the plaintiff                    No document is placed on
proves that he paid                      record to show wherefrom
Rs.1,00,000 on              NO           the said amounts were
17.01.2005, another                      withdrawn, nor was the same
Rs.1,00,000/− on                         paid in the presence of any

(cid:12)     07.05.2005, Rs.2,000/−                      one of the witnesses. The
on 12.06.2008 and                           amount paid on 07.05.2005
Rs.8,000/− on                               was apparently paid by
12.06.2008 to defendant                     cheque but the cheque
no. 1 through her                           number is absent from the
husband defendant no.                       receipt. No passbook or
2? If yes, what is the legal                statement is placed on record
effect of this payment on                   to show the payment of such
the rights of the parties?                  amount. The handwriting in
which the endorsement on
the last page of the
agreement was made in
respect of receipt of such
amount is unclear.

3.   Does the plaintiff prove        YES         Suresh’s (PW 1) testimony
that he is ready and                        that after receiving requisite
willing to perform his                      permission from the
part of the contract?                       authority the plaintiff had
asked the defendant to
execute the deed by way of
serving notice and also the
fact that he has placed on
record cheque for
Rs.3,90,000/−, leads to the
conclusion that he has
always been ready and
willing to perform his part of

3

Suresh Lataruji Ramteke vs Sau. Sumanbai Pandurang Petkar on 21 September, 2023

the contract.

4.   Is the plaintiff entitled for   YES         Consequent to the findings in
specific relief as sought                   the affirmative in question
for?                                        Nos.1, 2 and 3, the question
No.4 is also in the
affirmative.

5.   What order and decree?          Suit     is
partly
decreed
with        −−−−−
proportio
nate
costs.

9. The Plaintiff was, in view of the above, directed to deposit (cid:132) 6 lakh with the Court
within 15 days and upon such deposit, the defendant was to necessarily execute the
sale deed to be entitled to withdraw the said amount.

10. The First Appellate Court in addition to the questions framed by the Trial Court,
further added two issues, i.e., (a) Whether the suit is within limitation?; and (b)
Whether the impugned judgement required interference? While not disturbing the
findings arrived at by the Trial court, resultantly answering the second issue in the
negative, also held the suit filed to be within the period of limitation. The appeal was,
therefore, dismissed.

IMPUGNED JUDGMENT

11. In the Second Appeal, the Court framed four questions, substantial in nature, and
held that the concurrent findings as returned by the trial courts were based on
“complete misapplication of law” and “erroneous consideration” and appreciation of
the evidence led by the parties. Reliance was placed on Ravi Setia v. Madan Lal6 to
state that in cases of perverse findings/complete misappropriation/erroneous

6 (2019) 9 SCC 381 Two Judge Bench consideration of the evidence, or failure to consider relevant
evidence, a Court in Second Appeal could re−appreciate the evidence. In view of the above, the
judgement rendered by both the Courts below was set aside and the plaintiff’s suit for specific
performance dismissed.

12. It has been urged before us, amongst other grounds, that the judgement of the High Court is
contrary to the law settled by various judgments of this court as the substantial questions were
framed on the second date of hearing thereby contravening the provisions of Section 100 CPC; the

4

Suresh Lataruji Ramteke vs Sau. Sumanbai Pandurang Petkar on 21 September, 2023

High Court ought not to ordinarily reverse findings of fact, more so concurrent, returned by the trial
court until and unless findings returned are perverse, which clearly was not the case; on the aspect
of readiness and willingness, reliance was placed on Sukhbir Singh v. Brij Pal Singh7 to submit that
compliance with those two factors of specific relief does not entail the carrying of hard cash and
instead it is the presence of the financial capacity to do so. A cheque for (cid:132) 3,90,000/−8 has been
placed on record which was for the meeting which was slated to take place in the office of the Sub−
Registrar but in fact it was the Respondents who did not 7 (1997) 2 SCC 200 Two Judge Bench 8
Exhibit 73, as recorded by the Trial Court in issue No.3 of its judgment. attend; The High Court
erred severely in overturning the findings of fact, particularly in the absence of the record of the trial
court. OPINION OF THE COURT

13. The jurisprudence on Section 100, CPC is rich and varied. Time and again this Court in
numerous judgments has laid down, distilled and further clarified the requirements that must
necessarily be met in order for a Second Appeal as laid down therein, to be maintainable, and
thereafter be adjudicated upon. Considering the fact that numerous cases are filed before this Court
which hinge on the application of this provision, we find it necessary to reiterate the principles.

13.1 The requirement, most fundamental under this section is the presence and framing of a
“substantial question of law”. In other words, the existence of such a question is sine qua non for
exercise of this jurisdiction.9 13.2 The jurisdiction under this section has been described by this
Court in Gurdev Kaur v. Kaki10 (Two−Judge Bench) stating that post 1976 amendment, the scope of
Section 100 CPC stands drastically curtailed and narrowed down to be 9 Panchugopal Barua v.
Umesh Chandra Goswami and Ors. (1997) 4 SCC 713 Two Judge Bench 10 (2007) 1 SCC 546 Two
Judge Bench restrictive in nature. The High Court’s jurisdiction of interfering under Section 100
CPC is only in a case where substantial questions of law are involved, also clearly formulated/set out
in the memorandum of appeal. It has been observed that:

“At the time of admission of the second appeal, it is the bounden duty and obligation
of the High Court to formulate substantial questions of law and then only the High
Court is permitted to proceed with the case to decide those questions of law. The
language used in the amended section specifically incorporates the words as
“substantial question of law” which is indicative of the legislative intention. It must
be clearly understood that the legislative intention was very clear that legislature
never wanted second appeal to become “third trial on facts” or “one more dice in the
gamble”. The effect of the amendment mainly, according to the amended section,
was:

(i) The High Court would be justified in admitting the second appeal only when a
substantial question of law is involved;

(ii) The substantial question of law to precisely state such question;

(iii) A duty has been cast on the High Court to formulate substantial question of law
before hearing the appeal;

5

Suresh Lataruji Ramteke vs Sau. Sumanbai Pandurang Petkar on 21 September, 2023

(iv) Another part of the section is that the appeal shall be heard only on that
question.” Gurdev Kaur (supra) was referred to and relied upon in Randhir Kaur v.
Prithvi Pal Singh & Ors.11

11 (2019) 17 SCC 71; Two Judge Bench 13.3 In Santosh Hazari v. Purushottam Tiwari12 a Bench of
three Judges, held as under in regard to what constitutes a substantial question of law:−

a) Not previously settled by law of land or a binding precedent.

b) Material bearing on the decision of case; and (c) New point raised for the first time before the
High Court is not a question involved in the case unless it goes to the root of the matter. Therefore, it
will depend on facts of each case.

Such principles stand followed in Government of Kerala v. Joseph13 and Chandrabhan v.
Saraswati14. 13.4 Non−formulation of substantial question(s) of law renders proceedings “patently
illegal”. This Court’s decisions in Umerkhan v. Bimillabi15 and Shiv Cotex v. Tirgun Auto Plast Pvt
Ltd. & Ors.16 indicate this position.

14. Substantial questions of law, as framed by the High Court must be answered in light of the
contentions raised therein. 12 (2001) 3 SCC 179 Three Judge Bench 13 2023 SCC OnLine SC 961
Two Judge Bench 14 2022 SCC OnLine SC 1273 Two Judge Bench 15 (2011) 9 SCC 684 Two Judge
Bench 16 (2011) 9 SCC 678 Two Judge Bench 14.1 If the Court is of the view that a question framed
is to be altered, deleted or a new question is to be added, then the Court must hear the parties.

14.2 For both the above principles, reference may be made to Gajaraba Bhikhubha Vadher v.
Sumara Umar Amad 17 where the following principles were observed: −

a) The substantial question of law framed by the High Court must be answered, with reasons.
Disposing off the appeal without answering the same cannot be justified.

b) If a need is felt to modify, alter or delete a question, a hearing must be provided to the parties in
respect thereof.

14.3 When the case is admitted, but upon hearing when it is found that no substantial question of
law arises for consideration, reasons should be recorded in such dismissal.

15. In Kichha Sugar Co. Ltd. v. Roofrite (P) Ltd 18 it was observed:

17 (2020) 11 SCC 114 (Three Judge Bench) 18 (2009) 16 SCC 280 Three Judge Bench
“4. Our attention is drawn by the learned counsel for the respondents to the
provisions of Section 100(5) of the Civil Procedure Code where the respondent to a
second appeal is permitted “to argue that the case does not involve such question” i.e.
the questions formulated earlier. No doubt, but then the order on the second appeal
should indicate, howsoever briefly, why the questions formulated at the earlier stage

6

Suresh Lataruji Ramteke vs Sau. Sumanbai Pandurang Petkar on 21 September, 2023

had, at the stage of final hearing, been found to be no questions of law.”

16. Substantial questions should ordinarily, not be framed at a later stage. If done so, then parties
must be given an opportunity to meet them. This Court in U.R. Virupakshappa v. Sarvamangala19
held :

“15. … It, furthermore, should not ordinarily frame a substantial question of law at a
subsequent stage without assigning any reason therefor and without giving a
reasonable opportunity of hearing to the respondents. [See Nune Prasad v. Nune
Ramakrishna [(2008) 8 SCC 258 : (2008) 10 Scale 523] ; Panchugopal Barua v.
Umesh Chandra Goswami [(1997) 4 SCC 713] (SCC paras 8 and 9); and Kshitish
Chandra Purkait v. Santosh Kumar Purkait [(1997) 5 SCC 438] (SCC paras 10 and
12)].

16. The High Court, in this case, however, formulated a substantial question of law
while dictating the judgment in open court. Before such a substantial question of law
could be formulated, the parties should have been put to notice. They should have
been given an opportunity to meet the same. Although the Court has the requisite
jurisdiction to formulate a substantial question of law at a subsequent stage which
was not formulated at the time of admission of the second appeal but the
requirements laid down in the proviso appended to Section 100 of the Code of Civil
Procedure were required to be met.” 19 (2009) 2 SCC 177 Two Judge Bench 16.1 This
Court in Mehboob−Ur−Rehman v. Ahsanul Ghani20, observed in respect of
application of Section 100(5) CPC as under: −

a) It is not rule under proviso to sub−section (5) to hear any other substantial
question of law irrespective of the question(s) formulated, so as to annul other
requirements of S. 100, CPC.

b) Proviso to come in operation in exceptional cases where reasons are to be recorded by High
Court. 16.2 It has further been held that the application of this section is only when some questions,
substantial in law, already stand framed. (B.C. Shivashankara v. B.R. Nagaraj21).

16.3 Wrong application of law laid down by the Privy Council, Federal Court or the Supreme Court,
will not qualify for substantial question of law and neither wrong application of facts.

16.4 If on an issue, the trial court discusses the evidence but does not return a finding thereon, High
20 (2019) 19 SCC 415 Two Judge Bench 21 (2007) 15 SCC 387 Two Judge Bench Court in
jurisdiction under Section 100, CPC may do so.

Reference be made to Govindbhai Chhotabhai Patel v. Patel Ramanbhai Mathurbhai.22 This Court
in Kondiba Dagadu Kadam v. Savitribai Sopan Gujar23, observed− “6. If the question of law termed
as a substantial question stands already decided by a larger Bench of the High Court concerned or
by the Privy Council or by the Federal Court or by the Supreme Court, its merely wrong application

7

Suresh Lataruji Ramteke vs Sau. Sumanbai Pandurang Petkar on 21 September, 2023

on the facts of the case would not be termed to be a substantial question of law. Where a point of law
has not been pleaded or is found to be arising between the parties in the absence of any factual
format, a litigant should not be allowed to raise that question as a substantial question of law in
second appeal. The mere appreciation of the facts, the documentary evidence or the meaning of
entries and the contents of the document cannot be held to be raising a substantial question of
law…” 16.5 Interference on findings of fact permitted in exceptional cases, i.e., when finding is based
on either inadmissible or, no evidence. This Court in Dinesh Kumar v. Yusuf Ali24 referring to
various other cases held:−

a) It is not permissible for High Court to reappreciate evidence as if it was the first appellate court
unless findings were perverse.

22 (2020) 16 SCC 255 Two Judge Bench 23 (1999) 3 SCC 722 Two Judge Bench 24 (2010) 12 SCC
740 Two Judge Bench

b) Finding of fact can be interfered in exceptional circumstances as rarity, rather than a regularity.

c) Scrutiny of evidence in second appeal is not prohibited but has to be exercised upon proper
circumspection.

17. Jurisdiction under second appeal not to be exercised merely because an alternate view is
possible. It was observed in Hamida v. Mohd. Khalil25

7. …The High Court, it is well settled, while exercising jurisdiction under Section 100 CPC, cannot
reverse the findings of the lower appellate court on facts merely on the ground that on the facts
found by the lower appellate court another view was possible.” This position was reiterated by Avtar
Singh & Ors. v. Bimla Devi & Ors.26 17.1 In aid of such a restricted application, an essential aspect in
ensuring that it does not acquire the nature of a “third appeal” is the limited possibility of
appreciation of evidence and connectedly, the restriction on upturning concurrent findings of fact.
However, there are certain exceptions to the rule as pointed out by this Court in Nazir Mohamed v.
J. Kamala27, as under:

25 (2001) 5 SCC 30 Two Judge Bench 26 (2021) 13 SCC 816 Two Judge Bench 27
(2020) 19 SCC 57 Two Judge Bench “33.4. The general rule is, that the High Court
will not interfere with the concurrent findings of the courts below. But it is not an
absolute rule. Some of the well− recognised exceptions are where: (i) the courts below
have ignored material evidence or acted on no evidence; (ii) the courts have drawn
wrong inferences from proved facts by applying the law erroneously; or

(iii) the courts have wrongly cast the burden of proof. A decision based on no
evidence, does not refer only to cases where there is a total dearth of evidence, but
also refers to case, where the evidence, taken as a whole, is not reasonably capable of
supporting the finding.” 17.2 The extent of the same may be underscored by the
observation that:

8

Suresh Lataruji Ramteke vs Sau. Sumanbai Pandurang Petkar on 21 September, 2023

“32. In a second appeal, the jurisdiction of the High Court being confined to
substantial question of law, a finding of fact is not open to challenge in second appeal,
even if the appreciation of evidence is palpably erroneous and the finding of fact
incorrect as held in V. Ramachandra Ayyar v. Ramalingam Chettiar [V. Ramachandra
Ayyar v. Ramalingam Chettiar, AIR 1963 SC 302] . An entirely new point, raised for
the first time, before the High Court, is not a question involved in the case, unless it
goes to the root of the matter.” (Emphasis Supplied)

18. It is apparent from the above extracted principles and a perusal of the respective judgments that
the second appeal is envisioned, much like any other process of the Court to be a step−by−step
process, each step further being a consequence of the previous one. Framing of substantial questions
at the stage of admission, the appeal then being admitted for hearing, hearing thereon, and then a
reasoned judgment.

19. However, as a reading of the impugned judgment reveals, these steps came to be followed, only
partially, more so, ignoring the time element, inherent therein.

20. As Sumara Umar Ahmad (supra), Kichha Sugar (supra) and Virupakshappa (supra) and also the
ingredients identified by Gurdev Kaur (supra) show, hearing the parties, on all questions, framed at
the time of admission as also the one framed, added or altered, is absolutely essential.

21. In the present case, the parties were not given the requisite time to meet the questions framed by
the Court. Section 100(5) CPC suggests that there is a gap between framing of the questions at
admission and hearing, as the proviso thereto gives an opportunity to the Court to frame additional
questions at the time of hearing, on which the parties would have to be heard as well. Meaning
thereby, that the questions framed at the time of admission, at such point of subsequent framing of
questions are already known to the parties and they have had time to prepare to address arguments
on the same. It is during the arguments that a further important issue is discovered and a question
in that regard is framed, with the parties then being granted time to meet that question as well.

22. Our view finds support in Amar Singh v. Dalip Singh28 wherein this Court held: −

a) The purpose of framing of substantial question of law is to give the parties an opportunity to come
prepared on that particular question.

b) When a substantial question of law is formulated by the Court then the same must be made
known to parties and thereafter they have to be given an opportunity to advance arguments thereon.

c) If any additional questions were framed at the time of hearing, the Court must hear the parties on
that question as well.

23. Here, the questions of law, were framed on the second date of hearing, the parties were heard
right then and there, and the second appeal was disposed of with the judgment being dictated and
findings of fact reversed. That, as the above discussion points out, is not in consonance with the

9

Suresh Lataruji Ramteke vs Sau. Sumanbai Pandurang Petkar on 21 September, 2023

manner set out for the disposal of a second appeal.

24. The impugned judgment overturns concurrent findings of fact in respect of readiness and
willingness on the part of the 28 (2012) 13 SCC 405 Two Judge Bench plaintiff to perform the
contract, without pointing out the exceptional circumstance or the perversity in the findings which
were returned by the Courts below.

25. For the Court to have done so, in accordance with law, the actual evidence, which was before the
Courts below, in our view, had to be called for. This is so because, if the findings returned are to be
upturned on perversity, the same should unmistakably be reflected from record. If this is not so
done, the Court of first appeal being the “final Court of fact”, would be reduced to a mere saying, of
no actual effect. After all, a second appeal is not a “third trial on facts”, and so, for reappreciation of
evidence to be justified, and for the same to be required − as well as being demonstrably, at a
different threshold from merely, a “possible different view”, perversity or the other conditions of “no
evidence” or “inadmissible evidence” ought to be urged, and subsequently, with the Court being
satisfied on the arguments advanced, of such a possibility, the Court would then, proceed to call for
the record. That is to say that accepting the argument of perversity merely on the submissions made
and not having appreciated the record, would be unfair to the Court of first appeal.

26. The haste with which the Court proceeded to dispose of the appeal without proper and adequate
opportunity to address arguments cannot be appreciated. The governing statute lays considerable
emphasis on hearing the parties on all questions− and the same is reflected in various
pronouncements of this Court. The approach adopted by a Court in disposing of such appeals must
abide by the same.

27. The questions of law raised in the instant appeal are answered as under :

27.1 A Court sitting in second appellate jurisdiction is to frame substantial question of
law at the time of admission, save and except in exceptional circumstances. Post such
framing of questions the Court shall proceed to hear the parties on such questions,
i.e., after giving them adequate time to meet and address them. It is only after such
hearing subsequent to the framing that a second appeal shall come to be decided.

27.2 In ordinary course, the High Court in such jurisdiction does not interfere with
finding of fact, however, if it does find any compelling reason to do so as regard in
law, it can do but only after perusing the records of the Trial Court, on analysis of
which the conclusion arrived at by such a Court is sought to be upturned. In other
words, when overturning findings of fact, the Court will be required to call for the
records of the Trial Court or if placed on record, peruse the same and only then
question the veracity of the conclusions drawn by the Court below.

28. In view of the foregoing discussion we find it fit to remand the matter to the High
Court for consideration afresh in accordance with law. Judgment and Order dated
30th September 2022 passed in Second Appeal No.324/2021 by the High Court of

10

Suresh Lataruji Ramteke vs Sau. Sumanbai Pandurang Petkar on 21 September, 2023

Judicature at Bombay (Nagpur Bench) is set aside and the case is restored to the file
of the High Court. Accordingly, the appeal is accepted and allowed in such terms.

29. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.

30. No costs.

……………………J. (B.R GAVAI) ….....……………J. (SANJAY KAROL) Date : 21st September, 2023;

Place: New Delhi.

11