Suresh Thipmppa Shetty vs The State Of Maharashtra on 26 July, 2023

Suresh Thipmppa Shetty vs The State Of Maharashtra on 26
July, 2023

Author: Vikram Nath

Bench: Vikram Nath

1

2023INSC749
REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL No. 1541 OF 2010

SURESH THIPMPPA SHETTY                                  … APPELLANT

VERSUS

THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA                            … RESPONDENT

AND

CRIMINAL APPEAL No. 2346 OF 2011

SADASHIV SEENA SALIAN                                   … APPELLANT

VERSUS

THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA,
THROUGH HOME SECRETARY,
CIVIL SECRETARIAT, BOMBAY                           … RESPONDENT

J U D G M E N T

AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH, J.

2. These appeals are directed against the common Final Judgment and Order dated 05.11.2009
(hereinafter referred to as the “Impugned Judgment”) passed by a Division Bench of the High Court
of Judicature at Bombay (hereinafter referred to as the “High Court”) in Criminal Appeals No. 50 of
2003 (Accused No. 4/A4 – Suresh Thipmppa Shetty) and 522 of 2003 (Accused No. 2/A2 –
Sadashiv Seena Salian) respectively, whereby the High Court dismissed the appeals filed by the
appellants herein and upheld the conviction order(s) passed by the Sessions Court. The State’s
appeal against the acquittal of 4 co-accused i.e., A1, A5, A6 and A7 (Criminal Appeal No. 496 of
2003) as also Criminal Appeal No. 86 of 2003 by the Accused No. 3/A3 (Ganesh alias Annu

1

Suresh Thipmppa Shetty vs The State Of Maharashtra on 26 July, 2023

Shivaram Shetty, who later passed away), were dismissed by the Impugned Judgment. THE
FACTUAL PRISM:

3. Briefly put, relevant details of the story run thus:

3.1 The prosecution alleges that the original accused A1, A2 and A7 were in the
Colaba Police Station lockup from 23.09.1994 to 29.09.1994. The allegation is that
they entered into a criminal conspiracy between the period from 23.09.1994 to
12.05.1995 to abduct and murder Mahendra Pratap Singh (hereinafter referred to as
the “deceased”).

3.2 12.05.1995 became the fateful day. One Sharda Prasad Singh, a businessman, is
stated to be in the petroleum business. His office was located at Express Highway,
near the Regional Transport Office, Ghatkopar.

He has five sons. They were carrying out the business jointly. One of the sons of the said Sharda
Prasad Singh was the deceased. The prosecution states that A1 and A7, who are real brothers,
running Saroj Petro Chemicals Limited as also a transport business, had a business rivalry with the
deceased and thus, conspired to abduct and murder him. Their head office was at Chembur and they
used to manufacture thinner and solvents at Thane.

3.3 PW2 was a rickshaw-driver. A2 booked his rickshaw for going to the Jawaharlal Nehru Port
Trust. A2 and A3 came to Hotel Garden. They asked PW2 to take the rickshaw on the Highway.
Thereafter, they changed direction and got down and selected a spot for the assassination of the
deceased and returned to the hotel.

3.4 On 12.05.1995, PW1 as usual had been to his business. At about 6 PM, the deceased informed
him that one person is expected from Bangalore with money and they would go to Navi Mumbai.
Then, both in a Maruti 1000 vehicle, driven by the deceased reached Hotel Garden, Panvel at about
7.30 PM. They parked their vehicle at the parking lot. After enquiring with the receptionist, they
went to the 1st Floor and entered Room No. 106, where A3 was inside. On enquiry by the deceased,
A3 informed that as the air-conditioner was not working, Sethji (the person who the deceased had
come to meet) had gone to Hotel Welcome. Thereafter, A3 tried to contact Sethji by the
telephone/intercom but was unable to.

3.5 Then, A3 left the room to call Sethji. After about 5 minutes, he returned and informed that Sethji
was ex- pected at Hotel Garden itself. Thereafter, the as- sailant/shooter, who absconded, came and
informed that Sethji had gone to Farmhouse and the deceased and oth- ers were called there. 4
persons got into the Maruti 1000, being (1) the deceased; (2) PW1; (3) assailant/shooter, and (4) A3,
and proceeded to the Farmhouse. A3 and the shooter/assailant got the car, being driven by the
deceased stopped at a location, stepped out and later A3 and the assailant/shooter again got back in
the car and the shooter/assailant killed the deceased.

2

Suresh Thipmppa Shetty vs The State Of Maharashtra on 26 July, 2023

3.6 It is alleged that A2, on the side, had already booked a Maruti Van to proceed to Panvel from a
travel agency. Further, that A4, A3 and A2 proceeded in Maruti Van driven by PW7 to Hotel Garden.

3.7 A4, it is alleged, had with 2 others visited the site of occurrence prior to the incident by hiring
rickshaw. PW3 (Ranjan Shankar Behra, the hotel receptionist) has identified A4 being in the hotel
room with A3 and A2.

3.8 First Information Report, namely Crime No. 132/1995, was lodged on 13.05.1995. Investigation
commenced and culminated into a chargesheet against 10 persons – 3 were discharged and 7 stood
trial. Tabular summation of the assailed convictions, granted by the Sessions Court on 27.11.2002 is
apposite:

Sl. No. Position Convicted Under Punishment 1 A4 Section 302 r/w Rigorous Section
120-B of Imprisonment2 for the Indian Penal Life and INR Code, 18601 50,000 Fine
(1 year RI in default) 2 A2 Section 120-B, IPC 5 years’ RI and INR 50,000 Fine (1 year
RI in default) Section 302 r/w RI for Life and Section 120-B of INR 50,000 Fine 1
Hereinafter referred to as “IPC”. 2 Hereinafter referred to as “RI”.

IPC            (1 year RI in

default)

4. Aggrieved by order dated 27.11.2002 rendered by the Sessions Court, the present
appellants (A4 and A2), A3 and the State of Maharashtra preferred separate appeals
before the High Court. As noted above, the Impugned Judgment dismissed all the
appeals. In the meantime, A3 passed away. Aggrieved, now on account of the
Impugned Judgement, the appellants have preferred the instant appeals before this
Court.

SUBMISSIONS BY THE APPELLANTS:

5. According to learned counsel for the appellants, as per the prosecution story and
the witnesses, they (A4 and A2) were not the two persons who accompanied the
deceased in the car wherein ultimately, he was shot and thus, only upon the
conspiracy theory having been proved, could they have been convicted. Learned
counsel submitted that in the present case, the chain of events does not show any
conspiracy as the main accused being A1 and A7, who were brothers, and who were
said to have been in rivalry with the deceased had hatched the plan.

They hired the other/remaining accused to eliminate the deceased. It was further contended that as
per the complaint by the uncle of the deceased who is said to have accompanied him in the car, the
two accused who had sat behind in the car on the pretext of taking the deceased to meet one Sethji,
who had offered some business deal with the deceased, after one of the said two co-accused having

3

Suresh Thipmppa Shetty vs The State Of Maharashtra on 26 July, 2023

shot the deceased in the car, the complainant/PW1 (Chandrabhan Singh Srinath Singh) is said to
have been ordered to run away from the place (which he did), failing which he would be shot.

6. However, learned counsel pointed out that his conduct does not inspire confidence as he did not
go to the nearest Police Station but instead is said to have gone to the residence of one Bharatbhai
Shah who was not there but his brother-in-law was present, who accompanied him to the house of
the deceased, where his family members were informed and when they reached the place of
occurrence, they found that the police had already arrived on the spot. Another aspect, which
learned counsel for the appellants pointed out, was that it is against normal human behaviour that a
person after committing such a serious offence would leave an eyewitness alive, to later get exposed
and risk getting convicted, especially for offence(s) with serious penal consequences.

7. Learned counsel urged that there is absolutely no evidence available to link the appellants to the
crime as no connection whatsoever has surfaced during the entire investigation and trial apropos
them having conspired as no other conspiracy theory has even been considered by the prosecution.
It was further contended that once the so-called main conspirators, at whose behest the murder has
taken place, have been acquitted, there being no theory, much less proof, of any motive for the
appellants to commit the crime in question; in any view of the matter, benefit of doubt was required
to be given to them. It was contended that the surfacing of PW7 (Shivshankar Mongalal Tiwari) after
more than six months of the occurrence itself brings serious doubts about credibility in the
statement as he has stated that he has not mentioned the factum of occurrence of the crime in
question to anybody, which is highly improbable.

8. Another indicator concerning the testimony of PW7, as pointed out by the learned counsel for the
appellants is that if the incident took place at 8:15 PM, and minute details are being disclosed by
him when he was at a distance of 150 feet, the same is palpably difficult to believe. Moreover, the
weapon having not been recovered nor there being collection of the clothes worn by PW1 showing
that he has blood stains, when admittedly after being shot, the deceased’s neck had tilted on his
shoulder, also points to the said witness not being at the spot and the whole story so far as the
appellants are concerned is fabricated, per the learned counsel.

9. Learned counsel for A2 further took the stand that despite some money confiscated from the bank
account and fixed deposit of A2, there is nothing to connect the said money to A1 and A7 who are
said to have been the masterminds in hatching the conspiracy with motive.

10. Learned counsel summed up stating that even the alleged rivalry between the deceased on the
one hand, and A1 and A7 on the other, was not proved before the trial court, which resulted in the
acquittals of A1 and A7.

11. Learned counsel for the appellants submitted that in cross-examination, PW2 (Vinayak Shivaji
Sawant) has not identified A4. PW2 also admits that he was shown photographs of A2 and A4 on
many occasions. It was also contended that the assailant/actual shooter is still absconding and has
not been apprehended and only to cover up lapses, the police after six months have set up PW7 to
somehow implicate the appellants. In his deposition, PW7 has stated that he heard crackers being

4

Suresh Thipmppa Shetty vs The State Of Maharashtra on 26 July, 2023

burst which means that there were multiple sounds whereas there is a categorical statement made
by PW1, who was in the car that two shots were fired by a small weapon and thus, there could not
have been multiple sounds from the same firing, which indicates that it could not have been from a
small weapon, which would not make repeated sound(s).

SUBMISSIONS OF THE RESPONDENT:

12. Per contra, learned counsel appearing for the State (sole respondent) in both appeals supported
the Impugned Judgment. He tried to persuade us not to interfere. He submitted that the Sessions
Court has clearly discussed the role of the appellants based on the testimony of the witnesses and
they have also been identified by the prosecution witnesses. Thus, it was contended that the
conspiracy was clearly established. Furthermore, it was submitted that the Impugned Judgment has
also discussed the deposition of the prosecution witnesses, including the room service
personnel/hotel staff of different hotels who have recognised A2, which further proves that there
was a criminal conspiracy between the appellants. It was contended that there was also discussion
based on the testimony of the witnesses about the bank transaction of A2. Reliance was placed by
learned counsel on the decision in Firozuddin Basheeruddin v State of Kerala, (2001) 7 SCC 596 for
the proposition that conspiracy can also be established based on circumstantial evidence and that
though not being a specific crime, but on the basis thereof, a conspirator can also be held
responsible for a crime committed by co- conspirator in furtherance of the objective of the
conspiracy.

ANALYSIS, REASONING AND CONCLUSION:

13. The High Court relied on the judgment of a 3-Judge Bench in Noor Mohammad Mohd. Yusuf
Momin v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1971 SC 885 to hold that ‘criminal conspiracy can be proved by
circumstantial evidence’3. On a careful appreciation of Noor Mohammad Mohd. Yusuf Momin
(supra), while in agreement with the law laid 3 Paragraph 51 of the Impugned Judgment. down
therein, we are not able to see how the prosecution’s case is strengthened with its aid. Noor
Mohammad Mohd. Yusuf Momin (supra) does not, in any manner, militate against this Court
overturning a conviction when reasonable doubt emanates.

14. In State of Uttar Pradesh v Krishna Gopal, (1988) 4 SCC 302, the Court held:

‘25. A person has, no doubt, a profound right not to be convicted of an offence which
is not established by the evidential standard of proof beyond reasonable doubt.
Though this standard is a higher standard, there is, however, no absolute standard.
What degree of probability amounts to “proof” is an exercise particular to each case.
Referring to the interdependence of evidence and the confirmation of one piece of
evidence by another a learned Author says [See: “The Mathematics of Proof-II”:
Glanville Williams:

Criminal Law Review, 1979, by Sweet and Maxwell, p. 340 (342)]:

5

Suresh Thipmppa Shetty vs The State Of Maharashtra on 26 July, 2023

“The simple multiplication rule does not apply if the separate pieces of evidence are
dependent. Two events are dependent when they tend to occur together, and the
evidence of such events may also be said to be dependent.

In a criminal case, different pieces of evidence directed to establishing that the
defendant did the prohibited act with the specified state of mind are generally
dependent. A juror may feel doubt whether to credit an alleged confession, and doubt
whether to infer guilt from the fact that the defendant fled from justice. But since it is
generally guilty rather than innocent people who make confessions, and guilty rather
than innocent people who run away, the two doubts are not to be multiplied together.
The one piece of evidence may confirm the other.” Doubts would be called reasonable
if they are free from a zest for abstract speculation. Law cannot afford any favourite
other than truth. To constitute reasonable doubt, it must be free from an
over-emotional response. Doubts must be actual and substantial doubts as to the
guilt of the accused person arising from the evidence, or from the lack of it, as
opposed to mere vague apprehensions. A reasonable doubt is not an imaginary,
trivial or a merely possible doubt; but a fair doubt based upon reason and common
sense. It must grow out of the evidence in the case.

26. The concepts of probability, and the degrees of it, cannot obviously be expressed
in terms of units to be mathematically enumerated as to how many of such units
constitute proof beyond reasonable doubt. There is an unmistakable subjective
element in the evaluation of the degrees of probability and the quantum of proof.

Forensic probability must, in the last analysis, rest on a robust common sense and, ultimately, on
the trained intuitions of the Judge. While the protection given by the criminal process to the accused
persons is not to be eroded, at the same time, uninformed legitimisation of trivialities would make a
mockery of administration of criminal justice.’ (emphasis supplied)

15. The principle in Krishna Gopal (supra) was reiterated in State of Madhya Pradesh v Dharkole,
(2004) 13 SCC 308. On the above anvil, the prosecution story does not inspire confidence to enable
sustenance of the impugned convictions.

16. Insofar as reliance placed by learned counsel for the State on the judgment in Firozuddin
Basheeruddin (supra) is concerned, this Court would only observe that the same encapsulated a
different factual scenario – the main persons responsible for the death of the deceased in that case
were convicted. However, in the present case, the prosecution story’s main conspirators stand
acquitted. This is one stark difference in the foundational facts of the said case and the present one.
But this is sufficient to safely conclude that Firozuddin Basheeruddin (supra) would not apply to the
case at hand. Recently, this Court in Sanjay Dubey v State of Madhya Pradesh, 2023 INSC 5194,
restated the position that is no longer res integra:

’18. … It is too well-settled that judgments are not to be read as Euclid’s theorems;
they are not to be construed as statutes, and; specific cases are authorities only for

6

Suresh Thipmppa Shetty vs The State Of Maharashtra on 26 July, 2023

what they actually decide. We do not want to be verbose in reproducing the relevant
paragraphs but deem it proper to indicate some authorities on this point –
Sreenivasa General Traders v State of Andhra Pradesh, (1983) 4 SCC 353 and M/s
Amar Nath Om Prakash v State of Punjab, (1985) 1 SCC 345 - which have been
reiterated, inter alia, in BGS SGS Soma JV v NHPC Limited, (2020) 4 SCC 234, and
Chintels India Limited v Bhayana Builders Private Limited, (2021) 4 SCC 602.’ 4
2023 SCC OnLine SC 610.

17. Having considered the matter in extenso, including examining the facts and applicable law, we
are of the clear view that sufficient material is available on record, which has come out during the
trial giving rise to reasonable doubt as to the involvement of the appellants in the crime. The
appellants have been able to poke holes in the testimonies of PW1, PW2 and PW7. Our conclusion is
only fortified as A1 and A7 have been acquitted and thus, the conspiracy angle dehors the said main
conspirators, who are the masterminds as per the prosecution, cannot be said to have been proved
beyond reasonable doubt. Moreover, no alternative theory qua conspiracy has been even suggested,
much less proved, by the prosecution. Undisputedly, the four persons in the car on the fateful date
were (1) the deceased; (2) PW1; (3) assailant/shooter, who is absconding, and (4) A3. In the
background of the admitted position that the appellants were not present at the spot where the
crime was committed i.e., in the car nor any direct/specific role in commission of the offence being
attributed to them, their convictions cannot be upheld.

18. On a deeper and fundamental level, when this Court is confronted with a situation where it has
to ponder whether to lean with the Prosecution or the Defence, in the face of reasonable doubt as to
the version put forth by the Prosecution, this Court will, as a matter of course and of choice, in line
with judicial discretion5, lean in favour of the Defence. We have borne in mind the cardinal
principle that life and liberty are not matters to be trifled with, and a conviction can only be
sustained in the absence of reasonable doubt. The presumption of innocence in favour of the
accused and insistence on the Prosecution to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt are not empty
formalities. Rather, their origin is traceable to Articles 21 and 14 of the Constitution of India. Of
course, for certain offences, the law seeks to place a reverse onus on the accused to prove his/her
innocence, 5 Although in the context of bail jurisprudence, for a working idea as to what ‘judicial
dis- cretion’ entails, peruse the views of a learned Single Judge (sitting as Judge-in-Chambers) of
this Court in Gudikanti Narasimhulu v Public Prosecutor, High Court of Andhra Pradesh, (1978) 1
SCC 240.

but that does not impact adversely the innocent-till- proven-guilty rule for other criminal offences.

19. In Coffin v United States, 156 US 432 (1895), the United States’ Supreme Court held:

‘The principle that there is a presumption of innocence in favor of the accused is the
undoubted law, axiomatic and elementary, and its enforcement lies at the foundation
of the administration of our criminal law.’

7

Suresh Thipmppa Shetty vs The State Of Maharashtra on 26 July, 2023

20. We see no quarrel with the afore-noted statement as the same applies on all fours to our
criminal justice system. The presumption of innocence is also a human right, per the
pronouncement in Narendra Singh v State of Madhya Pradesh, (2004) 10 SCC 699. In Ranjeetsing
Brahmajeetsing Sharma v State of Maharashtra, (2005) 5 SCC 294, a 3-Judge Bench of this Court, at
Paragraph 35, had opined that ‘… Liberty of a person should not ordinarily be interfered with unless
there exist cogent grounds therefor. …’

21. Accordingly, for reasons aforesaid, these appeals stand allowed. The appellants are discharged
from the liabilities of their bail bonds. If any fine(s) pursuant to the orders of the Sessions Court or
High Court were deposited by/realised from either appellant, they shall be entitled to refund of the
same.

........................J. [VIKRAM NATH] ........................J. [AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH] NEW DELHI
JULY 26, 2023

8