Jaideep Bose vs M/S Bid And Hammer Auctioneers Private ... on 18 February, 2025

Jaideep Bose vs M/S Bid And Hammer Auctioneers Private ... on
18 February, 2025

                                                 1

2025 INSC 241                                                            REPORTABLE

                             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                            CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                              CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 814 OF 2025
                            (Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 10212 of 2024

             JAIDEEP BOSE                                          ...     APPELLANT

                                            VERSUS

             M/S. BID AND HAMMER AUCTIONEERS
             PRIVATE LIMITED                                      ...    RESPONDENT

                                                WITH

                              CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 815 OF 2025
                            (Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 13443 of 2024

             NERGISH SUNAVALA                                      ...     APPELLANT

                                            VERSUS

             M/S. BID AND HAMMER AUCTIONEERS
             PRIVATE LIMITED & OTHERS                             ... RESPONDENTS

                                                WITH

                              CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 816 OF 2025
                            (Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 15653 of 2024

             SWATI DESHPANDE & OTHERS                              ... APPELLANTS

                                               VERSUS
   Signature Not Verified

   Digitally signed by

             M/S. BID AND HAMMER AUCTIONEERS
   POOJA SHARMA
   Date: 2025.02.18
   18:50:04 IST
   Reason:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48742622/

1

Jaideep Bose vs M/S Bid And Hammer Auctioneers Private ... on 18 February, 2025

             PRIVATE LIMITED                                       ...   RESPONDENT
(cid:12)                                                      2

                                                     WITH

                            CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 817 OF 2025
                          (Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 16153 of 2024

NEELAM RAAJ                                                      ...     APPELLANT

                                                   VERSUS

M/S. BID AND HAMMER AUCTIONEERS
PRIVATE LIMITED                                                 ...    RESPONDENT

                                              JUDGMENT

R. MAHADEVAN, J.

1. Leave granted.

2. These appeals are directed against an order dated 18.06.2024 passed by the High Court of
Karnataka at Bengaluru1 in Criminal Petition No.3829 of 2017, titled ‘Bennett Coleman and Co. Ltd
and others v. M/s. Bid and Hammer Auctioneers Private Limited, arising out of complaint in PCR
No.13146/2014 and CC No.18491 of 2016 pending on the file of the Court of II Additional Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate, Bengaluru2. By the said order, the High Court dismissed the criminal
petition filed by the appellants herein challenging the initiation of the criminal proceedings against
them for the offences under sections 499 and Hereinafter referred to as “the High Court”
Hereinafter referred to as “the trial Court” 500 of the Indian Penal Code, 18603, however, quashed
the complaint as far as M/s. Bennett Coleman and Co. Ltd.4 (Accused No.1) is concerned.

3. The genesis of the present cases lies in a private complaint dated 22.08.2014 filed by the
complainant / respondent herein against the company and its directors, editors and journalists,
numbering 14 accused persons, under Section 200 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 19735 read
with Sections 499 and 500 IPC. The gravamen of the complaint pertains to certain news articles
published in various newspapers viz., Bangalore Mirror, Mumbai Mirror, The Times of India
(Bangalore, Kolkata, Mumbai, New Delhi, and Pune Editions), and The Economic Times (New Delhi
and Mumbai editions) on 27.06.2014, 28.06.2014, 29.06.2014, 06.07.2014, 07.07.2014, and
20.07.2014 which contained alleged defamatory contents regarding the authenticity of certain
paintings to be auctioned by the respondent herein.

4. Upon receipt of the complaint, the sworn statement of the complainant / respondent was
recorded on 14.11.2014. Thereafter, the trial Court took cognizance of the complaint and directed to
register the same for the offences under sections 499 and 500 IPC and issue summons to the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48742622/

2

Jaideep Bose vs M/S Bid And Hammer Auctioneers Private ... on 18 February, 2025

accused, vide order dated 29.07.2016. The complaint was received as PCR No.13146/2014 and later,
For short, “IPC” For short, “the company” For short, “Cr.P.C” registered as CC No.18491 of 2016
which is now, pending on the file of the trial Court.

5. Challenging the issuance of summons, the appellants filed Criminal Petition No.3829 of 2017
before the High Court seeking to quash the criminal proceedings initiated against them. After due
contest, the High Court dismissed the petition as against the appellants herein, however, quashed
the complaint as far as the company (A1) is concerned. Aggrieved by the same, the appellants are
before us with the present appeals.

CONTENTIONS

6. The learned counsel for the appellant / Accused No.2 [SLP (Crl.) No.10212 of 2024] made the
following submissions:

(a) The appellant is neither the author of the alleged defamatory news articles nor
editor of any of the newspapers in question; and he is editorial director of the
company; and therefore, he is not responsible for the publication of the alleged
defamatory news articles.

(b) In the private complaint filed by the respondent, there is no specific averment
regarding the appellant’s role in publishing the alleged defamatory news articles,
except mentioning his name as the editorial director of the company and thus, he
could not have been arraigned as an accused.

(c) Under the Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867, it is the "editor"

who controls the selection of matter published in the newspapers, besides requiring the names of
editor, printer, and publisher to be published in the print line of the newspapers. The appellant's
name does not appear in the print line of any of the newspapers that published the news articles in
question. The designation of "Editorial Director" without any specific allegation about the
appellant's direct involvement in the publication of the impugned news articles, cannot form the
basis for criminal liability. Therefore, the appellant cannot be held liable for the alleged offences.

(d) Section 202 Cr.P.C. as amended in 2005, mandates an inquiry before proceeding against an
accused residing outside the jurisdiction of the Magistrate and this provision aims to prevent the
harassment of persons residing at far-off places through false complaints. In this case, the
Magistrate did not examine any other witnesses except the complainant and the statement of the
complainant manifestly fail to prove the allegation of defamation against the appellant. Hence, the
failure of complying with the mandatory provision of Section 202 Cr.P.C. before issuing process
against the appellant, who resides in Mumbai i.e., outside the territorial jurisdiction of the
Bengaluru court, vitiates the criminal proceedings initiated against him.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48742622/

3

Jaideep Bose vs M/S Bid And Hammer Auctioneers Private ... on 18 February, 2025

(e) The complaint lacks the essential ingredients of criminal defamation under Section 499 IPC. The
explanation to the said section clearly requires that the imputation must lower the moral or
intellectual character of a person in the estimation of others. Whereas, the complaint filed by the
respondent relies solely on the complainant's self-estimation of harm without any evidence from
third parties about reputational damage. Thus, the failure to establish reputational harm in the eyes
of others, renders the said complaint unsustainable.

(f) Without properly appreciating all these aspects, merely on assumption that the appellant being
the editorial director, is overseeing the contents of all the newspapers and responsible for the
publication of alleged defamatory news articles, the High Court dismissed the criminal petition filed
by the appellant, by the order impugned herein, which has to be set aside by this Court.

7. The learned counsel for the appellant / Accused No.12 [SLP (Crl.) No.13443/2024] made the
following submissions:

(a) The order impugned herein only refers to the article dated 27.06.2014 titled
“Fakes at Art Auction Raise Huge Storm” which was published on the date of auction
and was authored by Ms.Neelam Raj (Accused No.4) and it makes no reference to the
article authored by the appellant.

(b) There is no allegation that the appellant contributed or assisted or was involved in
the said article. Even in the complaint, there is only a bare allegation that the accused
have all, in connivance with one another, orchestrated a smear campaign that is
intended at ruining the reputation of the complainant and the news articles have
been engineered to appear on the date of auction. Thus, there is a bald averment to
substantiate the allegation of conspiracy.

(c) The appellant authored a completely different article titled ‘Art’s Identity Crisis’,
which was published on 20.07.2014 i.e., almost a month after the auction dated
27.06.2014. She did not draw any conclusion regarding the authenticity of the
paintings that the complainant was auctioning, rather the said article focused on the
challenge of authenticating Indian art and how it depends less on science and more
on an artist’s family in India. Therefore, the appellant’s article was not defamatory
and did not constitute the offence under section 499/500 IPC.

(d) Reliance was also placed on the decisions of this Court in Aroon Purie v. State of
NCT of Delhi6 and Iveco Magirus Brandschutztechnik GMBH v. Nirmal Kishore
Bhartiya7, wherein, it was held that there exists no bar that the exceptions to section
499 IPC can be regarded only at the stage of trial.

(e) However, the High Court on the basis of the article authored by the Accused No.4
and without having applied judicial mind to the article allegedly authored by the
appellant, erred in upholding the complaint and criminal proceedings emanating
therefrom before the Magistrate.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48742622/

4

Jaideep Bose vs M/S Bid And Hammer Auctioneers Private ... on 18 February, 2025

(f) The Magistrate except the complainant, did not examine any other witnesses. The
appellant resides in Mumbai, i.e., outside the territorial jurisdiction of the Magistrate
Court, but no inquiry was conducted before issuance of summons, and thus, there
was no substantial compliance of the mandatory procedure under section 202 Cr.P.C.
Hence, the summoning order was 2022 SCC OnLine SC 1491 (2024) 2 SCC 86 bad in
law.

(g) Mere factual reference to another allegedly defamatory article or recording of a
third-party view by a journalist cannot be held as defamatory and doing so would
severely impact freedom of press and places the appellant in jeopardy of being a
victim of the law of land being incorrectly applied against her and causing a
miscarriage of justice.

(h) It is alleged that the complainant appears to be a serial litigator taking recourse to
the criminal process only to stifle the freedom of speech and expression of the press
when art experts began to question the authenticity of the paintings being sold by the
complainant in its auction.

(i) This Court in Bloomberg Television Production Services India Private Limited &
Ors. v. Zee Entertainment Enterprises Limited8, has recognized that the
constitutional mandate of protecting journalistic expression cannot be understated.

(j) Similar defamation complaint filed by the respondent was quashed by this Court
vide judgment dated 20.07.2022 passed in Criminal Appeal No.1008 of 2022 arising
out of SLP (Crl) No.6732/2019 titled ‘M/s. DAG Pvt. Ltd v. Bid & Hammer
Auctioneers (P) Ltd.

With these submissions, learned counsel prayed to allow the appeal and quash the criminal
proceedings initiated against this appellant. 2024 INSC 255

8. The learned counsel for the appellants / Accused Nos.8, 9, 10 and 13 [SLP (Crl.) No. 15653 of
2024] made the following submissions:

(a) The trial court overlooked the news articles written by the appellants and erred in
issuing process only on the basis of the respondent’s interpretation of the news
articles made in the complaint and his sworn statement. Even the High Court in the
impugned order, referred to only the article written by Ms. Neelam Raj (Accused
No.4) and did not consider the news articles written by the appellants to see whether
the same were defamatory or not.

(b) The Respondent in paragraph 16 of the complaint stated that Accused
No.5-Maulik Vyas and the Appellant No.4 (Accused No.13) co-authored the article
dated 27.06.2014 in the Economic Times, however, a bare perusal of the said article
shows that it is said to be authored by Accused no 5-Maulik Vyas and only inputs are

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48742622/

5

Jaideep Bose vs M/S Bid And Hammer Auctioneers Private ... on 18 February, 2025

said to have been given by Accused No.13. This article only provides information
about exchange of legal notices and mentions the comments of the advocate of the
respondent.

(c) Since all the appellants are having office/residents at Mumbai and Kolkata i.e.,
outside the territorial jurisdiction, the Magistrate ought to have conducted inquiry as
required section 202 Cr.PC, by examining witnesses other than the complainant
before issuing process, which was not done.

(d) No reasons have been given in the summoning order, with respect to delineating
the role of each accused, in light of the judgement of this Court in Pepsi Foods Ltd.
and Others v. Special Judicial Magistrate and Others9.

(e) The respondent did not adduce any legal evidence and his statement manifestly
failed to prove the allegation of defamation against the appellants.

(f) The complaint was also fundamentally flawed as self-estimation is not defamation.
Since no witness has come to say that complainant has fallen in its estimation/ no
third person had come before the Magistrate to even prima facie claim that the
reputation of the Respondent had been lowered in their estimation.

Stating so, the learned counsel sought to quash the criminal proceedings initiated against the
appellants based on the private complaint filed by the respondent.

9. The learned counsel for the appellant / Accused No.4 [SLP (Crl.) No.16153 / 2024] made the
following submissions:

(a) The appellant wrote two news articles, which were carried in different editions
using different headlines as decided by the desk. It was stated that portions of an
article get deleted as per the discretion of the editor of that edition.

The impugned order of the High Court discussed only one article and remained completely silent on
the other article of the appellant and hence, it is liable to be set aside.

(b) The news articles merely state that experts have raised questions without making assumptions /
conclusions against the respondent and therefore, (1998) 5 SCC 749 the same would not constitute
the offence of defamation.

(c) Further, the news articles were published by the appellant in furtherance of an article previously
published in The Indian Express, which was already in public domain, and the subsequent debate
initiated by Samindranath Majumdar on social networking websites.

(d) In the article published, the statement of various art experts and family members of artists, such
as, Rukhsana Pathan Ara, Susobhan Adhikary, Prof.R.Sivakumar, Balaka Bhattacharjee, Ashish

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48742622/

6

Jaideep Bose vs M/S Bid And Hammer Auctioneers Private ... on 18 February, 2025

Anand, Rajani Prasanna Hebbar has been quoted; and no judgment on any works of art was given
by the appellant. However, the trial court without looking into the entire contents of the publication,
issued process on the basis of the respondent’s interpretation of the news articles in the complaint
and his sworn statement.

(e) The respondent did not adduce any legal evidence and also the statements of the complainant
manifestly fail to prove the allegation of defamation. Further, the summoning order was
fundamentally flawed as no third person had come before the Magistrate to even prima facie state
that the reputation of the respondent had been lowered in their estimation. In the absence of this
material, the very summoning order is bad in law.

(f) Without considering all these aspects, the High Court erred in dismissing the criminal petition by
the order impugned herein, which suffers from serious and glaring infirmities and is hence, liable to
be set aside.

10. Per contra, the learned counsel appearing for the complainant / respondent submitted that the
complainant enjoys a rich legacy that is enviable having been incorporated by persons of impeccable
character and reputation. In contrast, the defamatory news articles have had a serious and adverse
impact on the reputation of the complainant company. The news articles were widely circulated and
caused considerable harm to the company’s business interests. As a result, the company's reputation
has been significantly tarnished, and its credibility has been undermined in the eyes of its clients,
partners, and the public. In light of the substantial reputational damage caused, the respondent
preferred a private complaint under Section 200 Cr.P.C., against the accused for committing
defamation. The Magistrate after careful consideration of the defamatory nature of the news articles
in question, directed to register the complaint and issue summons to the accused.

10.1. The learned counsel further submitted that the complaint itself establishes the appellants’ role
in the publication of the defamatory news articles in the newspapers. The complainant has
sufficiently outlined the defamatory nature of the news articles, which caused harm to their
reputation. The issuance of summons by the trial Court is consistent with the legal principles
governing the stage of cognizance and process issuance, where a detailed inquiry into the merits of
the case is not required. That apart, the High Court's observations, including those in paragraph 3 of
the impugned order, are based on a prima facie appreciation of the facts and do not amount to
prejudging the case. It is well- settled that at the stage of summoning, the complainant need not
prove their case beyond doubt; a mere prima facie case suffices. Thus, according to the learned
counsel, the High Court correctly dismissed the challenge to the summons and the same need not be
interfered with by this court.

11. We have heard the learned counsel appearing on both sides and also perused the materials
available on record.

12. Vide order dated 12.08.202410 in SLP (Criminal) No.10212 of 2024, this Court granted an order
of interim stay of all further proceedings in connection with Complaint Case No.18491/2016 until
further orders. Similar order was passed by this Court in SLP (Criminal) No.13443 of 2024 as well,

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48742622/

7

Jaideep Bose vs M/S Bid And Hammer Auctioneers Private ... on 18 February, 2025

on 14.10.2024. Consequently, such benefit was also extended to the appellant in SLP (Criminal)
No.15653 of 2024 and the appellants in SLP (Criminal) No.16153 of 2024, vide orders dated
11.11.2024 and 14.11.2024 respectively. The petitioner is the Editorial Director of Bennett Coleman
and Company Limited. Mr.R.Basant, senior counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner submits
that:

(i) The complaint lacks specific allegations of acts or omission by the petitioner
(except allegations of a general nature);

(ii) The High Court erroneously assumed that the petitioner is the Editor of all the
newspapers and publications of the Bannett Coleman and Company Ltd and is,
therefore, responsible for all their contents; and

(iii) Separate individuals have been designated under Section 7 of the Press and
Registration of Books Act 1867 and hence the complaint of defamation against the
petitioner was not maintainable.

3 Issue notice returnable on 9 September 2024.

4 Pending further orders, there shall be a stay of further proceedings in connection with Complaint
Case No 18491/2016.

LEGAL PROVISIONS

13. At the outset, we refer to the relevant legal provisions applicable to the present case, as outlined
below:

(a) The Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867 Section 1 – Interpretation clause
‘Editor' means the person who controls the selection of the matter that is published in
a newspaper.

‘Newspaper’ means any printed periodical work containing public news or comments on public
news Section 5 Rules as to publication of newspapers. No newspaper shall be published in India,
except in conformity with the rules hereinafter laid down:

(1) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 3, every copy of every such
newspaper shall contain the names of the owner and editor thereof printed clearly on
such copy and also the date of its publication. (2) ……"

Section 7 "Office copy of declaration to be prima facie evidence. In any legal
proceeding whatever, as well civil as criminal, the production of a copy of such
declaration as is aforesaid, attested by the seal of some Court empowered by this Act
to have the custody of such declarations, or, in the case of the editor, a copy of the
newspaper containing his name printed on it as that of the editor shall be held

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48742622/

8

Jaideep Bose vs M/S Bid And Hammer Auctioneers Private ... on 18 February, 2025

(unless the contrary be proved) to be sufficient evidence, as against the person whose
name shall be subscribed to such declaration, or printed on such newspaper, as the
case may be, that the said person was printer or publisher, or printer and publisher
(according as the words of the said declaration may be) of every portion of every
newspaper whereof the title shall correspond with the title of the newspaper
mentioned in the declaration, or the editor of every portion of that issue of the
newspaper of which a copy is produced."

13.1. It is vivid from the above provisions that every newspaper must clearly mention the names of
its owner and editor, ensuring transparency in publication. Furthermore, a statutory presumption is
cast upon the editor, who is responsible for the selection of content that is subsequently published,
making him accountable for the same unless proven otherwise.

(b) Indian Penal Code, 1860 Section 499 Defamation. Whoever, by words either spoken or intended
to be read, or by signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning
any person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will
harm, the reputation of such person, is said, except in the cases hereinafter expected, to defame that
person.

Explanation 1.— It may amount to defamation to impute anything to a deceased person, if the
imputation would harm the reputation of that person if living, and is intended to be hurtful to the
feelings of his family or other near relatives.

Explanation 2.— It may amount to defamation to make an imputation concerning a company or an
association or collection of persons as such.

Explanation 3.— An imputation in the form of an alternative or expressed ironically, may amount to
defamation.

Explanation 4.— No imputation is said to harm a person’s reputation, unless that imputation
directly or indirectly, in the estimation of others, lowers the moral or intellectual character of that
person, or lowers the character of that person in respect of his caste or of his calling, or lowers the
credit of that person, or causes it to be believed that the body of that person is in a loathsome state,
or in a state generally considered as disgraceful.

Section 500 Punishment for defamation. Whoever defames another shall be punished with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.

13.2. From the above provisions, it is clear that defamation under section 499 IPC necessitates both
an intention to harm or knowledge that the imputation is likely to cause harm, and that the
imputation must be capable of lowering the reputation of the person in the estimation of others. In
other words, the essence of defamation lies not merely in the making of an imputation but in its
effect on the perception of the public, thereby impacting the standing of the person in society.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48742622/

9

Jaideep Bose vs M/S Bid And Hammer Auctioneers Private ... on 18 February, 2025

(c) Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 Section 202 Postponement of issue of process.

(1) Any Magistrate, on receipt of a complaint of an offence of which he is authorised to take
cognizance or which has been made over to him under section 192 may, if he thinks fit, [and shall, in
a case where the accused is residing at a place beyond the area in which he exercises his jurisdiction]
[Inserted by Act 25 of 2005, Section 19 (w.e.f. 23-6-2006).] postpone the issue of process against the
accused, and either inquire into the case himself or direct an investigation to be made by a police
officer or by such other person as he thinks fit, for the purpose of deciding whether or not there is
sufficient ground for proceeding :

Provided that no such direction for investigation shall be made, -

(a) where it appears to the Magistrate that the offence complained of is triable
exclusively by the Court of Session; or

(b) where the complaint has not been made by a Court, unless the complainant and
the witnesses present (if any) have been examined on oath under section 200.

(2) In an inquiry under sub-section (1), the Magistrate may, if he thinks fit, take
evidence of witnesses on oath:

Provided that if it appears to the Magistrate that the offence complained of is triable
exclusively by the Court of Session, he shall call upon the complainant to produce all
his witnesses and examine them on oath. (3) If an investigation under sub-section (1)
is made by a person not being a police officer, he shall have for that investigation all
the powers conferred by this Court on an officer-in-charge of a police station except
the power to arrest without warrant.” 13.3. The above provision clearly stipulates that
upon receiving a private complaint under section 200 Cr.P.C., the Magistrate must
mandatorily conduct an inquiry or investigation before proceeding to issue process
against the accused, if such accused resides outside the jurisdiction of the Court. In
other words, the Magistrate must examine witnesses before issuing summons in
cases where the accused resides outside the Magistrate’s jurisdiction. This mandatory
requirement of inquiry or investigation was introduced through section 19 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act (Central Act 25 of 2005) which came
into effect from 23.06.2006 by introducing the words ‘and shall, in a case where the
accused is residing at a place beyond the area in which he exercises his jurisdiction’.

13.4. The above requirement has been eruditely elucidated by this Court in Abhijit Pawar v. Hemant
Madhukar Nimbalkar11. The relevant paragraphs of the said judgment are extracted below:

“23. Admitted position in law is that in those cases where the accused is residing at a
place beyond the area in which the Magistrate exercises his jurisdiction, it is
mandatory on the part of the Magistrate to conduct an enquiry or investigation
before issuing the process. Section 202 CrPC was amended in the year 2005 by the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48742622/

10

Jaideep Bose vs M/S Bid And Hammer Auctioneers Private ... on 18 February, 2025

Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2005, with effect from 22-6-2006 by
adding the words “and shall, in a case where the accused is residing at a place beyond
the area in which he exercises his jurisdiction”. There is a vital purpose or objective
behind this amendment, namely, to ward off false complaints against such persons
residing at a far-off places in order to save them from unnecessary harassment. Thus,
the amended provision casts an obligation on the Magistrate to conduct enquiry or
direct investigation before issuing the process, so that false complaints are filtered
and rejected. The aforesaid purpose is specifically mentioned in the note appended to
the Bill proposing the said amendment.

24. The essence and purpose of this amendment has been captured by this Court in
Vijay Dhanuka v. Najima Mamtaj [Vijay Dhanuka v. Najima Mamtaj, (2014) 14 SCC
638: (2015) 1 SCC (Cri) 479] in the following words: (SCC p. 644, paras 11-

12) “11. Section 202 of the Code, inter alia, contemplates postponement of the issue of the process ‘in
a case where the accused is residing at a place beyond the area in which he exercises his jurisdiction’
and thereafter to either inquire into the case by himself or direct an investigation to be made by a
police officer or by such other person as he thinks fit. In the face of it, what needs our determination
is as to whether in a case where the accused is residing at a place beyond the area in which the
Magistrate exercises his jurisdiction, inquiry is mandatory or not.

12. The words ‘and shall, in a case where the accused is residing at a place beyond (2017) 3 SCC 528
the area in which he exercises his jurisdiction’ were inserted by Section 19 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure (Amendment) Act (Central Act 25 of 2005) w.e.f. 23- 6-2006. The aforesaid amendment,
in the opinion of the legislature, was essential as false complaints are filed against persons residing
at far-off places in order to harass them. The note for the amendment reads as follows:

‘False complaints are filed against persons residing at far-off places simply to harass
them. In order to see that innocent persons are not harassed by unscrupulous
persons, this clause seeks to amend sub-section (1) of Section 202 to make it
obligatory upon the Magistrate that before summoning the accused residing beyond
his jurisdiction he shall enquire into the case himself or direct investigation to be
made by a police officer or by such other person as he thinks fit, for finding out
whether or not there was sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused.’ The
use of the expression “shall” prima facie makes the inquiry or the investigation, as the
case may be, by the Magistrate mandatory. The word “shall” is ordinarily mandatory
but sometimes, taking into account the context or the intention, it can be held to be
directory. The use of the word “shall” in all circumstances is not decisive. Bearing in
mind the aforesaid principle, when we look to the intention of the legislature, we find
that it is aimed to prevent innocent persons from harassment by unscrupulous
persons from false complaints. Hence, in our opinion, the use of the expression
“shall” and the background and the purpose for which the amendment has been
brought, we have no doubt in our mind that inquiry or the investigation, as the case
may be, is mandatory before summons are issued against the accused living beyond

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48742622/

11

Jaideep Bose vs M/S Bid And Hammer Auctioneers Private ... on 18 February, 2025

the territorial jurisdiction of the Magistrate.”

26. The requirement of conducting enquiry or directing investigation before issuing
process is, therefore, not an empty formality. What kind of “enquiry” is needed under
this provision has also been explained in Vijay Dhanuka case [Vijay Dhanuka v.
Najima Mamtaj, (2014) 14 SCC 638: (2015) 1 SCC (Cri) 479], which is reproduced
hereunder: (SCC p. 645, para 14) “14. In view of our answer to the aforesaid question,
the next question which falls for our determination is whether the learned Magistrate
before issuing summons has held the inquiry as mandated under Section 202 of the
Code. The word “inquiry” has been defined under Section 2(g) of the Code, the same
reads as follows:

‘2. (g) “inquiry” means every inquiry, other than a trial, conducted under this Code by
a Magistrate or court;’ It is evident from the aforesaid provision, every inquiry other
than a trial conducted by the Magistrate or the court is an inquiry. No specific mode
or manner of inquiry is provided under Section 202 of the Code. In the inquiry
envisaged under Section 202 of the Code, the witnesses are examined whereas under
Section 200 of the Code, examination of the complainant only is necessary with the
option of examining the witnesses present, if any. This exercise by the Magistrate, for
the purpose of deciding whether or not there is sufficient ground for proceeding
against the accused, is nothing but an inquiry envisaged under Section 202 of the
Code.”

27. When we peruse the summoning order, we find that it does not reflect any such
inquiry. No doubt, the order mentioned that the learned Magistrate had passed the
same after reading the complaint, verification statement of the complainant and after
perusing the copies of documents filed on record i.e. FIR translation of the
complaint, affidavit of advocate who had translated the FIR into English, etc…

28. Insofar as these two accused persons are concerned, there is no enquiry of the
nature enumerated in Section 202 CrPC.

29. The learned Magistrate did not look into the matter keeping in view the
provisions of Section 7 of the Press Act and applying his mind whether there is any
declaration qua these two persons under the said Act and, if not, on what basis they
are to be proceeded with along with the Editors. Application of mind on this aspect
was necessary. It is made clear that this Court is not suggesting that these two
accused persons cannot be proceeded with at all only because of absence of their
names in the declaration under the Press Act. What is emphasised is that there is no
presumption against these persons under Section 7 of the Press Act and they being
outside the territorial jurisdiction of the Magistrate concerned, the Magistrate was
required to apply his mind on these aspects while passing summoning orders qua A-1
and A-2.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48742622/

12

Jaideep Bose vs M/S Bid And Hammer Auctioneers Private ... on 18 February, 2025

DISCUSSIONS AND FINDINGS

14. It appears to us that the complainant / respondent herein preferred a single complaint against 14
accused for different news articles written on different dates and published in different editions in
different States of the Country, viz., Delhi, Kolkata, Mumbai, Bangalore and Pune. Upon receipt of
the complaint, the respondent was examined and his sworn statement was recorded. Thereafter, the
Magistrate took cognizance of the complaint and directed to register the same and issue summons to
the accused. Consequently, the company (A1) and the appellants herein preferred criminal petition
before the High Court to quash the criminal proceedings initiated against them. Vide order dated
18.06.2024, the High Court quashed the complaint only in respect of the Accused No.1 – Bennett
Coleman and Co. Ltd., and dismissed the criminal petition insofar as the appellants are concerned.
Therefore, these criminal appeals are filed by the appellants.

15. According to the complainant / respondent herein, the defamatory news articles printed,
published and circulated by all the accused caused readers to view the complainant with suspicion
and also fostered an unjustifiable and unfounded public opinion that the works offered for sale by
the complainant through public auction could be fake. It was further alleged in the complaint that
the second accused being the editorial director of the company (A1), oversaw the contents of the
newspapers and was responsible for news articles’ publication; and all other accused, in connivance
with each other published various news articles in various newspapers with an intent to scuttle the
success of the complainant’s auction by harming its reputation or lowering its image in the
estimation of the public, thereby committing the offences punishable under Sections 499 and 500
IPC.

16. On the other hand, the appellants entirely refuted the allegations raised in the complaint filed by
the respondent. While they have commonly contended that the Magistrate failed to comply with the
procedure mandated under section 202 Cr.P.C., their individual responses to the specific allegations
regarding their respective publications are tabulated below for ease of reference:

    Name of the Details    of               Responses to the allegations
    appellant / Publication
    accused

    Jaideep Bose –    Editorial        He neither authored nor was connected
    A2                Director  of     with the publication of the alleged news
    SLP (Crl.) No.    the Company      articles and hence, he cannot be held
    10212/2024        (A1)             liable for the same.

    Nergish        20.07.2014          The article pertaining to the appellant
    Sunavala – A12 Times      of       was purely based on existing public
                   India               discourse and previously published
    SLP (Crl.) No.                     material by other reputed sources. There
    13443/2024                         was no intention to defame the
                                       respondent and the article was aimed at
                                       informing the public about matters of
                                       significant interest and concern. No
                                       Judgment or any insinuations was made.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48742622/

13

Jaideep Bose vs M/S Bid And Hammer Auctioneers Private ... on 18 February, 2025

    Swati          28.06.2014    The article on the face of it, is not
    Deshpande –    Times      of defamatory. A holistic reading of the
    A8             India Mumbai article rather shows that a balanced view
                                 was taken as it merely presents the views
    Appellant No.1               of all parties concerned, including the
    in SLP (Crl.)                complainant. There is nothing in the
    No.15653/2024                article to suggest any intention or
                                 knowledge of causing disrepute to the
                                 complainant.

    Shubro Niyogi 29.06.2014      The article nowhere mentions the name
    – A9           Times       of of the complainant, rather only reports on

Appellant No.2 India, Kolkata calls by art experts for the creation of a in SLP (Crl.) panel of experts
to scrutinize authenticity No.15653/2024 of artworks. There was no intention to disrepute the
complainant. When read in its entirety, the article cannot be considered as defamatory.

    Ratnottam         06.07.2014    A reading of article shows that it merely
    Sengupta –        Times      of reports on the controversy surrounding

A10            India              artworks and in a balanced manner,
Appellant No.3 Kolkata            includes the comments and the position
in SLP (Crl.)                     of the complainant, while also presenting
No.15653/2024                     the views of various other experts in the
                                  art-field. The reading of the article in its
                                  entirety does not constitute defamation.

Rashmi Menon     27.06.2014       The article clearly shows that the
– A13            Economic         appellant only gave certain inputs.
Appellant No.4   Times, New       Regardless, a reading of the article shows
in SLP (Crl.)    Delhi            that it merely reports on M. F. Hussain
No.15653/2024                     Foundation having sent a legal notice to
                                  the complainant, while also displaying
                                  the response of the complainant, which at
                                  that time had expressed that it was not
                                  aware of such notice. This article in no
                                  manner can be said to be defamatory.

Neelam Raj –   27.06.2014         A reading of the news articles authored
A4             Times       of     by the appellant cannot be said to be
               India,             defamatory. These news articles, read in
Appellant   in Bangalore          their entirety, merely report on the views
SLP (Crl.) No. 27.06.2014         of art experts and cautions people at large
16153/2024     Times       of     regarding fake art and nothing more.
               India, New         None of the news articles, suggests that
               Delhi              there was any intention to harm the
               27.06.2014,        complainant’s reputation.
               Times       of

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48742622/

14

Jaideep Bose vs M/S Bid And Hammer Auctioneers Private ... on 18 February, 2025

               India,Mumbai

                 27.06.2014
                 Times       of
                 India, Pune

                 28.06.2014
                 Times      of
                 India,
                 Bangalore

17. Before appreciating the rival contentions, it is necessary to look into the specific allegations
raised in the complaint against each of the appellants, which are extracted as under:

“2. ……The second accused is the editorial director of the first accused. The third
accused is the executive editor of the first accused. The second and third accused
oversee the content of the newspapers and are responsible for the contents….

12. On 27.06.2014, the fourth accused, Ms. Neelam Raj, wrote an article that carried
the headline, "Fakes at Art Auction Raise Huge Storm". On the front page of the
Times of India, Bangalore Edition itself and right under this headline, there is a
reference to the complainant by name. The article continues on page 14 with another
headline, "Biggest Counterfeit Indian Art Controversy Hits Auction".

Under this headline, there are further states, "A copy or two has cropped up in the most respected of
auction houses but Bangalore based Bid and Hammer's forthcoming auction has been assailed by
what perhaps is the biggest controversy to come to light in the Indian art market". The article also
alleges that the accused tried to contact the complainant's chairman, but was unsuccessful. The
complainant never received such calls and it is unethical and wrong to publish an article without
even clarifying the facts. It also asserts that the complainant was "caught" in a similar controversy in
2010 over the work of a Souza work. Further, incidents and works that have nothing to do with the
complainant are narrated, giving the reader the impression that the complainant is involved in these
works also and is a habitual dealer in fake arts and paintings…

13. These allegations and insinuations are clearly and palpably false and render a highly negative
image of the works brought to auction by the complainant after extensive study and verification at
considerable cost and despite the highly credible process of authentication of each work brought out
on auction. The allegations also defame eminent consignors such as granddaughter of Maharaja of
Burdwan, Namrata Shirodkar and Mahesh Babu and others.

14. On 27.06.2014 itself, the fourth accused, Ms. Neelam Raj, further authored similar insinuations
in the Delhi, Mumbai, and Pune editions of the Times of India under the heading, "Controversy
Over Fakes Hits Art Auction" on the front page. On the 12th page of the same edition under the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48742622/

15

Jaideep Bose vs M/S Bid And Hammer Auctioneers Private ... on 18 February, 2025

headline, "Experts Question Authenticity of Signatures dates in auction Art"…

15. The said accused followed this up with another defamatory article on 28.06.2014, the day after
the auction with the headline, "More Fake Trouble for Indian Art Mart. The article starts with the
words, "Fake" alleging that it continued to cause a tizzy in the art world especially concerning the
works featured in the auction of the complainant.

16. On 27.06.2014, the fifth accused. Mr. Maulik Vyas and Ms. Rashmi Menon, the thirteenth
accused, co-authored an article in the Economic Times with the headline, "Legal Notice Over Fake
Hussains” including on the first page. The article refers to a legal notice issued to the complainant
on the very day that the notice was sent and even before it was received by the complainant. This
clearly shows the intention of the article was to defame the complainant, knowing fully well that
readers of the Economic Times include leading industrialists, who are well known connoisseurs to
art and potential customers of the complainant…. It is pertinent to note that the said two accused
conveniently ignored the rebuttal and clarifications issued by the complainant against the false
charges levelled on the complainant, despite this rebuttal being sent to them well in time for
publication the following day. This shows the mala fide intent to defame the complainant, in fact.
Subsequently, the thirteenth accused, Ms. Rashmi Menon, confirmed receipt of the rebuttal from
the complainant. When asked why she did not publish the rebuttal, she stopped replying /
corresponding with the complainant. This shows the mala fide intent to defame the complainant.

18. On 13.06.2014, the eighth accused, Ms. Swati Deshpande, authored an article in the Times of
India, Mumbai Edition with the headline, "Auction House Denies 22 Hussain Works are Fake". The
article refers to the details of the legal notice and reply, thus casting doubts over the work of the
complainant. This is an insinuation that has tarnished the image of the complainant.

19. On 29.06.2014, the ninth accused Mr. Shubro Niyogi, authored an article in the Times of India,
Kolkata Edition insinuates that the auction held by the complainant contained fakes. The mala fide
intention of the ninth accused is clearly established from the fact that the paintings published in
support of the article were not even featured in the catalogue as they did not form part of the
auction. So the accused was not even aware of the paintings at the auction but took it upon himself
to call them fakes. This insinuation has tarnished the image of the complainant.

20. On 06.07.2014, the tenth accused. Mr. Rathnotham Sengupta, authored an article in the Times
of India, Kolkata Edition, with the headlines "Who Speaks the Last Word on Fakes". The article
specifically insinuates that Lots 82 and 83 of the auction held by the complainant were identified as
fakes. This insinuation has tarnished the image of the complainant.

22. 20.07.2014, the Twelfth accused, Ms. Nargish Sunavala, authored an article in the Times of
India, Bangalore Edition, insinuating that the works auctioned by the complainant do not have
proper authenticity certificates, deliberately suppressing the crucial processes involved in the
complainant's auction, which was in the public domain. This insinuation has tarnished the image of
the complainant.”

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48742622/

16

Jaideep Bose vs M/S Bid And Hammer Auctioneers Private ... on 18 February, 2025

18. It is not in dispute that the appellant (A2) Jaideep Bose is the Editorial Director of the company
and other appellants are authors of the alleged defamatory news articles published in various
newspapers. The respondent filed a single private complaint against the accused for committing the
offence of defamation.

19. Let us first deal with the case of the appellant (A2) Jaideep Bose, who stands on a different
footing from the other accused. He is serving as the Editorial Director of the company, which is the
owner of all the newspapers in question. According to him, he is neither the author nor the editor of
the news articles in question and his role is merely administrative in nature, with no direct
involvement in the publication process. He further states that there was procedural irregularity in
the process of issuance of summons as he resides in Mumbai, which falls outside the jurisdiction of
the Court, and hence, the Magistrate was required to conduct an inquiry by examining witnesses as
mandated under Section 202 Cr.P.C.

19.1. As already reiterated, it is the editor who plays a key role in the publication process bearing
responsibility for ensuring that the content published adheres to legal standards, including laws
surrounding defamation. It is well settled that the Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867 (“the
Act”) imposes a higher degree of responsibility and liability on an editor. Section 5 of the Act
mandates that every newspaper or periodical publication must specify the name of the editor and
owner. Section 7 creates a rebuttable presumption that the editor whose name is printed in the
newspaper shall be held to be the editor in any civil or criminal proceedings in respect of that
publication. Since an “editor” has been defined as the person who controls the selection of the
matter that is published in a newspaper, the presumption goes to the extent of holding that he was
the person, who controlled the selection of the matter that was published in the newspaper.
However, merely because the Act does not mention persons holding other roles in a publication of
the company, such as an Editorial Director, or mandate the publication of their names, the same
does not imply that such persons cannot be made liable for any defamatory content. The key
distinction is that unlike an editor, against whom a statutory presumption is imposed, there is no
such presumption against the editorial director at the outset [See: K.M. Mathew v. K.A.
Abraham12].

19.2. Turning to the complaint, which is also necessary in it, are specific allegations regarding the
role of the accused in the publication process. This Court 2002 (6) SCC 670 in Gambhirsinh R.
Dekare v. Falgunbhai Chimanbhai Patel13 observed that while the Act does not recognise any other
legal entity viz. Chief Editor, Managing Editor, etc. for raising a presumption, such individuals can
still be proceeded against, but only when specific allegations are made against them. In the present
case, the complaint merely alleges that the appellant (A2) oversaw the publications. No other
averments were made to establish as to how the appellant (A2) was responsible for controlling the
selection of contents of the newspaper publications. Furthermore, as already stated above, he is the
editorial director of the company and not of the individual newspapers. Thus, in our view, such a
broad, general or blanket statement without specific or substantive details cannot justify the
issuance of summons.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48742622/

17

Jaideep Bose vs M/S Bid And Hammer Auctioneers Private ... on 18 February, 2025

19.3. The Magistrate, without a proper examination and inquiry, proceeded to issue summons to the
appellant (A2). It is also pertinent to note here that the appellant (A2) resides in Mumbai, which
falls outside the jurisdiction of the concerned Magistrate. In such a scenario, as discussed earlier,
the Magistrate was required to proceed with the complaint in accordance with section 202(1) Cr.P.C.
However, no such inquiry was conducted in the present case. Therefore, considering all these
aspects, we are of the opinion that the complaint is not maintainable against the appellant (A2).

(2013) 3 SCC 697

20. Regarding the appellants in the other appeals, it is evident from the orders of the trial Court as
well as the High Court that not all news articles individually authored by the various accused were
considered. While passing the impugned order, the High Court referred only to one article authored
by Ms. Neelam Raj (A4) and neither took into account nor discussed the other news articles
authored by the remaining accused. Furthermore, the mandatory procedure under section 202
Cr.P.C., was clearly not followed. The Appellants viz., A8, A9, A10, A12 and A13 reside in Mumbai /
Kolkata, whereas the complaint was filed in Bangalore. The complainant failed to produce any
witness to prima facie establish that the alleged imputations had lowered their reputation in the
estimation of others and the Magistrate, after merely reviewing the complainant’s statement,
proceeded to issue summons. Thus, the Magistrate’s order clearly suffers from procedural
irregularity. Ordinarily, such irregularities would warrant a remand. However, in the present case,
the auction was conducted on 27.06.2014 and the complaint was filed on 22.08.2014. No material
has also been placed before us to suggest that the auction was unsuccessful or that any damage or
loss was actually caused, due to the alleged news articles published in the newspapers. Irrespective
of the same, at this stage, remanding the matter for fresh examination of witnesses before issuance
of summons would serve no useful purpose, given the remote likelihood of securing witnesses. It
would only prolong the litigation yielding little to no benefit especially, since the auction has already
concluded and more than a decade has passed. We also take note of the submissions of the learned
counsel for the appellants that there is no intent to defame or harm the complainant’s reputation.
Notably, this Court vide common order dated 20.07.2022 titled ‘M/s.DAG Pvt. Ltd. V. M/s.Bid &
Hammer Auctioneers (P) Ltd.’ allowed similar criminal appeals bearing Nos. 1008/2022 etc. cases,
arising from the complaint filed by the same complainant. In view of the above stated reasons, to
meet the ends of justice, we are inclined to quash the order passed by the High Court as well as the
issuance of summons by the Magistrate. Consequently, the criminal proceedings initiated against
the appellants are also liable to be quashed.

21. Before parting, we find it necessary to emphasise that right to freedom of speech and expression
guaranteed under Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution of India is paramount. At the same time, it is
reiterated that those working in the media, particularly, individuals in key positions, authors, etc.,
must exercise utmost caution and responsibility before publishing any statements, news, or
opinions. The power of the media in shaping public opinion is significant and the press possesses
the ability to influence public sentiments and alter perceptions, with remarkable speed. As aptly
stated by Bulwer Lytton, “The Pen is mightier than the sword”. Given its vast reach, a single article
or report can resonate with millions, shaping their beliefs and judgments, and it has the capability to
cause severe damage to the reputation of those concerned, with consequences that may be

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48742622/

18

Jaideep Bose vs M/S Bid And Hammer Auctioneers Private ... on 18 February, 2025

far-reaching and enduring. This highlights the critical need for accuracy and fairness in media
reporting, especially when dealing with matters having the potential to impact the integrity of
individuals or institutions. Keeping these aspects in mind, publication of the news articles must be
done in public interest and with good faith.

22. With the aforesaid observations, we allow all these appeals and quash the impugned order
passed by the High Court and summoning orders as well as the criminal complaint filed by the
respondent, as far as the appellants herein are concerned. Connected Miscellaneous Application(s),
if any, shall stand disposed of.

………………………J. [J.B. Pardiwala] ……………………J. [R. Mahadevan] NEW DELHI, FEBRUARY 18,
2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48742622/

19

