Tata Sons Pvt. Ltd. (Formerly Tata Sons ... vs Siva Industries And Holdings Ltd. on 5 January, 2023

Tata Sons Pvt. Ltd. (Formerly Tata Sons ... vs Siva Industries
And Holdings Ltd. on 5 January, 2023

Bench: Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha, Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud

1

Reportable

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

Miscellaneous Application No 2680 of 2019
In
Arbitration Case (Civil) No 38 of 2017

TATA Sons Pvt Ltd (Formerly TATA Sons Ltd)                                        … Petitioner

Versus

Siva Industries and Holdings Ltd & Ors                                            … Respondents

JUDGMENT

Dr Dhanajaya Y Chandrachud, CJI 1 The applicant Tata Sons Pvt Ltd is a company incorporated
under the Indian Companies Act 1913. The first respondent, Siva Industries and Holdings Ltd is a
company incorporated under the Companies Act 1956 with a registered office at Chennai. The
second respondent, C Sivasankaran, who is the promoter of the first respondent is a resident of
Seychelles.

2 The applicant, the first respondent and Tata Tele Services Ltd 1 executed a share “TTSL”
subscription agreement on 24 February 2006 for the issuance and allotment of shares of TTSL to
Siva Industries in accordance with its terms and conditions. 3 Subsequently, a share subscription
agreement dated 12 November 2008 was entered into between NTT Docomo Inc, 2 a company
incorporated in Japan, the applicant and TTSL. In terms of the agreement, Docomo sought to
acquire 26% of the equity share holding of TTSL through a combination of primary shares (fresh
shares issued and allotted by TTSL) and secondary shares (shares held by certain existing
shareholders of TTSL).

1

Tata Sons Pvt. Ltd. (Formerly Tata Sons ... vs Siva Industries And Holdings Ltd. on 5 January, 2023

4 The first respondent was an existing shareholder of TTSL and was invited to participate in the sale
of secondary shares to Docomo. Accordingly, Docomo and the first respondent executed a secondary
share purchase agreement dated 3 March 2009 in terms of which Docomo acquired 20.740 million
equity shares of TTSL from the first respondent. The applicant, TTSL and Docomo executed a
Shareholders’ Agreement dated 25 March 2009 to record the terms and conditions of the
understanding between the parties regarding the rights, obligations and duties with respect to
Docomo’s ownership of shares of TTSL. Thereafter, the applicant, TTSL and the respondents
executed an Inter se agreement. The agreement, inter alia, obliged the respondents to purchase the
TTSL shares on a pro-rata basis in the event Docomo exercised its sale option under the
Shareholder’s Agreement.

5 Docomo addressed a sale notice on 7 July 2014 to the applicant while invoking its sale option
under clause 5.7 of the Shareholder’s Agreement dated 25 March 2009.

“Docomo” 6 Disputes having arisen between the applicant and Docomo, the latter invoked
arbitration against the applicant under the Rules of the London Council for International
Arbitration. A three-member Tribunal made its award dated 22 June 2016, consequent upon which
the applicant was called upon to make payment to Docomo and to acquire the shares of TTSL which
were put by Docomo.

7 Thereupon, the applicant called upon the first respondent under the Inter se agreement to
proportionately pay for and acquire back its shareholdings in TTCL from Docomo. Under the terms
of the Inter se agreement, the second respondent, as promoter of the first respondent company, had
agreed to be liable to the applicant in the event that the first respondent failed to fulfill its
obligation. 8 The applicant issued a notice of arbitration on 15 June 2017 to the first respondent and
to the second respondent (a foreign party, being a resident of Seychelles) under Clause 10 of the
Inter se agreement and nominated an arbitrator. Clause 10 states that the Arbitration shall be at
Mumbai and Mumbai Courts have exclusive jurisdiction. The number of arbitrators is fixed as three
by the Clause. 9 The respondents did not appoint their nominee arbitrator despite the service of the
arbitration notice. The applicant filed a petition before this Court under Section 11(6) of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996 3 for the constitution of an arbitral tribunal in an
international commercial arbitration. The Supreme Court had exclusive jurisdiction to entertain the
arbitration petition since the proposed arbitration between the applicant and the respondents, of
whom the second respondent is a foreign party, was an international commercial arbitration in
terms of Section 2(1)(f) of the Arbitration Act.

“Arbitration Act” 10 By an order dated 17 January 2018 of this Court in proceedings initiated under
Section 11(6) of the Arbitration Act, Mr Justice S N Variava was appointed as the sole arbitrator with
the consent of the parties.

11 The arbitrator entered upon the reference on 14 February 2018. On 21 March 2018, a preliminary
meeting was held between the parties and the arbitrator at which the parties agreed to a six months
extension, if the arbitral proceedings could not be completed within a period of twelve months
commencing from the date the arbitral tribunal entered reference. The time to deliver the award in

2

Tata Sons Pvt. Ltd. (Formerly Tata Sons ... vs Siva Industries And Holdings Ltd. on 5 January, 2023

the proceedings before the arbitral tribunal stood extended until 14 August 2019 since the parties
had consented to an extension of six months.

12 The applicant filed the statement of claim on 13 April 2018. The first respondent filed the
statement of defense on 21 June 2018. On 30 July 2018, the arbitral tribunal disposed of
applications under Sections 16 and 17 filed by the first respondent and the applicant respectively.
Between 15 and 25 October 2018, the examination of the applicant and the first respondent’s
witnesses took place before the arbitral tribunal. 13 During the pendency of the arbitral proceedings,
IDBI Bank Ltd initiated insolvency proceedings against the first respondent under the Insolvency
and Bankruptcy Code 2016.4 By an order dated 5 July 2019, the National Company Law Tribunal,
Chennai initiated the Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process 5 under the IBC and placed a
moratorium on all proceedings against the first respondent, including “IBC” “CIRP” arbitral
proceedings.

14 The original period of one year and the extension of six months which was agreed upon by the
parties expired on 14 August 2019. On 14 December 2019, a Miscellaneous Application6 was filed by
the applicant before this Court seeking an extension of the mandate of the tribunal. The applicant
sought an extension of the mandate of the arbitral tribunal from 14 August 2019 for a period of six
months after the date on which the moratorium imposed under the IBC on 5 July 2019 against the
first respondent would stand vacated.

15 The hearing of the MA was adjourned by an order of this Court dated 7 January 2020 in view of
the circumstances at that time.

16 In the meantime, on 3 June 2022, the first respondent has been freed from the rigours of the
CIRP in pursuance of an order passed by this Court. Accordingly, there is no longer a moratorium
over proceedings against the first respondent, with effect from 3 June 2022.

17 An interlocutory application7 has been filed on behalf of the applicant in the MA in view of two
developments:

a. The first respondent, as a consequence of the order of this Court dated 3 June
2022, has been freed from the rigours of the CIRP; and b. As a result of the
amendment of Section 29A of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, with effect
from 30 August 2019, the arbitration proceedings before the sole arbitrator should, in
the submission of the applicant, be allowed to automatically continue in view of the
amendment of the statute.

18 For convenience of reference, the reliefs which have been sought in the IA are extracted below:

“a. Hold that the Arbitration Proceedings between the parties herein, presided over
by the Ld. Sole Arbitrator (Retd.) Hon'ble Mr. Justice S.N. Variava, may be allowed to
continue without any need for an extension of the term of the Ld. Sole Arbitrator; or
b. Alternatively, in the event this Hon'ble Court is of the opinion that the amended

3

Tata Sons Pvt. Ltd. (Formerly Tata Sons ... vs Siva Industries And Holdings Ltd. on 5 January, 2023

Section 29A (following the 2019 Amendment) is inapplicable to the present
Arbitration Proceedings, allow the extension of the time limit within which Ld. Sole
Arbitrator (Retd.) Hon'ble Mr. Justice S.N. Variava is to render an award in the
Arbitration Proceedings between the parties by a period of 1 year.”

19 This Court issued notice on the IA on 25 November 2022.

20 The provisions of Section 29A were introduced into the Arbitration Act with effect from 23
October 2015 by Act 3 of 2016 8. Section 29A was substituted by Act 33 of 20199 with effect from 30
August 2019. The provisions of Section 29A as originally inserted and as they stand after the
amendment of 2019 are tabulated below:

SECTION 29-A PRE AND POST 2019 AMENDMENT Post 2015 Amendment w.e.f.
Post 2019 Amendment w.e.f.

23.10.2015 30.08.2019 29A. (1) The award shall be made 29A. (1) The award in
matters other than within a period of twelve months from international commercial
arbitration shall be the date the arbitral tribunal enters made by the arbitral tribunal
within a period of upon the reference. twelve months from the date of completion of
pleadings under sub-section (4) of 2015 Amendment Act 2019 Amendment Act
Explanation. -For the purpose of this section 23:

sub-section, an arbitral tribunal shall be deemed to have entered upon the Provided
that the award in the matter of reference on the date on which the international
commercial arbitration may be arbitrator or all the arbitrators, as the made as
expeditiously as possible and case may be, have received notice, in endeavor may be
made to dispose of the writing, of their appointment. matter within a period of twelve
months from the date of completion of pleadings under sub-section (4) of section 23.

(2) If the award is made within a period (2) If the award is made within a period of
six of six months from the date the arbitral months from the date the arbitral tribunal
tribunal enters upon the reference, the enters upon the reference, the arbitral
tribunal arbitral tribunal shall be entitled to shall be entitled to receive such amount
of receive such amount of additional fees additional fees as the parties may agree.

as the parties may agree.

(3) The parties may, by consent, extend (3) The parties may, by consent, extend the the period
specified in sub-section (1) period specified in sub-section (1) for making for making award for
further period not award for further period not exceeding six exceeding six months. months.

(4) If the award is not made within the (4) If the award is not made within the period period
specified in sub-section (1) or specified in sub-section (1) or the extended the extended period
specified under period specified under sub-section (3), the sub-section (3), the mandate of the

4

Tata Sons Pvt. Ltd. (Formerly Tata Sons ... vs Siva Industries And Holdings Ltd. on 5 January, 2023

mandate of the arbitrator(s) shall terminate arbitrator(s) shall terminate unless the unless the Court
has, either prior to or after the Court has, either prior to or after the expiry of the period so specified,
extended the expiry of the period so specified, period.

extended the period.

Provided that while extending the Provided that while extending the period under period under this
sub-section, if the this sub-section, if the Court finds that the Court finds that the proceedings have
proceedings have been delayed for the been delayed for the reasons reasons attributable to the
arbitral tribunal, attributable to the arbitral tribunal, then, then, it may order reduction of fees of it
may order reduction of fees of arbitrator(s) by not exceeding five per cent for arbitrator(s) by not
exceeding five per each month of such delay. cent for each month of such delay.

Provided further that where an application under sub-section (5) is pending, the mandate of the
arbitrator shall continue till the disposal of the said application:

Provided also that the arbitrator shall be given an opportunity of being heard before
the fees is reduced.

(5) The extension of period referred to (5) The extension of period referred to in sub-

in sub-section (4) may be on the section (4) may be on the application of any of application of any of
the parties and the parties and may be granted only for may be granted only for sufficient sufficient
cause and on such terms and cause and on such terms and conditions as may be imposed by the
Court. conditions as may be imposed by the Court.

(6) While extending the period referred (6) While extending the period referred to in to in
sub-section (4), it shall be open to sub-section (4), it shall be open to the Court to the Court to
substitute one or all of the substitute one or all of the arbitrators and if one arbitrators and if one or
all of the or all of the arbitrators are substituted, the arbitrators are substituted, the arbitral arbitral
proceedings shall continue from the proceedings shall continue from the stage already reached and
on the basis of the stage already reached and on the basis evidence and material already on record,
and of the evidence and material already on the arbitrator(s) appointed under this section record,
and the arbitrator(s) appointed shall be deemed to have received the said under this section shall be
deemed to evidence and material. have received the said evidence and material.

(7) In the event of arbitrator(s) being (7) In the event of arbitrator(s) being appointed appointed
under this section, the under this section, the arbitral tribunal thus arbitral tribunal thus
reconstituted shall reconstituted shall be deemed to be in be deemed to be in continuation of the
continuation of the previously appointed previously appointed arbitral tribunal. arbitral tribunal.
(8) It shall be open to the Court to (8) It shall be open to the Court to impose impose actual or
exemplary costs upon actual or exemplary costs upon any of the any of the parties under this
section. parties under this section. (9) An application filed under sub- (9) An application filed under
sub-section (5) section (5) shall be disposed of by the shall be disposed of by the Court as Court as

5

Tata Sons Pvt. Ltd. (Formerly Tata Sons ... vs Siva Industries And Holdings Ltd. on 5 January, 2023

expeditiously as possible and expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall endeavour shall be made
to dispose of be made to dispose of the matter within a the matter within a period of sixty days
period of sixty days from the date of service of from the date of service of notice on the notice on the
opposite party” opposite party (emphasis supplied). (emphasis supplied).

21 We have heard Mr Jaideep Gupta, senior counsel appearing on behalf of the applicant and Mr
Ankur Kashyap, counsel appearing on behalf of the second respondent.

22 The submission which has been urged on behalf of the applicant is that as a result of the
amendment of Section 29A by Act 33 of 2019, the period of 12 months prescribed for making an
award from the date of the completion of the pleadings has ceased to apply to an international
commercial arbitration. Hence, it has been urged that the amendment being of a procedural nature,
the amended provision would apply to the arbitral proceedings in the present case following the
appointment of Justice S N Variava on 17 January 2018 and pursuant to the arbitrator entering
upon reference on 14 February 2018. Alternatively, the applicant has urged that in the event that
this Court were to hold that the amended provisions of Section 29A are inapplicable to the present
arbitration, a further extension of time may be granted to the sole arbitrator to complete the arbitral
proceedings.

23 The first respondent has not entered appearance in these proceedings. The second respondent,
who is contesting the proceedings as a guarantor, has urged that the amendment of Section 29A by
Act 33 of 2019 would not lead to the conclusion that an international commercial arbitration lies
outside the purview of the provision. The second respondent has submitted that reading the
provisions of Section 29A in the manner in which the applicant seeks to read them would result in a
situation where there would be no timeline under the statute for an international commercial
arbitration. Where an international commercial arbitration is governed by the Rules of an arbitral
institution, such rules would structure the conduct of the arbitration. The second respondent has
submitted that it was not the intention of the legislature that in a case which is not governed by an
arbitral institution, the court would have no control over the time taken in the course of the arbitral
proceedings leaving the matter entirely within the discretion of the arbitral forum in a situation such
as the present, where the arbitral proceeding is governed by Indian Law and has a seat within the
country. 24 The provisions of Section 29A, as originally introduced into the statute, mandated that
all awards shall be made within a period of twelve months from the date on which the arbitral
tribunal enters upon the reference. The explanation clarified when the arbitral tribunal would be
deemed to have entered upon the reference, namely, the date on which the arbitrator has received
written notice of the appointment. The mandatory nature of the provisions of Section 29A(1) and
their application to all arbitrations conducted under the Act, domestic or international commercial,
was evident from the use of the word “shall”. In terms of Section 29A(4), in case the arbitral award
was not rendered within the twelve or eighteen month period as the case may be, the mandate of the
arbitrator(s) would stand terminated, unless on an application made by any of the parties, the court
extended time on sufficient cause being shown. 25 After the amendment, Section 29A(1) stipulates
that the award “in matters other than international commercial arbitration” shall be made by the
arbitral tribunal within a period of twelve months from the date of the completion of the pleadings
under Section 23(4).10 The expression “in matters other than an international commercial

6

Tata Sons Pvt. Ltd. (Formerly Tata Sons ... vs Siva Industries And Holdings Ltd. on 5 January, 2023

arbitration” makes it abundantly clear that the timeline of twelve months which is stipulated in the
substantive part of Section 29A(1), as amended, does not apply to international commercial
arbitrations. This is further reaffirmed in the proviso to Section 29A(1) which stipulates that the
award in the matter of an international commercial arbitration “may be made as expeditiously as
possible” and that an “endeavour may be made to dispose of the matter within a period of 12
months” from the date of the completion of pleadings. The expression “as expeditiously as possible”
coupled with the expression “endeavour Section 23(4) of the Arbitration Act, as inserted by Act 33 of
2019, provides that “The statement of claim and defence under this section shall be completed
within a period of six months from the date the arbitrator or all the arbitrators, as the case may be,
received notice, in writing of their appointment.” may be made” demonstrate that the intent of
Parliament is that the period of twelve months for making the award is not mandatory in the case of
an international commercial arbitration. In an international commercial arbitration, the arbitral
tribunal is required to endeavour, that is, make an effort to render the arbitral award within a period
of twelve months or in a timely manner. In a domestic arbitration, Section 29A(1) stipulates a
mandatory period of twelve months for the arbitrator to render the arbitral award. In contrast, the
substantive part of Section 29A(1) clarifies that the period of twelve months would not be
mandatory for an international commercial arbitration. Hence, post amendment, the time limit of
twelve months as prescribed in Section 29A is applicable to only domestic arbitrations and the
twelve-month period is only directory in nature for an international commercial arbitration.

26 Sub-section (3) of Section 29A empowers parties, by consent, to extend the period specified in
sub-section (1) for making the award by a further period not exceeding six months. Thereafter, if the
award is not made within the period which is specified in sub-section (1) or the extended period
specified in sub-section (3), the mandate of the arbitrator shall terminate unless the court has
extended the period either prior to or after the expiry of the period so specified. In other words, the
timeline of twelve months for making the award (in matters other than international commercial
arbitration), is qualified by the consensual entrustment to the parties under sub-section (3) to
extend the period by six months after which the court is empowered in terms of sub-section (4) to
extend the period for making the award. The submission of the second respondent is that the
provisions of sub-section (3) and sub-section (4) must also apply to an international commercial
arbitration. This would merit close scrutiny. The legislature has not expressly excluded the
applicability of sub-sections (3) and (4) of Section 29A to an international commercial arbitration.
But, at the same time, it must be noticed that the rationale underlying sub-section (3) is to ensure
that despite the stipulation of twelve months for the making of an arbitral award in the domestic
context, parties may by consent agree to an extension of time by a further period of six months. Such
an extension of six months is envisaged in the case of a domestic arbitration since there is a mandate
that the award shall be made within a period of twelve months. A further extension has, however,
been entrusted to the court in terms of sub-section (4) of Section 29A. However, insofar as an
international commercial arbitration is concerned, the statutory regime is clear by the substantive
part of sub-section 1 of Section 29A in terms of which the timeline of twelve months for making an
arbitral award is not applicable to it. In an international commercial arbitration, the legislature has
only indicated that the award should be made as expeditiously as possible and that an endeavour
may be made to dispose of the matter within a period of twelve months from the completion of
pleadings.

7

Tata Sons Pvt. Ltd. (Formerly Tata Sons ... vs Siva Industries And Holdings Ltd. on 5 January, 2023

27 The introduction of amended Section 29A finds its genesis in the report dated 30 July 2017 of the
Committee chaired by Justice B N Srikrishna. The ‘High Level Committee’, as it is described, was set
up to review the “institutionalization of (the) arbitration mechanism” in India. The report
specifically elaborates upon the reason for the exclusion of international commercial arbitrations
from the ambit of the mandatory timeline of twelve months stipulated in the context of a domestic
arbitration. The report of the Committee records:

“In fact, one of the provisions of the ACA — section 29A — which was inserted by the
2015 Amendment Act, is perceived to have made arbitral institutions wary of
arbitrations in India. Section 29A provides for strict timelines for completion of
arbitration proceedings. This has been criticised as unduly restrictive of the conduct
of arbitrations by arbitral institutions which provide for timelines for different stages
of the arbitration proceedings.” “The Committee notes that international arbitral
institutions have strongly criticised the setting of timelines for conducting
international commercial arbitrations. These institutions are of the view that
monitoring the conduct of the arbitral proceedings is best left to the arbitral
institutions. Institutions have their own machinery for case management and do not
require monitoring by the court. With respect to domestic arbitrations, the general
opinion of arbitrators is that the timelines fixed for conducting domestic arbitrations
under section 29A should take effect post completion of pleadings.”

28 The recommendations of the Committee are extracted below:

“1. A new sub-section may be inserted in section 29A limiting the applicability of the
section to domestic arbitrations only. International commercial arbitrations may be
left outside the purview of the timelines provided in Section 29A.

2. Section 29A(1) may be amended such that the time in section 29A(1) starts to run
post completion of pleadings.

Further, a time period of 6 months may be provided for submission of pleadings.

3. Section 29A(4) may be amended to provide that if an application under Section 29A(5) is filed
before a court, the mandate of the arbitral tribunal continues till the application is disposed.

4. Section 29A(9) may be amended to add if the application is not disposed of within the period
mentioned therein, it is deemed to be granted.

5. A new sub-section should be inserted in Section 29A providing that where the court seeks to
reduce the fees of the arbitrator(s), sufficient opportunity should be given to such arbitrator(s) to be
heard.” (emphasis supplied) 29 The Committee indicated that international arbitration institutions
had been critical of the setting up of timelines for conducting international arbitrations.
International arbitral institutions with their own machinery for case management were of the view
that they did not require the monitoring of timelines by the intervention of the court. The

8

Tata Sons Pvt. Ltd. (Formerly Tata Sons ... vs Siva Industries And Holdings Ltd. on 5 January, 2023

Committee also noted that in other jurisdictions, timelines for arbitral proceedings are usually
agreed by the parties themselves in accordance with the nature and complexity of the dispute. The
intervention of the court in the extension of timelines was criticized by arbitral institutions and
eventually led to the formulation of the amended provisions of Section 29A which have expressly
kept international commercial arbitrations outside the purview of the mandatory timelines provided
in Section 29A. Hence, in terms of the amended provisions of Section 29A, arbitral tribunals in
international commercial arbitrations are only expected to make an endeavor to complete the
proceedings within twelve months from the date of competition of pleadings and are not bound to
abide by the time limit prescribed for domestic arbitrations.

30 Having clarified that the 2019 Amendment Act has excluded international commercial
arbitrations from the statutorily prescribed mandatory time limits, the question arises whether the
amended Section 29A would apply prospectively or retrospectively.

31 The provisions of Section 29A, as introduced by Act 3 of 2016, were prospective in nature by
virtue of Section 26 of the 2015 Amendment Act. In terms of Section 26, Section 29A was introduced
with effect from 23 October 2015 and applied to all arbitration proceedings that commenced on or
after 23 October 2015. Section 26 of the 2015 Amendment Act read as follows:

“26. Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to the arbitral proceedings
commenced, in accordance with the provisions of Section 21 of the principal Act,
before the commencement of this Act unless the parties otherwise agree but this Act
shall apply in relation to arbitral proceedings commenced on or after the date of
commencement of this Act.”

32 In Board of Control for Cricket in India v. Kochi Cricket Pvt. Ltd,11 a two Judge Bench of this
Court while dealing with the construction and applicability of Section 26 of the 2015 Amendment
Act in relation to arbitration proceedings and / or legal proceedings in connection with such
arbitration proceedings, inter alia, observed in a footnote that Section 29A was procedural in nature.
However, this Court stated that Section 29A created new obligations in respect of a proceeding
which had already commenced since it laid down a strict timeline for rendering an arbitral award for
the first time in the framework of the Arbitration Act (emphasis supplied). This Court clarified:

“Section 29A of the Amendment Act provides for time limits within which an arbitral
award is to be made. In Hitendra Vishnu Thakur v. State of Maharashtra (1994) 4
SCC 602 at 633, this Court stated:

“(iii) Every litigant has a vested right in substantive law but no such right exists in
procedural law.

(iv) A procedural statute should not generally speaking be applied retrospectively
where the result would be to create new disabilities or obligations or to impose new
duties in respect of transactions already accomplished.

9

Tata Sons Pvt. Ltd. (Formerly Tata Sons ... vs Siva Industries And Holdings Ltd. on 5 January, 2023

(v) A statute which not only changes the procedure but also creates new rights and
liabilities shall be construed to be prospective in operation, unless otherwise
provided, either expressly or by necessary implication.” It is, inter alia, because
timelines for the making of an arbitral award have been laid down for the first time in
Section 29A of the (2018) 6 SCC 287 Amendment Act that parties were given the
option to adopt such timelines which, though procedural in nature, create new
obligations in respect of a proceeding already begun under the unamended Act. This
is, of course, only one example of why parties may otherwise agree and apply the new
procedure laid down by the Amendment Act to arbitral proceedings that have
commenced before it came into force.”

33 Procedural law establishes a mechanism for determining rights and liabilities of a party and a
machinery for enforcing them. 12 Generally, procedural laws are presumed to be retrospective,
unless there is a clear indication that such was not the intention of the legislature,13 or the
procedural law imposes new obligations qua transactions already concluded or creates new rights or
liabilities. 14 34 The 2019 Amendment Act does not contain any provision equivalent to Section 26
of Act 3 of 2016 evincing a legislative intent making the application of the amended provision
prospective. The amended provisions of Section 29A, in terms of which the arbitral tribunal has to
endeavour to dispose of the proceedings in an international commercial arbitration as expeditiously
as possible within a period of twelve months from the completion of the pleadings are remedial in
nature. The amended provision has excepted international commercial arbitrations from the
mandate of the twelve- month timeline which governs domestic arbitrations. The amendment is
intended to meet the criticism over the timeline in its application to international commercial
arbitrations. The amendment is remedial in that it carves out international commercial arbitrations
from the rigour of the timeline of six months. This lies within the domain of the arbitrator and is
outside the purview of judicial intervention. The removal of the mandatory time limit for making an
arbitral award in the case of an international commercial arbitration does not confer any rights or
liabilities on any party. Since Thirumalai Chemicals Ltd v. Union of India (2011) 6 SCC 739 Jose Da
Costa and Anr. v. Bascora Sadasiva Sinai Narcornim, (1976) 2 SCC 917; Gurbachan Singh v. Satpal
Singh (1990) 1 SCC 445; Rajendra Kumar v. Kalyan (D) by Lrs, (2000) 8 SCC 99 Hitendra Vishnu
Thakur v. State of Maharashtra, (1994) 4 SCC 602 Section 29A(1), as amended, is remedial in
nature, it should be applicable to all pending arbitral proceedings as on the effective date i.e., 30
August 2019. 35 We may notice certain judgments of the High Courts on the provisions of Section
29A which have been adverted to during the course of oral submissions. Those decisions are:

i. A decision of a Single Judge of the High Court of Delhi dated 23 January 2020 in
Shapoorji Pallonji & Co. Pvt. Ltd. Vs Jindal India Thermal Power Ltd.;15 ii. A
decision of a Single Judge of the Delhi High Court dated 21 July 2020 in ONGC Petro
Additions Ltd. vs Ferns Construction Co. Inc.;16 and iii. The decision of the Chief
Justice of the High Court of Judicature for Orissa at Cuttack dated 11 December 2020
in M/s SARA International Pvt. Ltd. Vs Southern Eastern Railways & Anr.17

36 In Shapoorji Pallonji, the Delhi High Court had held that amended Section 29A(1) of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, being procedural law, would apply to the pending arbitrations as

10

Tata Sons Pvt. Ltd. (Formerly Tata Sons ... vs Siva Industries And Holdings Ltd. on 5 January, 2023

on the date of the amendment. However, a coordinate bench in MBL Infrastructures Ltd v. Rites
Ltd.18 held that the amended Section 29A would be prospective in nature, without referring to the
earlier order in Shapoorji Pallonji. Finally, the Delhi High Court in ONGC Petro Additions settled
the controversy and reiterated the position of law as laid down in Shapoorji Pallonji. The Court,
inter alia, stated that Section 29A(1) shall be applicable to all pending arbitrations seated in India as
on August 30, 2019 and commenced after October 23, 2015, and there is no strict time line
prescribed to the proceedings which are in nature of international commercial OMP (Misc) (Comm.)
No 512/2019 OMP (Misc) (Comm) 256/2019 OMP (Misc) (Comm) 56/2020, as decided on 10
February 2020 arbitration as defined under the Act, seated in India.

37 Consistent with the amended provisions of Section 29A, the sole arbitrator in the present case
would be acting within his domain and jurisdiction to decide upon any further extension of time
beyond what is originally stipulated at the meeting which was held on 21 March 2018. The sole
arbitrator may issue appropriate procedural directions for extension of time while at the same time
endeavoring an expeditious conclusion of the arbitration.

38 The Miscellaneous Application and the Interlocutory Application shall accordingly stand allowed
in the above terms.

39 Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.

… . . … . . … . . . . … . . . . . . . . … … … … … … . … . . . . . . C J I   [ D r   D h a n a n j a y a   Y   C h a n d r a c h u d ]
…..…..…....…........……………….…........J. [Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha] New Delhi;

January 05, 2023.

-GKA-

11