Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

2025 INSC 330                                                       REPORTABLE

                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                              CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1184 OF 2025
                            (ARISING OUT OF SLP (Crl.) NO. 6320 OF 2024)

             JAMIN & ANR.                                          ... APPELLANTS

                                              VERSUS

             STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH & ANR.                        ... RESPONDENTS

                                          JUDGMENT

J. B. PARDIWALA, J. :

For the convenience of exposition, this judgment is divided into the following parts: -

INDEX A. FACTUAL MATRIX .................................................................................. 3
B. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANTS ..................... 11 C.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT .................... 20 D. ISSUES
FOR DETERMINATION ......................................................... 25 E. ANALYSIS
................................................................................................. 26

(i) Legislative history, ingredients and scope of Section 319 of the CrPC
................................................................................................... 26

(ii) Stage at which power under Section 319 of the CrPC can be exercised . 39

(iii) Meaning of the expression “could be tried together with the accused”
.................................................................................................. 54

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

1

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

(iv) Peculiar facts of the present case not fully covered by the guidelines issued by this
C o u r t   i n   i t s   d e c i s i o n s   i n   S u k h p a l   S i n g h   K h a i r a   a n d   H a r d e e p   S i n g h
....................................................................................... 59

(v) Whether the High Court was right in exercising its revision jurisdiction to set
aside the order of the Trial Court rejecting the second application preferred by the
respondent no. 2 under section 319 of the CrPC? ....... 61

(vi) The order passed by the High Court in exercise of its revision jurisdiction would
relate back to and replace the order passed by the Trial Court rejecting the
application under Section 319 of the CrPC ........................ 65

(vii) Right of the proposed accused to be heard at the stage of summoning under
Section 319 of CrPC ......................................................................... 87 F.
CONCLUSION ......................................................................................... 93

1. Leave granted.

2. This appeal arises from the judgment and order passed by the High Court of
Judicature at Allahabad, Lucknow Bench dated 01.04.2024 in Criminal Application
No. 2399 of 2024 filed by the appellants herein under Section 482 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (the “CrPC”) by which the High Court rejected the
application and thereby affirmed the order passed by the Sessions Court summoning
the appellants herein as accused under Section 319 of the CrPC in the Session Trial
No. 582 of 2009.

A. FACTUAL MATRIX

3. On 14.04.2009, the respondent no. 2 herein lodged a First Information Report (“FIR”) No.
99/2009 in the Police Station Bilgram, Hardoi, Uttar Pradesh for the offence punishable under
Sections 147, 148, 149 and 302 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as the “IPC”)
respectively against five persons namely Irshad, Irfan, Abdul, Jamin and Akil in connection with the
murder of his brother. The FIR alleged that the appellants herein namely, Jamin and Akil exhorted
the other co-accused to kill the deceased and as a result of such instigation, the said co-accused fired
at the deceased using their pistols resulting into his death.

4. On conclusion of the investigation, the police filed chargesheet no. 07/2009 dated 14.07.2009
against two accused persons, namely Irshad and Irfan for the alleged offence. The police by way of
Parcha No. CD 16 dated 14.07.2009 informed the court concerned that the investigation qua the
remaining accused persons, namely Abdul, Jamin and Akil was ongoing. The chargesheet contained
a list of 18 witnesses which the State proposed to examine in support of the charges.

5. On 27.10.2009, the Trial Court framed charge for the offence under Sections 147, 148, 149 and
302 of the IPC respectively against the accused persons who were named in the chargesheet who in

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

2

turn pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried.

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

6. While the trial against the chargesheeted accused persons namely Irshad and Irfan was in
progress, the respondent no. 2 filed an application under Section 319 of the CrPC praying to
summon the other three persons named in the FIR to face the trial along with the chargesheeted
accused persons.

7. On 29.01.2010, the Trial Court rejected the aforesaid application on the ground that a person
could be summoned by the trial court in exercise of its powers under Section 319 of the CrPC
provided that there is cogent and reliable evidence indicating towards the complicity of such person
in the commission of an offence for which he could be tried together with the accused persons
already put to trial. The Trial Court noted that PW-1 and PW-2 respectively had yet not been
cross-examined and it was not clear whether the I.O. intended to file chargesheet against the
persons sought to be summoned, therefore it declined the prayer to summon under Section 319 of
the CrPC. The relevant extracts from the said order are reproduced hereinbelow:

“Hence, from the aforesaid principles it is cleared that till date, cross examination of
Pw-1 & Pw-2 has not been done and it is also not cleared that the chargesheet against
the application by the accused u/s 319 CrPC is being filed or not Investigation have
been completed or not and if final report have been filed then is it pending in Add
District Court or till now investigation is going on? Whenever it would not be cleared
and until and unless such evidence has not been filed by prosecution that such
evidence against proposed accused is enough to punished the them until then
summoned to accused is not justifiable. Hence, application not accepted and is
deserved to be dismissed/rejected.”

8. A revision petition bearing no. 203 of 2010 was filed by the respondent no.

2 before the High Court against the order of the Trial Court dated 29.01.2010 referred to above. The
High Court vide order dated 14.05.2010 directed the Trial Court to reconsider the prayer of the
respondent no. 2 for summoning the proposed accused persons under Section 319 of the CrPC after
the cross- examination of PW-1 and PW-2 respectively was over. In the meantime, the evidence of
PW-1 and PW-2 was recorded on 01.12.2009, 02.04.2010 and 15.05.2010 respectively. The relevant
extracts from the said order are reproduced hereinbelow:

“It appears that the revisionist is the complainant and his petition under section 319
CrPC for summoning additional accused has been rejected by the court concerned on
the ground that cross-examination of PW-

1 and 2 had not taken place.

The learned trial court is expected to consider the revisionist’s prayer after the cross-examination is
over. With the aforesaid observation, the revision is finally disposed of.”

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

3

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

9. Thereafter, on 10.06.2010, the respondent no. 2 filed a second application under Section 319 of
the CrPC before the Trial Court with a prayer to summon the three persons named in the FIR as
accused in addition to the accused persons named in the chargesheet. The Additional District &
Sessions Judge, Hardoi vide order dated 19.07.2010 rejected the said application on the ground that
the evidence recorded in the course of the trial did not warrant the summoning of the said three
persons as accused. The Trial Court noted that that while exercising jurisdiction under Section 319
of the CrPC, it is necessary to see whether there is sufficient and cogent evidence to take cognizance
and if not, then the persons sought to be summoned as accused cannot be asked to face the trial. The
Court observed that the complainant had no idea as regards the identity of the proposed accused
persons, namely, Abdul, Jamin and Akil and no explanation was forthcoming as to how their names
came to be included in the FIR.

10. In such circumstances referred to above, the respondent no. 2 preferred revision petition bearing
no. 400/2010 before the High Court seeking to challenge the order dated 19.07.2010.

11. During the pendency of the revision petition, the Additional District & Sessions Judge, Hardoi
vide the judgment and order dated 19.10.2011, held Irshad and Irfan guilty of the offence of murder
and sentenced them to life imprisonment and fine. The trial accordingly stood concluded.

12. Long after the conclusion of the trial, the High Court, though aware of conclusion of the trial of
the co-accused, set aside the order of the Trial Court dated 19.07.2010, vide order dated 14.09.2021
passed in criminal revision petition no. 400/2010, while observing as under:

a. First, merely on the basis of a statement made by a prosecution witness that not a
single person in the village was known to him, the Trial Court could not have
concluded that the proposed accused were not present at the scene of the crime; and
b. Secondly, no final report was submitted by the police against the proposed
accused, exonerating them from the alleged crime. The High Court held that a person
not named in the FIR or if named in the FIR but not chargesheeted, could be
summoned under Section 319 of the CrPC if the court was prima facie satisfied that
such person had also committed the offence and he could be tried along with the
other accused for the alleged offence on the basis of the evidence recorded in the
course of inquiry into or trial of an offence. In light of the aforesaid observations, the
High Court allowed the revision petition and directed the Trial Court to reconsider
the application under Section 319 of the CrPC submitted by the complainant (the
respondent no. 2 herein) within three months from the date of its order.

The relevant observations made by the High Court are reproduced hereinbelow:

“8 The proposed accused are named in the FIR. The plaintiff has been examined as
PW-1, he has confirmed the statements in his FIR. Just because he said that he did
not know anyone by name in that village, it cannot be assumed that he did not know
the proposed accused. In the cross-examination he was not specifically asked to
identify the proposed accused, in such a situation it cannot be justified to conclude

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

4

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

that he did not know the proposed accused. It is noteworthy here that the original
trial has been completed and the accused have been found guilty. Annexure-1,
submitted along with the supplementary affidavit dated 24.11.2020 submitted by the
reviewer, is reflected in the copy of the decision. […] In the light of the legal
principles propounded by the Honorable Supreme Court and the above analysis, it is
clear that the impugned order passed by the trial court is erroneous, because on the
basis of mere statement of PW that he did not know any person in the village by
name before the incident. Considering that he did not even know the proposed
accused and the investigation against the proposed accused seems to be prevalent,
neither the final report was given against them nor the rejection of the chargesheet
application cannot be called legal and justified, as a result deserves to be set aside.

9 This revision is accepted. The impugned order dated 19.07.2010 passed by the trial
court is set aside. The trial court is ordered to again consider the application
submitted by the plaintiff under Section 319 CrPC in the light of all the evidence and
well-established legal principles and pass an order as per law within three months of
receiving the copy of the order.”

13. On the strength of the order passed by the High Court referred to above, the respondent no. 2
filed another application dated 22.09.2021 under Section 319 of the CrPC before the Additional
District and Session Judge and prayed to summon the proposed accused in the trial. The Additional
District and Sessions Judge vide order dated 21.02.2024 allowed the said application on the ground
that the oral evidence of the witnesses recorded by the Trial Court clearly revealed the involvement
of the proposed accused, viz., Abdul, Jamin and Akil along with the accused who stood convicted.
Since one of the proposed accused namely, Abdul had passed away, the court summoned Jamin and
Akil to face the trial.

14. The appellants being dissatisfied with the summoning order, challenged the same by filing an
application under Section 482 of the CrPC and prayed that the order be quashed and set aside. The
challenge to the summoning order was essentially on the ground that the appellants had been
summoned in a trial which stood concluded on 19.10.2011 that is, almost 13 years before the
summoning order was passed.

15. The High Court vide the impugned order dated 01.04.2024, rejected the aforesaid application of
the appellants filed under Section 482 of the CrPC and thereby affirmed the summoning order
passed by the Additional District and Sessions Judge. The High Court held that Section 319(4) of the
CrPC provides that where the court proceeds against any person under sub-section (1) of Section
319, the proceedings in respect of such person is supposed to commence afresh and the witnesses
are to be re-heard with respect to the proposed accused so summoned. The conclusion of trial
against the other accused persons would not cause any prejudice to the appellants as they would be
afforded an opportunity to defend themselves in a fresh trial. In view of the aforesaid, the High
Court found no illegality in the order summoning the appellants herein under Section 319 of the
CrPC. The relevant observations made by the High Court are reproduced hereinbelow:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

5

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

“27.(cid:132) (cid:132)ln the present case, the witnesses PW-1 and PW-2 have stated about that the
previously tried accused had shot at the victim at the exhortation of the applicant.
The trial stands concluded by the judgment and order dated 19.10.2011 wherein it
was held that the accused persons Irshad and Irfan created an unlawful assembly
with the other accused persons and they killed the deceased Arif by shooting at him
with a firearm. In case the aforesaid evidence remains unrebutted, the same would
lead to conviction of the applicant.

28.(cid:132) (cid:132)Therefore, there is no illegality in the order summoning the applicant under
Section 319 CrPC.

29.(cid:132) (cid:132)Section 482 CrPC saves the inherent powers of the High Court to make such
orders as may be necessary to secure the ends of justice. Non-summoning of accused
persons against whom there was ample evidence warranting their trial, would defeat
the ends of justice.

The order rejecting the application under Section 319 CrPC was set aside by this Court in exercise of
its revisional jurisdiction and it is only thereafter, that the trial Court has summoned the applicants
under Section 319 CrPC. Any interference with the order summoning the applicants to face trial
would in fact defeat the ends of justice, which would be contrary to the object for which the inherent
powers of this Court are meant to be exercised.

30.(cid:132) (cid:132)In view of the foregoing discussion, the application filed under Section 482 CrPC lacks merit
and the same is hereby dismissed.” B. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANTS

16. Mr. Siddharth Aggarwal, the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellants addressed
himself on the following questions:

(i) Whether the Trial Court could have entertained an application filed under Section
319 of the CrPC almost twelve years after the conclusion of the main trial and in the
absence of any proceedings pending before it?

(ii) Whether the application under Section 319 of the CrPC dated 22.09.2021 could
have been filed by the respondent no. 2 on the strength of the order of the High Court
dated 14.09.2021?

(iii) Whether the order dated 14.09.2021 could have been passed by the High Court without issuing
notice to the appellants?

(iv) What is the effect of the conclusion of the trial on the revision petition pending before the High
Court, more particularly when the proceedings of trial were not stayed by the High Court?

(v) Whether there was sufficient material on record to summon the appellants under Section 319 of
the CrPC?

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

6

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

17. As regards the question whether the Trial Court could have entertained the application filed
under Section 319 of the CrPC after the conclusion of the trial, the learned counsel made the
following submissions:

a) The conditions for the exercise of power by the Trial Court under Section 319(1) of
the CrPC are:

(i) that there must be any inquiry into, or trial of, an offence;

(ii) that in course of that inquiry or trial, it must appear from the evidence that any
person, who is not the accused, has committed any offence for which he could be
tried together with the accused.

If the aforesaid conditions are satisfied, the person sought to be summoned can be asked to appear
“in the course of any inquiry into, or trial of, an offence”. In other words, the summoning order
should be passed at a stage anterior to the date of pronouncement of the judgment, in the trial.

b) However, in the present matter, the application under Section 319 of the CrPC, which was allowed
vide order dated 21.02.2024, was made 13 years after the judgment & order of conviction of the
chargesheeted accused persons. Therefore, the Additional Sessions Judge, Hardoi could not have
exercised its powers under Section 319 of the CrPC as he became functus officio with the passing of
the order of conviction and sentence.

c) The High Court failed to take into consideration the law laid down by a Constitution Bench of this
Court in Singh Khaira v. State of Punjab reported in (2023) 1 SCC 289 wherein it was held that the
summoning order under Section 319 of the CrPC had to be necessarily passed before the order of
sentence is passed where a finding of conviction was returned. Accordingly, the appellants could not
have been summoned by the Trial Court in 2024, long after the conclusion of the proceedings of
Sessions Trial No. 582 of 2009 resulting into conviction and sentence of life imprisonment being
passed against the original accused, namely Irshad and Irfan. Therefore, the order dated 21.02.2024
passed by the Additional District and Sessions Judge, Hardoi was not merely a procedural lapse but
rather a violation of the substantive rights of the appellants.

d) The respondent no. 2 also failed to inform the Trial Court about the pendency of the Revision
Petition no. 400/2010 before the High Court and the High Court was also not informed about the
conclusion of trial qua the chargesheeted accused persons.

e) The decision of this Court in Shashikant Singh v. Tarkeshwar Singh & Anr. reported in (2002) 5
SCC 738 is distinguishable from the present case as having been passed in a very different set of
facts and thus would not come to the aid of the respondents. The facts in Shashikant Singh (supra)
were that a revision petition was preferred against the order of the Trial Court allowing the
application under Section 319 of the CrPC and summoning the proposed accused. Thereafter, the
trial came to be concluded during the pendency of the revision petition. In Shashikant Singh
(supra), the application under Section 319 was allowed at a time when the Trial Court still had the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

7

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

jurisdiction and therefore, the matter was remanded by this Court to the High Court for fresh
consideration on merits. However, contrary to the facts in Shashikant Singh (supra), in the present
matter, the Revision Petition no. 400 of 2010 was preferred by the respondent no. 2 against the
order of the Trial Court rejecting the application under Section 319 on merits. Thus, while in
Shashikant Singh (supra) the summoning order was issued during the pendency of the trial, in the
present case the summoning order came to be issued long after the conclusion of the trial and is,
thus, bad in law as the Trial Court became functus officio with the conclusion of the trial and could
not have passed the summoning order.

f) Further, this Court in Hardeep Singh v. State of Punjab reported in (2014) 3 SCC 92 has held that
the powers under Section 319 of the CrPC should be exercised sparingly. The evidence on record
warranting exercise of this power must be such that if it goes unrebutted then it would lead to a
conviction. In the present case, the appellants were named in the FIR and were subjected to
investigation and yet were not arrayed as accused in the chargesheet dated 14.07.2009.

g) The record of the Trial Court indicates that the investigation qua the appellants was closed for
want of sufficient material against them and therefore the investigating officer decided not to file
chargesheet against the appellants.

h) The oral evidence of PW-1 and PW-2, respectively, before the Trial Court also failed to inspire any
confidence for the purpose of summoning the appellants as the testimony of PW-1 was not
believable. It was pointed out that PW-1 himself had deposed that he did not know anyone from the
village to which the appellants belonged and the testimony of PW-2 by itself could not have been
relied upon as the respondent no. 2 did not name himself as an eye-witness in his complaint or in
his statement recorded under Section 161 of the CrPC or in his substantive evidence before the court.

18. As regards the question whether the High Court could have passed the order dated 14.09.2021
without issuing notice and granting an opportunity of being heard to the appellants, the counsel
made the following submissions:

a) Upon rejection of the application under Section 319 of the CrPC dated 10.06.2010
by the Trial Court, the respondent no. 2 preferred Revision Petition no. 400 of 2010
before the High Court. However, contrary to the settled position of law, the
appellants were not joined as parties to the said revision petition.

b) Further, the said revision petition remained pending for 11 years before the High Court and in the
interregnum, the appellants were not heard at any stage. Therefore, the order directing the Trial
Court to reconsider the application under Section 319 came to be passed on 14.09.2021 without
affording the appellants any opportunity to be heard.

c) The order dated 14.09.2021 could be said to be contrary to the law laid down by this Court in
Manharbhai Muljibhai Kakadia v. Shaileshbhai Mohanbhai Patel reported in (2012) 10 SCC 517 and
Subhash Sahebrao Deshmukh v. Satish Atmaraman Talekar & Ors. reported in (2020) 6 SCC 625
wherein the right to be heard has been recognised and it was held that an opportunity of hearing is

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

8

to be mandatorily granted to a proposed accused in revisional proceedings.

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

19. As regards the question pertaining to the legal effect of the conclusion of trial on the revision
proceedings pending before the High Court, more particularly when the High Court had not stayed
the proceedings of the trial, the counsel submitted the following:

a) Upon conclusion of trial, as a natural corollary, any interim proceedings arising
therefrom would come to an end as the Trial Court becomes functus officio unless a
specific stay on such trial proceeding has been granted by a higher court.

b) In the present matter, the Trial Court became functus officio on 19.10.2011 i.e., the
date on which it pronounced the judgment of conviction and sentence against the
original accused persons namely, Irshad and Irfan, and was thereafter shorn of the
jurisdiction to entertain a subsequent application under Section 319 of the CrPC as
no proceedings were pending before it. As such, no order for summoning the
appellants could have been passed by the Trial Court, especially because the High
Court in its revisional jurisdiction had not passed any order for staying the trial
proceedings or restraining the Trial Court from pronouncing the final judgment
against the other accused persons during the pendency of the revision petition

c) The principle that the Trial Court cannot exercise its powers under Section 319 of
the CrPC after conclusion of the trial has been duly recognized by this Court in its
decision in Sukhpal Singh Khaira (supra).

20. As regards the question whether there was sufficient material on record to
summon the appellants to face trial, the counsel submitted as follows:

a) No chargesheet had been filed against the appellants nor was any evidence
adduced to point towards the involvement of the appellants in the alleged offence.

b) The application under Section 319 of the CrPC was not preferred by the
prosecution but by the complainant.

c) The Case Diary No. 19 dated 05.09.2009 also recorded that action against Abdul,
Jamin and Akil was not required as their presence at the spot of the crime had not
been confirmed.

d) The second application under Section 319 of the CrPC dated 10.06.2010 was
rejected by the Trial Court inter alia on the ground that upon examination of PW-1, it
became evident that the complainant did not know the appellants herein and no
explanation had been offered as to how the complainant mentioned their names in
the FIR. Further, it was observed that investigation against the proposed accused
persons was ongoing and no final report against them had been submitted by the
police.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

9

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

e) After due consideration of all the materials and evidence collected during investigation, the
prosecution arrived at a decision that no case was made out against the appellants herein and
accordingly decided not to file a supplementary chargesheet against them. Similarly, after
considering the oral evidence on record, the Trial Court recorded a finding that no prima facie case
was made out against the appellants and accordingly rejected the application filed under Section 319
of the CrPC.

f) Even after the filing of the criminal revision petition before the High Court against the rejection of
the application under Section 319, no stay on the trial proceedings was granted by the High Court
and the respondent no. 2 also did not seek an early hearing of the revision petition despite being
aware of the fact that the trial was about to conclude.

g) The impugned order of the High Court also noted that the counsel for the complainant did not
apprise the Trial Court of the pendency of the revision petition.

C. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT

21. Mr. Shaurya Sahay, the learned counsel appearing for the State of Uttar Pradesh, addressed
himself primarily on the following two aspects:

(i) The issue of summoning of proposed accused under Section 319 of the CrPC after
conclusion of trial is well settled in law and in light of the said settled position the
summoning order issued in the present case cannot be said to be erroneous in law.

(ii) The impact and purport of Section 319(4) to the extent it contemplates re-hearing
of the witnesses and fresh commencement of trial had been correctly considered by
the High Court while passing the impugned order.

22. As regards the first proposition, the counsel submitted as follows:

a) This Court in its decision in Sukhpal Singh Khaira (supra), inter alia, laid down the
following guidelines to be followed by a court while deciding an application under
Section 319 of the CrPC:

i. If the competent court finds cogent evidence or if an application is made under
Section 319 of the CrPC showing involvement of any other person in the commission
of the offence based on evidence recorded at any stage in the trial before passing of
the order on acquittal or sentence, the court shall stop the proceedings of the trial at
that stage and proceed to decide the application filed under Section 319 of the CrPC
first before proceeding further with the trial.

ii. If the court decides to summon an accused under Section 319 of the CrPC, such
summoning order shall be passed before proceeding further with the trial in the main
case and depending upon the stage at which the order is passed, the court shall apply

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

10

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

its mind to the fact as to whether such summoned accused is to be tried along with
the other accused or separately.

iii. If the power under Section 319 of the CrPC is not invoked or exercised in the main
trial till its conclusion and if there is a split-

up case, such power can be invoked or exercised only if there is evidence to that
effect, pointing to the involvement of the additional accused to be summoned in the
split-up (bifurcated trial).

b) In the present matter, the High Court in its impugned order has recorded that as
per Section 319(4), the trial against the accused sought to be summoned has to be
commenced afresh and the witnesses have to be re-heard. Therefore, the conclusion
of the trial against the original accused persons would not cause any prejudice to the
appellants.

c) The aforesaid finding of the High Court falls squarely within the ambit of
paragraphs 41.3 and 41.6 of Sukhpal Singh Khaira (supra). The relevant guidelines
laid down in Sukhpal Singh Khaira (supra) and relied upon by the counsel are
reproduced below:

“41.3. If the decision of the court is to exercise the power under Section 319 CrPC and
summon the accused, such summoning order shall be passed before proceeding
further with the trial in the main case. ……….

41.6. If the decision is that the summoned accused can be tried separately, on such
order being made, there will be no impediment for the Court to continue and
conclude the trial against the accused who were being proceeded with.”

d) The impugned order also finds sustenance from the decision of this Court in
Sarojben Ashwinkumar Shah v. State of Gujarat reported in (2011) 13 SCC 316
wherein while laying down the principles applicable to Section 319 of the CrPC, it was
held that regard must be had to the constraints imposed by sub-Section (4) of Section
319 that the proceedings in respect of newly added persons shall be commenced
afresh from the beginning of the trial.

e) The decision of this Court in Devendra Kumar Pal v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr. reported in
2024 SCC OnLine SC 2487 has referred to the Constitution Bench judgment in Sukhpal Singh
Khaira (supra) and held that if a summoning order is passed after the passing of order of acquittal in
the case of acquittal or after the passing of order on sentence in the case of conviction, the same may
not be sustainable.

23. As regards the impact and purport of Section 319(4) with respect to re-

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

11

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

hearing of the witnesses and fresh commencement of trial, the counsel made the following
submissions:

a) The High Court in the impugned order has observed that the revisional power of
the High Court under Sections 397 and 401 of the CrPC respectively is plenary and
there are no limitations to reverse an order rejecting the Section 319 application in
order to ensure that actual perpetrators of the crime are rightly brought before the
court to face trial.

b) The High Court has further recorded in the impugned order that merely because
the trial against the original accused persons stood concluded during the pendency of
the revision, the power of revision cannot be limited, more particularly when the
Trial Court had recorded that the murder was committed by the original accused due
to the exhortation of the persons sought to be summoned under Section 319 of the
CrPC.

c) The principles governing the exercise of jurisdiction under Section 319 were laid
down by this Court in Hardeep Singh (supra) wherein it was observed that it is the
duty of the court to do justice by punishing the real culprit.

d) As regards the satisfaction of the court before it proceeds to exercise its power
under Section 319 of the CrPC, the Constitution Bench in Hardeep Singh (supra) has
held as follows:

“105. Power under Section 319 CrPC is a discretionary and an extraordinary power. It
is to be exercised sparingly and only in those cases where the circumstances of the
case so warrant. It is not to be exercised because the Magistrate or the Sessions Judge
is of the opinion that some other person may also be guilty of committing that
offence. Only where strong and cogent evidence occurs against a person from the
evidence led before the court that such power should be exercised and not in a casual
and cavalier manner.

106. Thus, we hold that though only a prima facie case is to be established from the
evidence led before the court, not necessarily tested on the anvil of cross-

examination, it requires much stronger evidence than mere probability of his complicity. The test
that has to be applied is one which is more than prima facie case as exercised at the time of framing
of charge, but short of satisfaction to an extent that the evidence, if goes unrebutted, would lead to
conviction. In the absence of such satisfaction, the court should refrain from exercising power under
Section 319 CrPC. In Section 319 CrPC the purpose of providing if “it appears from the evidence that
any person not being the accused has committed any offence” is clear from the words “for which
such person could be tried together with the accused”. The words used are not “for which such
person could be convicted”. There is, therefore, no scope for the court acting under Section 319 CrPC
to form any opinion as to the guilt of the accused.”

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

12

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

e) In the present case, both the Trial Court and High Court concurrently held that the summoning of
the appellants was warranted in view of the evidence that had come on record during the course of
the trial. The appellants were accused of having exhorted the original accused persons and therefore
prima facie could be said to have abetted the commission of the offence of murder.

24. In such circumstances referred to above, the counsel appearing for the respondent State
submitted that the Trial Court was justified in summoning the appellants as accused in exercise of
its powers under Section 319 CrPC. D. ISSUES FOR DETERMINATION

25. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having gone through the
materials on record, the following questions fall for our consideration:

(i) Whether the High Court was right in exercising its revisional jurisdiction for the
purpose of setting aside the order of the Trial Court rejecting the second application
preferred by the respondent no. 2 under section 319 of the CrPC?

(ii) Whether the order dated 21.02.2024 passed by the Trial Court to give effect to the
order passed by the High Court directing it to reconsider the application under
Section 319 of CrPC would relate back and replace its earlier order dated 19.07.2010
rejecting the Section 319 application?

(iii) Whether the Trial Court could have entertained an application filed under
Section 319 of the CrPC after the conclusion of the trial, more particularly when no
stay on trial had been granted by the High Court?

(iv) Whether the High Court should have given an opportunity of hearing to the
proposed accused before deciding the revision petition filed against the rejection of
application under Section 319 of the CrPC by the Trial Court? If yes, whether the
order dated 14.09.2021 passed by the High Court in exercise of its revisional
jurisdiction was passed without issuing notice to the appellants and providing them
an opportunity of hearing?

E. ANALYSIS

(i) Legislative history, ingredients and scope of Section 319 of the CrPC

26. Section 319 of the CrPC empowers the court to proceed against other persons appearing to be
guilty of offence. The section is reproduced below:

“319. Power to proceed against other persons appearing to be guilty of offence.

(1) Where, in the course of any inquiry into, or trial of, an offence, it appears from the
evidence that any person not being the accused has committed any offence for which
such person could be tried together with the accused, the Court may proceed against

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

13

such person for the offence which he appears to have committed.

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

(2) Where such person is not attending the Court, he may be arrested or summoned,
as the circumstances of the case may require, for the purpose aforesaid.

(3) Any person attending the Court, although not under arrest or upon a summons,
may be detained by such Court for the purpose of the inquiry into, or trial of, the
offence which he appears to have committed.

(4) Where the Court proceeds against any person under sub-section (1), then

(a) the proceedings in respect of such person shall be commenced afresh, and the
witnesses re-heard;

(b) subject to the provisions of clause (a), the case may proceed as if such person had
been an accused person when the Court took cognizance of the offence upon which
the inquiry or trial was commenced.”

27. Before the enactment of CrPC in 1973, Section 351 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898
(hereinafter referred to as “the Code, 1898”) was the provision corresponding to Section 319 of the
CrPC. Section 351 of the Code, 1898 is reproduced hereinbelow:

“351. Detention of offenders attending court.

(1) Any person attending a Criminal Court, although not under arrest or upon a
summons, may be detained by such Court for the purpose of inquiry into or trial of
any offence of which such Court can take cognizance and which, from the evidence,
may appear to have been committed, and may be proceeded against as though he had
been arrested or summoned.

(2) When the detention takes place in the course of an inquiry under Chapter XVIII
or after a trial has been begun the proceedings in respect of such person shall be
commenced afresh, and the witnesses re-heard.”

28. A perusal of Section 351 of the Code, 1898 indicates that under the old provision the court was
empowered to proceed only against a person who was attending the Court and who also appeared to
have committed the offence from the evidence adduced before the Court, of which such Court can
take cognizance, by detaining such a person for the purpose of enquiry or trial. Sub-section (2)
provided that in respect of such person, the proceedings shall have to be commenced afresh and the
witnesses re-heard.

29. The expression “any offence of which such Court can take cognizance and which, from the
evidence, may appear to have been committed” used in Section 351 clearly indicates two aspects,
namely:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

14

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

a. First, that it must appear from the evidence that a person who is attending the
Court has committed an offence; and b. Secondly, that the offence is such that the
Court can take cognizance.

30. Therefore, what becomes clear from the aforesaid is that there was a lacuna in Section 351 of the
Code, 1898 as it did not cover two important situations:

a. First, the situation where the person who appears to have committed an offence
during the course of the enquiry into or trial was not attending the Court; and b.
Secondly, the manner in which the cognizance will be taken as against that person.

31. In order to make Section 351 comprehensive, the Law Commission, realizing the above two grey
areas, in its 41st report, recommended for suitable amendment of the said provision. The relevant
recommendation of the Law Commission is reproduced hereinbelow:

“24.80. It happens sometimes, though not very often, that a Magistrate hearing a
case against certain accused finds from the evidence that some person, other than the
accused before him, is also concerned in that very offence or in a connected offence.
It is only proper that a Magistrate should have the power to call and join him in the
proceedings. Section 351 provides for such a situation, but only if that person
happens to be attending the Court. He can then be detained and proceeded against.
There is no express provision in Section 351 for summoning such a person if he is not
present in Court. Such a provision would make Section 351 fairly comprehensive, and
we think it proper to expressly provide for that situation.

24.81. Section 351 assumes that the Magistrate proceeding under it has the power of
taking cognizance of the new case. It does not, however, say in what manner
cognizance is taken by the Magistrate.

The modes of taking cognizance are mentioned in Section 190, and are apparently exhaustive. The
question is, whether against the newly added accused, cognizance will be supposed to have been
taken on the Magistrate's own information under Section 190(1)(c), or only in the manner in which
cognizance was first taken of the offence against the accused. The question is important, because the
methods of inquiry and trial in the two cases differ. About the true position under the existing law,
there has been difference of opinion, and we think it should be made clear. It seems to us that the
main purpose of this particular provision is, that the whole case against all known suspects should
be proceeded with expeditiously and convenience requires, that cognizance against the newly added
accused should be taken in the same manner as against the other accused We, therefore, propose to
recast Section 351 making it comprehensive and providing that there will be no difference in the
mode of taking cognizance of a new person is added as an accused during the proceedings.”
(Emphasis supplied)

32. The aforesaid indicates that the Law Commission made two recommendations:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

15

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

a. First, to add an accused who is not before the Court but connected with that
offence; and b. Secondly, the mode of taking cognizance as against the newly added
accused shall be the same as against the other accused.

33. Pursuant to the above recommendation, Section 319 was enacted in CrPC with suitable
modifications. A perusal of Section 319 of CrPC makes it manifest that any person, not being the
accused before the court, who also appears to have committed an offence from the evidence adduced
before the court during the course of any enquiry into or trial of an offence for which cognizance has
already been taken, regardless of whether such person is attending the court or not, can be
summoned. If he is added as an accused pursuant to the said decision of the court, the mode of
taking cognizance in respect of such person would the same as in the case of the already arraigned
accused. In other words, he is deemed to have been an accused when the Court originally took
cognizance of the offence earlier. For this purpose, a legal fiction is created in Clause (b) of
sub-section (4) of Section 319 of CrPC.

34. Section 319 has been included in the statute book with the object of ensuring effective
administration of justice. The legislature enacted Section 319 to eliminate any situation wherein the
courts would feel helpless in proceeding against any person who appears to be guilty of committing
an offence, more particularly, in cases where the investigating agency or prosecution files
chargesheet only against a few persons in relation to an offence and leaves out a few others either
intentionally or unintentionally. The said section empowers the courts to proceed with persons who
are not the accused before it, upon satisfaction of the conditions prescribed in the provision.

35. The scope of power under Section 319 CrPC was explained by this Court in Municipal Corpn. of
Delhi v. Ram Kishan Rohtagi reported in (1983) 1 SCC 1 wherein it was held that cognizance against
a proposed accused can be taken under Section 319 even if the proceedings against him have been
quashed earlier. The relevant observations are reproduced as under:

“19. In these circumstances, therefore, if the prosecution can at any stage produce
evidence which satisfies the court that the other accused or those who have not been
arrayed as accused against whom proceedings have been quashed have also
committed the offence the Court can take cognizance against them and try them
along with the other accused. But, we would hasten to add that this is really an
extraordinary power which is conferred on the court and should be used very
sparingly and only if compelling reasons exist for taking cognizance against the other
person against whom action has not been taken. More than this we would not like to
say anything further at this stage. We leave the entire matter to the discretion of the
court concerned so that it may act according to law. We would, however, make it
plain that the mere fact that the proceedings have been quashed against Respondents
2 to 5 will not prevent the court from exercising its discretion if it is fully satisfied
that a case for taking cognizance against them has been made out on the additional
evidence led before it.” (Emphasis supplied)

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

16

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

36. Further, this Court, in Kishun Singh v. State of Bihar reported in (1993) 2 SCC 16, observed that
even a person who has been discharged earlier would fall within the sweep of Section 319 of the
CrPC subject to other requirements for applicability of the provision being satisfied. The relevant
observations are reproduced hereinbelow:

“11. On a plain reading of sub-section (1) of Section 319 there can be no doubt that it
must appear from the evidence tendered in the course of any inquiry or trial that any
person not being the accused has committed any offence for which he could be tried
together with the accused. This power, it seems clear to us, can be exercised only if it
so appears from the evidence at the trial and not otherwise. Therefore, this
sub-section contemplates existence of some evidence appearing in the course of trial
wherefrom the court can prima facie conclude that the person not arraigned before it
is also involved in the commission of the crime for which he can be tried with those
already named by the police. Even a person who has earlier been discharged would
fall within the sweep of the power conferred by Section 319 of the Code.” (Emphasis
supplied)

37. A perusal of the aforesaid decisions of this Court indicates that the intention behind giving a
wide interpretation to Section 319 is to ensure that the perpetrator of a crime does not get away
unpunished. The legislature incorporated the provision with the purpose of empowering the courts
to find out the real culprits without getting hindered by procedural impediments so that the guilty
does not go unpunished.

38. While discussing the spirit underlying Section 319 of the CrPC, this Court in Hardeep Singh
(supra) observed that the provision is based on the doctrine judex damnatur cum nocens absolvitur
which means that “the Judge is condemned when guilty is acquitted”. The Court further observed
that this doctrine must be used as a beacon light while explaining the ambit and the spirit
underlying the enactment of Section 319 CrPC. The relevant portions from the said decision
discussing the spirit of the provision and the approach which the courts must adopt while
interpreting the provision are reproduced hereinbelow:

“8. The constitutional mandate under Articles 20 and 21 of the Constitution of India
provides a protective umbrella for the smooth administration of justice making
adequate provisions to ensure a fair and efficacious trial so that the accused does not
get prejudiced after the law has been put into motion to try him for the offence but at
the same time also gives equal protection to victims and to society at large to ensure
that the guilty does not get away from the clutches of law. For the empowerment of
the courts to ensure that the criminal administration of justice works properly, the
law was appropriately codified and modified by the legislature under CrPC indicating
as to how the courts should proceed in order to ultimately find out the truth so that
an innocent does not get punished but at the same time, the guilty are brought to
book under the law. It is these ideals as enshrined under the Constitution and our
laws that have led to several decisions, whereby innovating methods and progressive
tools have been forged to find out the real truth and to ensure that the guilty does not

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

17

go unpunished.

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

9. The presumption of innocence is the general law of the land as every man is
presumed to be innocent unless proven to be guilty. Alternatively, certain statutory
presumptions in relation to certain class of offences have been raised against the
accused whereby the presumption of guilt prevails till the accused discharges his
burden upon an onus being cast upon him under the law to prove himself to be
innocent. These competing theories have been kept in mind by the legislature. The
entire effort, therefore, is not to allow the real perpetrator of an offence to get away
unpunished. This is also a part of fair trial and in our opinion, in order to achieve this
very end that the legislature thought of incorporating provisions of Section 319 CrPC.
It is with the said object in mind that a constructive and purposive interpretation
should be adopted that advances the cause of justice and does not dilute the intention
of the statute conferring powers on the court to carry out the abovementioned
avowed object and purpose to try the person to the satisfaction of the court as an
accomplice in the commission of the offence that is the subject-matter of trial.

--xxx--

12. Section 319 CrPC springs out of the doctrine judex damnatur cum nocens absolvitur (Judge is
condemned when guilty is acquitted) and this doctrine must be used as a beacon light while
explaining the ambit and the spirit underlying the enactment of Section 319 CrPC.

13. It is the duty of the court to do justice by punishing the real culprit. Where the investigating
agency for any reason does not array one of the real culprits as an accused, the court is not
powerless in calling the said accused to face trial. The question remains under what circumstances
and at what stage should the court exercise its power as contemplated in Section 319 CrPC?”
(Emphasis supplied)

39. A bare perusal of sub-section (1) of Section 319 brings out three essential requirements that
must be fulfilled for invoking the powers thereunder:

a. First, there must be an ongoing inquiry or trial in respect of the original accused
person(s); and b. Secondly, in the course of such proceedings, evidence must have
come on record to show that any person other than the original accused has
committed any offence; and c. Thirdly, the person sought to be summoned could be
tried together with the original accused for such offence.

40. This Court in Raj Kishore Prasad v. State of Bihar reported in (1996) 4 SCC 495 held that Section
319 deals only with a situation in which the complicity of the persons sought to be arrayed as
accused comes to light from the evidence taken and recorded in the course of an inquiry or trial.

This Court in its decision in Suman v. State of Rajasthan reported in (2010) 1 SCC 250 held that a
case can be proceeded with under Section 319 if, based upon the evidence brought on record in the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

18

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

course of any inquiry into, or trial of an offence, the court is prima facie satisfied that such person
has committed any offence for which he can be tried with other accused.

41. The standard of such prima facie satisfaction to be formed from the evidence produced during
the course of trial or inquiry has been explained by this court in Hardeep Singh (supra). The relevant
observations from the said decision are reproduced below:

“105. Power under Section 319 CrPC is a discretionary and an extraordinary power. It
is to be exercised sparingly and only in those cases where the circumstances of the
case so warrant. It is not to be exercised because the Magistrate or the Sessions Judge
is of the opinion that some other person may also be guilty of committing that
offence. Only where strong and cogent evidence occurs against a person from the
evidence led before the court that such power should be exercised and not in a casual
and cavalier manner.

106. Thus, we hold that though only a prima facie case is to be established from the
evidence led before the court, not necessarily tested on the anvil of cross-

examination, it requires much stronger evidence than mere probability of his complicity. The test
that has to be applied is one which is more than prima facie case as exercised at the time of framing
of charge, but short of satisfaction to an extent that the evidence, if goes unrebutted, would lead to
conviction. In the absence of such satisfaction, the court should refrain from exercising power under
Section 319 CrPC. In Section 319 CrPC the purpose of providing if “it appears from the evidence that
any person not being the accused has committed any offence” is clear from the words “for which
such person could be tried together with the accused”. The words used are not “for which such
person could be convicted”. There is, therefore, no scope for the court acting under Section 319 CrPC
to form any opinion as to the guilt of the accused.” (Emphasis supplied)

42. As regards the requirement of evidence and the standard for testing such evidence, Hardeep
Singh (supra) indicates as follows:

a. First, it is not necessary for the evidence tendered to be tested by way of
cross-examination for establishing the involvement of an additional accused; and b.
Secondly, the threshold for establishing the involvement of an additional accused is
more than that of a prima facie case as exercised at the time of framing of charge, but
less than such a satisfaction that the evidence, if goes unrebutted, would lead to
conviction.

43. Further, the exercise of powers under Section 319 is not inhibited with respect to who can be
summoned as an accused. This Court in Hardeep Singh (supra) has clarified in express terms that
Section 319 CrPC can be exercised against a person not subjected to investigation, or a person
placed in Column 2 of the chargesheet and against whom cognizance had not been taken, or even a
person who has been discharged. However, as regards a person who has been discharged, no
proceedings can be commenced against him directly under Section 319 CrPC without taking

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

19

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

recourse to provisions of Section 300(5) read with Section 398 CrPC. Such a person can be
proceeded against under Section 319 only if during or after an inquiry under Section 300(5) read
with Section 398, there appears to be evidence against such person which may indicate that they
committed any offence for which they could be tried together with the accused.

44. Therefore, a summoning order issued under Section 319 of the CrPC cannot be quashed only on
the ground that even though the proposed accused were named in the FIR or complaint, the police
did not include their names in the chargesheet. In other words, if the evidence tendered in the
course of any inquiry or trial shows that any person not being the accused has committed any
offence for which he could be tried together with the accused, he can be summoned to face trial even
though he may not have been chargesheeted by the investigating agency or may have been
discharged at an earlier stage.

45. Sub-section (4) of Section 319 mandates that a fresh trial or a de novo trial is to be conducted in
respect of the persons summoned under sub-section (1) so as to ensure that such persons are not
deprived of the opportunity to present their case and examine the witnesses properly. The
requirement of a de novo trial in sub-section (4)(a) is quite different from the notion of a split- up or
separate trial as provided under Section 317 of the CrPC. The provision of a de novo trial is to
safeguard the right of fair trial to be provided to the new persons summoned under Section 319(1).

46. However, while the provision of de novo or fresh trial under Section 319(4) is mandatory, the
said sub-section is applicable only in cases where the court proceeds against any person under
sub-section (1). Thus, a de novo trial can be commenced in respect of the proposed accused only if
the power under sub-section (1) has been validly exercised by the court. In other words, sub- section
(4) is subject to sub-section (1) and thus also to the expression “could be tried together with the
accused” mentioned in sub-section (1).

(ii) Stage at which power under Section 319 of the CrPC can be exercised

47. The principal contention of the appellants is that the Trial Court could not have allowed the
application under Section 319 of the CrPC after the conclusion of the trial of the original accused. In
other words, the appellants have contended that once the stage of trial was over by virtue of
pronouncement of judgment of conviction and sentence, it was not open anymore to the Trial Court
to issue summons against the appellants.

48. To better appreciate and address the aforesaid contention of the appellants, it is important to
understand the stage at which the power under Section 319 of the CrPC can be exercised. A bare
perusal of the sub-section (1) of Section 319 of the CrPC indicates that the power thereunder can be
exercised “in the course of an inquiry into, or trial of, an offence”.

49. A Constitution Bench of this Court in Hardeep Singh (supra) was called upon to resolve, inter
alia, the issue of the stage at which an order under Section 319 could be passed. This Court
considered the meaning and scope of the words “course”, “inquiry” and “trial” appearing in
sub-section (1) in detail and inter alia made the following observations:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

20

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

a. The stage of committal can neither be said to fall under the meaning of the
expression “inquiry” or “trial” and thus the powers under Section 319 cannot be
exercised at the stage of committal of proceedings.

b. The stage of trial commences upon the framing of charges. c. Inquiry does not include the stage of
investigation by the investigating authorities and refers to the stage which commences upon the case
being brought to the notice of the court upon filing of the chargesheet. d. The power under Section
319(1) CrPC can be exercised at any time after the charge-sheet is filed and before the
pronouncement of judgment, except during the stage of Sections 207/208 CrPC, committal, etc.
which is only a pre-trial stage, intended to put the process into motion. e. The application of the
provisions of Section 319 CrPC, at the stage of inquiry remains limited to adding a person as an
accused, whose name has been mentioned in Column 2 of the charge-sheet or any other person who
might be an accomplice.

f. The word “course” appearing in sub-section (1) signifies that the power under Section 319 can be
exercised when either the inquiry, or trial, has been commenced and is going on.

50. The relevant observations made by this Court in Hardeep Singh (supra) in the context of the
stage at which the powers under Section 319 can be exercised by the courts are reproduced
hereinbelow:

“38. In view of the above, the law can be summarised to the effect that as “trial”
means determination of issues adjudging the guilt or the innocence of a person, the
person has to be aware of what is the case against him and it is only at the stage of
framing of the charges that the court informs him of the same, the “trial” commences
only on charges being framed. Thus, we do not approve the view taken by the courts
that in a criminal case, trial commences on cognizance being taken.

39. Section 2(g) CrPC and the case laws referred to above, therefore, clearly envisage
inquiry before the actual commencement of the trial, and is an act conducted under
CrPC by the Magistrate or the court.

The word “inquiry” is, therefore, not any inquiry relating to the investigation of the case by the
investigating agency but is an inquiry after the case is brought to the notice of the court on the filing
of the charge-sheet. The court can thereafter proceed to make inquiries and it is for this reason that
an inquiry has been given to mean something other than the actual trial.

40. Even the word “course” occurring in Section 319 CrPC, clearly indicates that the power can be
exercised only during the period when the inquiry has been commenced and is going on or the trial
which has commenced and is going on. It covers the entire wide range of the process of the pre-trial
and the trial stage. The word “course” therefore, allows the court to invoke this power to proceed
against any person from the initial stage of inquiry up to the stage of the conclusion of the trial. The
court does not become functus officio even if cognizance is taken so far as it is looking into the
material qua any other person who is not an accused. […]

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

21

--xxx--

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

42. To say that powers under Section 319 CrPC can be exercised only during trial would be reducing
the impact of the word “inquiry” by the court. It is a settled principle of law that an interpretation
which leads to the conclusion that a word used by the legislature is redundant, should be avoided as
the presumption is that the legislature has deliberately and consciously used the words for carrying
out the purpose of the Act. The legal maxim a verbis legis non est recedendum which means, “from
the words of law, there must be no departure” has to be kept in mind.

--xxx--

47. Since after the filing of the charge-sheet, the court reaches the stage of inquiry and as soon as the
court frames the charges, the trial commences, and therefore, the power under Section 319(1) CrPC
can be exercised at any time after the charge-sheet is filed and before the pronouncement of
judgment, except during the stage of Sections 207/208 CrPC, committal, etc. which is only a
pre-trial stage, intended to put the process into motion. […]

--xxx--

53. It is thus aptly clear that until and unless the case reaches the stage of inquiry or trial by the
court, the power under Section 319 CrPC cannot be exercised. In fact, this proposition does not seem
to have been disturbed by the Constitution Bench in Dharam Pal (CB) [Dharam Pal v. State of
Haryana, (2014) 3 SCC 306 : AIR 2013 SC 3018]. […]

54. In our opinion, the stage of inquiry does not contemplate any evidence in its strict legal sense,
nor could the legislature have contemplated this inasmuch as the stage for evidence has not yet
arrived. The only material that the court has before it is the material collected by the prosecution
and the court at this stage prima facie can apply its mind to find out as to whether a person, who can
be an accused, has been erroneously omitted from being arraigned or has been deliberately excluded
by the prosecuting agencies. This is all the more necessary in order to ensure that the investigating
and the prosecuting agencies have acted fairly in bringing before the court those persons who
deserve to be tried and to prevent any person from being deliberately shielded when they ought to
have been tried. This is necessary to usher faith in the judicial system whereby the court should be
empowered to exercise such powers even at the stage of inquiry and it is for this reason that the
legislature has consciously used separate terms, namely, inquiry or trial in Section 319 CrPC.

55. Accordingly, we hold that the court can exercise the power under Section 319 CrPC only after the
trial proceeds and commences with the recording of the evidence and also in exceptional
circumstances as explained hereinabove.

--xxx--

57. Thus, the application of the provisions of Section 319 CrPC, at the stage of inquiry is to be
understood in its correct perspective. The power under Section 319 CrPC can be exercised only on

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

22

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

the basis of the evidence adduced before the court during a trial. So far as its application during the
course of inquiry is concerned, it remains limited as referred to hereinabove, adding a person as an
accused, whose name has been mentioned in Column 2 of the charge-

sheet or any other person who might be an accomplice.” (Emphasis supplied)

51. In Sukhpal Singh Khaira (supra), a Constitution Bench of this Court was called upon to
authoritatively consider the stage at which a trial could be said to have been concluded for the
purposes of Section 319 of the CrPC. The Court, inter alia, framed the following two questions:

a. Whether the trial court has the power under Section 319 CrPC for summoning
additional accused when the trial with respect to other co-

accused has ended and the judgment of conviction rendered on the same date before
pronouncing the summoning order?

b. Whether the trial court has the power under Section 319 CrPC for summoning
additional accused when the trial in respect of certain other absconding accused
(whose presence is subsequently secured) is ongoing/pending, having been
bifurcated from the main trial?

52. Answering the first question, the Court observed that where there is a judgment of conviction the
power under Section 319 CrPC is to be invoked and exercised before the pronouncement of the order
of sentence. In the case of acquittal, the power should be exercised before the order of acquittal is
pronounced. As regards cases where the summoning order and order of conviction/acquittal are
passed on the same day, the Court held that it will have to be examined on the facts and
circumstances of each case and if such summoning order is found to have been passed either after
the order of acquittal or imposing sentence in the case of conviction, the same would not be
sustainable.

53. With the regard to the second question, the Court observed that the trial court has the power to
summon additional accused during the proceeding of split- up trial (i.e., trial of the accused which
had been separated or bifurcated from the main trial), subject to the evidence recorded in the
split-up (bifurcated) trial pointing to the involvement of the accused sought to be summoned. The
Court clarified that the evidence recorded in the main concluded trial cannot be the basis of the
summoning order if such power has not been exercised in the main trial till its conclusion.

54. The Court also approved its earlier decision in Shashikant Singh (supra) wherein it was held that
the expression “could be tried together with the accused” used in Section 319 does not mandate that
the proposed accused has to be jointly tried with the original accused. It was held by this Court that
at the time of deciding to proceed against the proposed accused under Section 319, the court is also
required to apply its mind and take a decision as to whether the proceedings shall continue jointly
with the original accused or separately for the proposed accused.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

23

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

55. The relevant portions from the reasoning assigned by the Court in arriving at the aforesaid
conclusions are reproduced hereinbelow:

“23. […] Therefore, it would be open for the court to summon such a person so that
he could be tried together with the accused and such power is exclusively of the court.
Obviously, when such power is to summon the additional accused and try such a
person with the already charged accused against whom the trial is proceeding, it will
have to be exercised before the conclusion of trial. The connotation “conclusion of
trial” in the present case cannot be reckoned as the stage till the evidence is recorded,
but, is to be understood as the stage before pronouncement of the judgment as
already held in Hardeep Singh [Hardeep Singh v. State of Punjab, (2014) 3 SCC 92 :
(2014) 2 SCC (Cri) 86] since on judgment being pronounced the trial comes to a
conclusion since until such time the accused is being tried by the court.

--xxx--

27. From a perusal of the provisions extracted above, it is seen that if the Sessions
Court while analysing the evidence recorded finds that there is no evidence to hold
the accused for having committed the offence, the Judge is required to record an
order of acquittal. In that case, there is nothing further to be done by the learned
Judge and therefore the trial concludes at that stage. In such cases where it arises
under Section 232 CrPC and an order of acquittal is recorded and when there are
more than one accused or the sole accused, have/has been acquitted, in such cases,
that being the end of the trial by drawing the curtain, the power of the court to
summon an accused based on the evidence as contemplated under Section 319 CrPC
will have to be invoked and exercised before pronouncement of judgment of
acquittal. There shall be application of mind also, as to whether separate trial or joint
trial is to be held while trying him afresh. After such order it will be open to
pronounce the judgment of acquittal of the accused who was tried earlier.

--xxx--

29. The above aspects would indicate that even after the pronouncement of the
judgment of conviction, the trial is not complete since the learned Sessions Judge is
required to apply her/his mind to the evidence which is available on record to
determine the gravity of the charge for which the accused is found guilty; the role of
the particular accused when there is more than one accused involved in an offence
and in that light, to award an appropriate sentence. Therefore, it cannot be said that
the trial is complete on the pronouncement of the judgment of conviction alone,
though it may be so in the case of acquittal as contemplated under Section 232 CrPC,
since in that case there is nothing further to be done by the learned Judge except to
record an order of acquittal which results in conclusion of trial.

--xxx--

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

24

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

32. Therefore, from a perusal of the provisions and decisions of this Court, it is clear
that the conclusion of the trial in a criminal prosecution if it ends in conviction, a
judgment is considered to be complete in all respects only when the sentence is
imposed on the convict, if the convict is not given the benefit of Section 360 CrPC.
Similarly, in a case where there are more than one accused and if one or more among
them are acquitted and the others are convicted, the trial would stand concluded as
against the accused who are acquitted and the trial will have to be concluded against
the convicted accused with the imposition of sentence.

When considered in the context of Section 319 CrPC, there would be no dichotomy as argued, since
what becomes relevant here is only the decision to summon a new accused based on the evidence
available on record which would not prejudice the existing accused since in any event they are
convicted.

--xxx--

34. Though Section 319 CrPC provides that such person summoned as per sub-section (1) thereto
could be jointly tried together with the other accused, keeping in view the power available to the
court under Section 223 CrPC to hold a joint trial, it would also be open to the learned Sessions
Judge at the point of considering the application under Section 319 CrPC and deciding to summon
the additional accused, to also take a decision as to whether a joint trial is to be held after
summoning such accused by deferring the judgment being passed against the tried accused. If a
conclusion is reached that the fresh trial to be conducted against the newly added accused could be
separately tried, in such event it would be open for the learned Sessions Judge to order so and
proceed to pass the judgment and conclude the trial insofar as the accused against whom it had
originally proceeded and thereafter proceed in the case of the newly added accused. However, what
is important is that the decision to summon an additional accused either suo motu by the court or
on an application under Section 319 CrPC shall in all eventuality be considered and disposed of
before the judgment of conviction and sentence is pronounced, as otherwise, the trial would get
concluded and the court will get divested of the power under Section 319 CrPC. Since a power is
available to the court to decide as to whether a joint trial is required to be held or not, this Court was
justified in holding the phrase, “could be tried together with the accused” as contained in Section
319(1)CrPC, to be directory as held in Shashikant Singh [Shashikant Singh v. Tarkeshwar Singh,
(2002) 5 SCC 738 : 2002 SCC (Cri) 1203] which in our opinion is the correct view.

35. One other aspect which is necessary to be clarified is that if the trial against the absconding
accused is split up (bifurcated) and is pending, that by itself will not provide validity to an
application filed under Section 319CrPC or the order of court to summon an additional accused in
the earlier main trial if such summoning order is made in the earlier concluded trial against the
other accused. This is so, since such power is to be exercised by the court based on the evidence
recorded in that case pointing to the involvement of the accused who is sought to be summoned. If
in the split up (bifurcated) case, on securing the presence of the absconding accused the trial is
commenced and if in the evidence recorded therein it points to the involvement of any other person
as contemplated in Section 319CrPC, such power to summon the accused can certainly be invoked in

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

25

the split up (bifurcated) case before conclusion of the trial therein.” (Emphasis supplied)

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

56. Further, this Court in Sukhpal Singh Khaira (supra) also laid down certain guidelines for the
exercise of power by the courts under Section 319 of the CrPC. These guidelines are reproduced
below:

“41.(III) What are the guidelines that the competent court must follow while
exercising power under Section 319CrPC?

41.1. If the competent court finds evidence or if application under Section 319 CrPC is
filed regarding involvement of any other person in committing the offence based on
evidence recorded at any stage in the trial before passing of the order on acquittal or
sentence, it shall pause the trial at that stage.

41.2. The court shall thereupon first decide the need or otherwise to summon the
additional accused and pass orders thereon.

41.3. If the decision of the court is to exercise the power under Section 319 CrPC and
summon the accused, such summoning order shall be passed before proceeding
further with the trial in the main case.

41.4. If the summoning order of additional accused is passed, depending on the stage
at which it is passed, the court shall also apply its mind to the fact as to whether such
summoned accused is to be tried along with the other accused or separately.

41.5. If the decision is for joint trial, the fresh trial shall be commenced only after
securing the presence of the summoned accused.

41.6. If the decision is that the summoned accused can be tried separately, on such
order being made, there will be no impediment for the court to continue and
conclude the trial against the accused who were being proceeded with.

41.7. If the proceeding paused as in para 41.1 above, is in a case where the accused
who were tried are to be acquitted, and the decision is that the summoned accused
can be tried afresh separately, there will be no impediment to pass the judgment of
acquittal in the main case.

41.8. If the power is not invoked or exercised in the main trial till its conclusion and if
there is a split-up (bifurcated) case, the power under Section 319 CrPC can be
invoked or exercised only if there is evidence to that effect, pointing to the
involvement of the additional accused to be summoned in the split-up (bifurcated)
trial.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

26

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

41.9. If, after arguments are heard and the case is reserved for judgment the occasion
arises for the Court to invoke and exercise the power under Section 319 CrPC, the
appropriate course for the court is to set it down for re-hearing.

41.10. On setting it down for re-hearing, the above laid down procedure to decide
about summoning; holding of joint trial or otherwise shall be decided and proceeded
with accordingly.

41.11. Even in such a case, at that stage, if the decision is to summon additional
accused and hold a joint trial the trial shall be conducted afresh and de novo
proceedings be held.

41.12. If, in that circumstance, the decision is to hold a separate trial in case of the
summoned accused as indicated earlier:

(a) The main case may be decided by pronouncing the conviction and sentence and
then proceed afresh against summoned accused.

(b) In the case of acquittal the order shall be passed to that effect in the main case
and then proceed afresh against summoned accused.” (Emphasis supplied)

57. The guidelines laid down by this Court contemplate several situations as to how the trial of the
accused summoned under Section 319 should take place. Paragraph nos. 41.1 to 41.4 lay down the
chronology of steps to be taken while deciding an application under Section 319 that is:

a. First, the court has to decide the need for summoning an accused under Section
319;

b. Secondly, if the court reaches the conclusion that a person is required to be arrayed
as an accused under Section 319, then the summoning order in respect thereof must
be passed before the conclusion of the trial of the original accused;

c. Thirdly, depending on the stage of the trial at which the summoning order under
Section 319 is passed, the court also has to decide whether the newly arrayed accused
will be jointly or separately tried with the original accused.

58. Paragraph 41.8 of the guidelines clarifies that the power under Section 319 can be invoked only
during the pendency of trial of the original accused person(s). To illustrate, say in a case with
accused ‘A’ and accused ‘B’ the trial was split-up by the court in respect of accused ‘B’ because he
was found to be absconding, then the main trial in respect of the accused ‘A’ can continue separately
without any hindrance or delay. In a situation where the main trial in respect of accused ‘A’ has
already concluded and only the split- up trial in respect of accused ‘B’ remains pending, the power
under Section 319 can be invoked even in such split-up proceedings provided that it appears from
the evidence recorded in such split-up trial proceedings that a person not being the accused has

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

27

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

committed any offence which could be tried together with accused ‘B’ whose culpability is being
adjudicated in the split-up trial. It is apposite to mention here that if the evidence recorded during
the course of the main trial in respect of accused ‘A’ indicates towards the complicity of an
additional accused person, but the same has already concluded, then, by using such evidence, the
power under Section 319 cannot be invoked during the split-up trial in respect of accused ‘B’. For a
person to be summoned under Section 319 in the split-up trial, the condition precedent is that the
evidence taken in the split-up trial by itself should indicate towards the involvement of the proposed
accused in the offence.

59. Further, it is clear from Paragraph nos. 41.5, 41.6, 41.7, 41.9, 41.10, 41.11 and 41.12, respectively,
that a de novo or a fresh trial is mandatory upon summoning of an accused person under Section
319. If upon such summoning, the court decides to conduct a joint trial of the proposed accused with
the original accused, then the trial will be conducted afresh for the newly arrayed accused. On the
other hand, if the decision of the court is to conduct a separate trial for the newly arrayed accused,
then the main trial in respect of the original accused can be concluded without any impediment and
the fresh trial of the new accused persons can be conducted separately.

60. Therefore, conducting a fresh trial in respect of the proposed accused after the conclusion of the
main trial is not permissible unless an order separating the trial of the original accused with that of
the proposed accused is passed by the court before the original trial stands concluded. This stage is
reached after the summoning order has been made during the pendency of the trial in respect of the
original accused. From the above exposition of law, it is clear that passing of a summoning order
before the conclusion of trial is a requirement that flows from sub-section (1) of Section 319. This
requirement is in no way qualified by the provision of a fresh trial under sub- section (4) and thus,
cannot be the basis to allow a summoning order to be passed after the conclusion of trial in the
absence of a decision by the court to proceed against the proposed accused under sub-section (1) of
Section 319 of the CrPC during the pendency of the trial.

(iii) Meaning of the expression “could be tried together with the accused”

61. In our considered view, the expression “could be tried together with the accused” lays down a
necessary requirement that the persons sought to be arrayed as accused under Section 319 should be
capable of being jointly tried with the original accused irrespective of whether they are actually tried
together or not. This Court in its decision in R. Dineshkumar @ Deena v. State represented by
Inspector of Police & Ors. reported in (2015) 7 SCC 497 observed that the expression “could be tried
together” as appearing in Section 319 of the CrPC is to be construed in the context of Section 223 of
the CrPC which provides for circumstances under which different persons may be tried together.
The relevant observations are reproduced below:

“8. […] The section authorises the court making any inquiry into or conducting the
trial of an offence to “proceed” against any person (other than the accused facing
trial) subject to two conditions (i) that from the “evidence” it appears to the court that
such a person “has committed any offence”, and (ii) that such a person “could be tried
together with the accused”.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

28

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

9. We shall first consider the question as to when could a person appearing to have
committed an offence “be tried together with the accused” already facing trial?

10. Section 223 CrPC provides for the joint trial of different accused in certain
circumstances. It enumerates different contingencies in which different persons may
be charged and tried together. As rightly noticed by the High Court, the only clause if
at all relevant for the purpose of the present case is Section 223(d) which stipulates
that persons accused of different offences committed in the course of the same
transaction could be charged and tried together.” (Emphasis supplied)

62. Section 223 of the CrPC provides for certain situations and contingencies in
which different persons may be charged and tried together. This Court in R.
Dineshkumar (supra) had the occasion to consider the meaning of the expression
“same transaction” and held that joint trial of persons accused of different offences
committed in the course of same transaction is permissible under Section 319 where
the offences are not wholly unconnected.

63. What is discernible from the principles expounded in R. Dineshkumar (supra) is
that for offences committed in the same transaction, the court should ideally arraign
all the concerned persons as accused at the same time.

Even if a person is not arraigned as an accused, he could be arraigned as an accused under Section
319 provided, inter alia, he “could be tried together” with the originally chargesheeted accused.
Therefore, what follows is that a person must be arraigned as an accused under Section 319 when
the persons originally chargesheeted are still accused persons and their culpability is yet to be
decided.

64. The power under Section 319 can only be exercised in a situation where the Trial Court is seized
of the offence committed in the “same transaction”. When the trial is concluded, such court becomes
functus officio and the power to summon persons under Section 319 for the offences alleged to have
been committed in the same transaction no longer vests with the said court as the new persons
sought to be summoned cannot be tried together with the original accused.

65. While it is mandatory for the court to arrive at an objective satisfaction, on the basis of the
evidence adduced in the course of inquiry or trial, that the proposed accused appears to have
committed an offence, the court is also duty bound in law to ascertain whether the proposed accused
could be tried with the original accused for the commission of the offence which he appears to have
committed. Undoubtedly, it is open for the court to take a decision as to whether it wishes to try the
proposed accused jointly with the original accused or proceed against him in a separate trial,
however, the stage for exercise of such a discretion can only arise if the aforesaid two obligatory
conditions are satisfied. By implication, both the aforesaid conditions can only be satisfied if the
court proceeds against the proposed accused before the conclusion of the trial as with the conclusion
of trial the possibility of fulfilment of the twin conditions of “in the course of trial” and “could be
tried together” ceases to exist.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

29

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

66. We may clarify with a view to obviate any confusion that the requirement placed by the
expression “could be tried together with the accused” for exercise of power under sub-section (1) of
Section 319 is mandatory in the sense that a joint trial of the original accused and proposed accused
must be possible. However, whether a joint trial, or a separate trial, is held is left to the discretion of
the Trial Court. As a result, passing of the summoning order before the conclusion of trial is
mandatory. It cannot be said for a moment that passing of the summoning order before the
conclusion of trial is directory merely because sub-section (4) provides for conduct of a fresh trial in
respect of the additional accused.

67. This Court in its decisions in Shashikant Singh (supra) and Sukhpal Singh Khaira (supra) has
clarified that the expression “could be” tried together with the accused is only directory i.e., an
expression of possibility and should not be construed to mean “must be”. The dictum laid in the
aforesaid cases is that conclusion of the trial qua the original accused would not act as an
impediment for the court to proceed with the trial of the proposed accused who were summoned
under Section 319 of the CrPC before the conclusion of the original trial. In other words, if a
summoning order under Section 319 of the CrPC is passed against the proposed accused during the
pendency of the trial in respect of the original accused, then even if such trial concludes before the
court is able to proceed with the proposed accused, that would not prevent the court from
proceeding in a separate trial against the proposed accused.

68. Thus, what has been emphasised by this Court in the aforesaid decisions is that if the Trial
Court, after applying its mind as regards the fulfilment of the twin conditions under sub-section (1)
of Section 319, decides to summon the proposed accused for facing trial, then the mere fact that the
main trial stands concluded during the pendency of a revision petition against the summoning order
before the High Court, would not incapacitate the Trial Court from proceeding with the summoned
proposed accused in a separate trial even after conclusion of the main trial. In other words, the
summoning order would not become ineffective and inoperative so as to nullify the opinion earlier
formed by the court on the basis of evidence before it that the newly added person appears to have
committed the offence if the trial against the additional accused does not commence before the
conclusion of the main trial in respect of the original accused. The expression “could be tried
together with the accused” does not fetter the power of the Trial Court under Section 319 to conduct
trial of the proposed accused persons even after the conclusion of the main trial provided the
summoning order is passed before such conclusion. It is in this context that this Court stated that
the said expression is to be construed as directory and not mandatory.

(iv) Peculiar facts of the present case not fully covered by the guidelines issued by this Court in its
decisions in Sukhpal Singh Khaira and Hardeep Singh

69. The dictum that flows from the aforesaid discussion is that the power under Section 319 of the
CrPC must be exercised by the court against the proposed accused before the conclusion of the trial
in respect of the original accused. However, the factual matrix of the case at hand is one of its kind
and requires us to take a step forward into a territory which this Court has not had the occasion to
tread in any of its earlier decisions including those in Sukhpal Singh Khaira (supra), Hardeep Singh
(supra) and Shashikant Singh (supra) all of which have been discussed in detail by us.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

30

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

70. The facts in the present case compared to those in Shashikant Singh (supra) are distinguishable
to the extent that the summoning order in the latter case was passed before the conclusion of trial
and the same was overturned by the High Court in exercise of its revisional powers on the sole
ground that the trial in respect of the original accused had concluded during the pendency of the
revision. However, this Court gave a purposive interpretation to Section 319 and set aside the order
of the High Court and remanded the matter back for a fresh consideration. The decision in
Shashikant Singh (supra) was later approved by the Constitution Bench in Sukhpal Singh Khaira
(supra) as the summoning order in Shashikant Singh (supra) was passed by the Trial Court before
the conclusion of the trial.

71. In Sukhpal Singh Khaira (supra), the question to be decided was limited to the extent whether
the summoning order could have been passed by the Trial Court after the passing of the order of
conviction and sentence.

72. The peculiarity of the present case lies in the fact that although the application under Section 319
of the CrPC was rejected before the conclusion of the trial, the same came to be allowed after the
conclusion of the trial, and the case was remanded by the High Court for a fresh consideration due
to a patent illegality in the order of rejection passed by the Trial Court.

73. The facts in detail are that the Trial Court had rejected the second application filed under Section
319 by the respondent no. 2 whilst the trial was pending. The respondent no. 2 preferred a revision
before the High Court against the rejection of his application. This rejection order came to be set
aside by the High Court subsequent to the conclusion of the trial by the Sessions Court. The High
Court directed the Trial Court to consider the application afresh and in compliance with the same,
the respondent no. 2, though not required as per the High Court’s order, moved a third application
under Section 319 of the CrPC almost 10 years after the conclusion of trial. The 3rd application
under Section 319 of the CrPC came to be allowed by the Sessions Court and challenge to the same
by the appellants under Section 482 of the CrPC came to be rejected vide the impugned order passed
by the High Court.

74. The fundamental difference between the case at hand and Shashikant Singh (supra) is that
although the application under Section 319 was considered by the Trial Court before the conclusion
of the trial, yet the summoning order could not be passed before the conclusion of trial as the trial
stood concluded during the pendency of the revision petition before the High Court. Thus, what falls
for our consideration is the legal effect of the order of the High Court setting aside the rejection of
the second application by the Trial Court long after the conclusion of the trial. More particularly,
what needs to be determined is the interplay between power of courts under Section 319 vis- à-vis
the revisional power of the High Court under Sections 397 to 401 of the CrPC.

(v) Whether the High Court was right in exercising its revisional jurisdiction for the purpose of
setting aside the order of the Trial Court rejecting the second application preferred by the
respondent no. 2 under section 319 of the CrPC?

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

31

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

75. We are in seisin of the fact that the order dated 14.09.2021 passed by the High Court in Revision
Petition No. 400/2010, before it was acted upon, was not challenged by the appellants before any
forum and thus could be said to have attained finality. What is impugned before us is the order
passed by the High Court rejecting the Section 482 petition filed against the order of the Trial Court
allowing the application under Section 319 of the CrPC and summoning the appellants as accused to
face trial. However, to have a comprehensive overview of the matter and considering the peculiar
circumstances in which the order in Revision Petition 400/2010 came to be passed, we deem it
appropriate to examine whether the High Court was right in exercising its revisional jurisdiction to
set aside the order of the Trial Court rejecting the application under Section 319 and directing it to
consider the same afresh.

76. Explaining the scope of revisional jurisdiction under Section 397 of the CrPC, this Court in Amit
Kapoor v. Ramesh Chander reported in (2012) 9 SCC 460 made the following observations:

“12. Section 397 of the Code vests the court with the power to call for and examine the
records of an inferior court for the purposes of satisfying itself as to the legality and
regularity of any proceedings or order made in a case. The object of this provision is
to set right a patent defect or an error of jurisdiction or law. There has to be a
well-founded error and it may not be appropriate for the court to scrutinise the
orders, which upon the face of it bears a token of careful consideration and appear to
be in accordance with law. If one looks into the various judgments of this Court, it
emerges that the revisional jurisdiction can be invoked where the decisions under
challenge are grossly erroneous, there is no compliance with the provisions of law,
the finding recorded is based on no evidence, material evidence is ignored or judicial
discretion is exercised arbitrarily or perversely. These are not exhaustive classes, but
are merely indicative. Each case would have to be determined on its own merits.

13. Another well-accepted norm is that the revisional jurisdiction of the higher court
is a very limited one and cannot be exercised in a routine manner. One of the inbuilt
restrictions is that it should not be against an interim or interlocutory order. The
Court has to keep in mind that the exercise of revisional jurisdiction itself should not
lead to injustice ex facie. Where the Court is dealing with the question as to whether
the charge has been framed properly and in accordance with law in a given case, it
may be reluctant to interfere in exercise of its revisional jurisdiction unless the case
substantially falls within the categories aforestated.

Even framing of charge is a much advanced stage in the proceedings under the CrPC.

18. It may also be noticed that the revisional jurisdiction exercised by the High Court is in a way
final and no inter court remedy is available in such cases. Of course, it may be subject to jurisdiction
of this Court under Article 136 of the Constitution of India. Normally, a revisional jurisdiction
should be exercised on a question of law. However, when factual appreciation is involved, then it
must find place in the class of cases resulting in a perverse finding. Basically, the power is required
to be exercised so that justice is done and there is no abuse of power by the court.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

32

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

Merely an apprehension or suspicion of the same would not be a sufficient ground for interference
in such cases.

--xxx--

20. The jurisdiction of the court under Section 397 can be exercised so as to examine the
correctness, legality or propriety of an order passed by the trial court or the inferior court, as the
case may be. Though the section does not specifically use the expression “prevent abuse of process
of any court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice”, the jurisdiction under Section 397 is a very
limited one. The legality, propriety or correctness of an order passed by a court is the very
foundation of exercise of jurisdiction under Section 397 but ultimately it also requires justice to be
done. The jurisdiction could be exercised where there is palpable error, non-compliance with the
provisions of law, the decision is completely erroneous or where the judicial discretion is exercised
arbitrarily. […]” (Emphasis supplied)

77. A perusal of the aforesaid decision indicates that the scope of revisional jurisdiction is limited
and is to set right a patent illegality or defect of law in the order of a subordinate court. The power of
revision is not as extensive as that under Section 482 of the CrPC and should not be exercised
lightly.

78. The High Court passed the order dated 14.09.2021 setting aside the order of the Trial Court on
two grounds:

a. First, the mere fact that chargesheet had not been filed against the proposed
accused despite there being a FIR against them cannot be a ground for not
proceeding against them under Section 319 of the CrPC.

b. Secondly, the Trial Court wrongly assumed that as the first informant/ respondent
no. 2 didn’t know the proposed accused persons by name and hence their presence at
the time of the commission of the offence was not established.

79. The High Court observed that the settled position of law was that the filing or non-filing of a
chargesheet would not have any effect on the power of the court to proceed against the proposed
accused under Section 319 of the CrPC. Thus, we are of the view that the High Court was right in
exercising its revisional jurisdiction as the order was passed to set aside the order of a subordinate
court which was based on a misapplication of the settled position of law and thus could be said to
have been suffering from a patent illegality.

80. In such circumstances, the High Court set aside the order of the Trial Court and directed it to
reconsider the application under Section 319 within a period of three months. The question that now
arises is whether any meaningful effect can be given to the order of the High Court for a fresh
consideration of the application under Section 319 of the CrPC after the conclusion of the main trial.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

33

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

(vi) Whether the order passed by the High Court in exercise of its revisional jurisdiction would relate
back to the order passed by the Trial Court rejecting the application under Section 319 of the CrPC

81. This Court in Hardeep Singh (supra) observed that Section 319 casts a duty upon the courts to
give full effect to the words used by the legislature to ensure that no person who deserves to be tried
is able to go scot-free. The relevant paragraphs are reproduced below:

“18. The legislature cannot be presumed to have imagined all the circumstances and,
therefore, it is the duty of the court to give full effect to the words used by the
legislature so as to encompass any situation which the court may have to tackle while
proceeding to try an offence and not allow a person who deserves to be tried to go
scot-free by being not arraigned in the trial in spite of the possibility of his complicity
which can be gathered from the documents presented by the prosecution.

19. The court is the sole repository of justice and a duty is cast upon it to uphold the
rule of law and, therefore, it will be inappropriate to deny the existence of such
powers with the courts in our criminal justice system where it is not uncommon that
the real accused, at times, get away by manipulating the investigating and/or the
prosecuting agency. The desire to avoid trial is so strong that an accused makes
efforts at times to get himself absolved even at the stage of investigation or inquiry
even though he may be connected with the commission of the offence.”

82. In Shashikant Singh (supra), this Court emphasised on the duty of the courts to give a
meaningful or rather a purposeful interpretation to Section 319 so as to fulfil its avowed objective of
ensuring that no person who is guilty of an offence goes unpunished. The Court observed thus:

“8. When a statute is passed for the purpose of enabling something to be done, and
prescribes the way in which it is to be done, it may be either an absolute enactment or
a directory enactment. The difference being that an absolute enactment must be
obeyed or fulfilled exactly, but it is sufficient if a directory enactment be obeyed or
fulfilled substantially. No universal rule can be laid down as to whether mandatory
enactments shall be considered directory only or obligatory with an implied
nullification for disobedience. It is the duty of courts of justice to try to get at the real
intention of the legislature by carefully attending to the whole scope of the statute to
be construed. (Craies on Statute Law, 7th Edn., pp.

260-62.)

9. The intention of the provision here is that where in the course of any enquiry into,
or trial of, an offence, it appears to the court from the evidence that any person not
being the accused has committed any offence, the court may proceed against him for
the offence which he appears to have committed. At that stage, the court would
consider that such a person could be tried together with the accused who is already
before the court facing the trial. The safeguard provided in respect of such person is

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

34

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

that, the proceedings right from the beginning have mandatorily to be commenced
afresh and the witnesses reheard. In short, there has to be a de novo trial against him.
The provision of de novo trial is mandatory. It vitally affects the rights of a person so
brought before the court. It would not be sufficient to only tender the witnesses for
the cross-examination of such a person. They have to be examined afresh. Fresh
examination-in-chief and not only their presentation for the purpose of the
cross-examination of the newly added accused is the mandate of Section 319(4). The
words “could be tried together with the accused” in Section 319(1), appear to be only
directory. “Could be” cannot under these circumstances be held to be “must be”. The
provision cannot be interpreted to mean that since the trial in respect of a person
who was before the court has concluded with the result that the newly added person
cannot be tried together with the accused who was before the court when order under
Section 319(1) was passed, the order would become ineffective and inoperative,
nullifying the opinion earlier formed by the court on the basis of the evidence before
it that the newly added person appears to have committed the offence resulting in an
order for his being brought before the court.”

83. A strict application of the dictum as laid in Sukhpal Singh Khaira (supra) as
regards the stage of passing of summoning order under Section 319 of the CrPC to the
peculiar facts in the present case may be antithetical to the very object of Section 319
and would render the order of the High Court nugatory and incapable of being given
effect to despite having been passed to rectify a patent mistake committed by the
Trial Court. In our considered view, the aforesaid would lead to a serious miscarriage
of justice. Such a result is also contrary to the principle enshrined in the legal maxim
nullum tempus aut locus occurrit regi which means that “crime never dies”.

84. The facts of the case on hand are peculiar and require us to go one step ahead of
our present understanding of Section 319. We are of the view that the answer to
present conundrum lies in determining the legal effect of the order passed by the
High Court in exercise of its revisional jurisdiction and whether it operates from the
date on which it came to be passed or would it relate back to the date of the order of
the Trial Court against which it was passed.

85. This Court in Maru Ram v. Union of India, reported in (1981) 1 SCC 107 held that:

“56. We are mindful of one anomaly and must provide for its elimination. If the Trial
Court acquits and the higher Court convicts and it so happens that the acquittal is
before Section 433-A came into force and the conviction after it, could it be that the
convicted person would be denied the benefit of prospectivity and consequential
non-application of Section 433-A merely because he had the bad luck to be initially
acquitted? We think not. When a person is convicted in appeal, it follows that the
appellate Court has exercised its power in the place of the original court and the guilt,
conviction and sentence must be substituted for and shall have retroactive effect from
the date of judgment of the Trial Court. The appellate conviction must relate back to

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

35

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

the date of the Trial Court's verdict and substitute it. In this view, even if the
appellate Court reverses an earlier acquittal rendered before Section 433-A came into
force but allows the appeal and convicts the accused, after Section 433-A came into
force, such persons will also be entitled to the benefit of the remission system
prevailing prior to Section 433-A on the basis we have explained. An appeal is a
continuation of an appellate judgment as a replacement of the original judgment.
[Freedom Behind Bars — Criminology and Consciousness, Series I, 1979, Maharshi
European Research University Press Publication, p. 73]” (Emphasis supplied)

86. The judgment in Maru Ram (supra) is relevant to the extent that the order of the
appellate court relates back to the order of the Trial Court on the premise that an
appeal is a continuation of trial and an appellate judgment is a replacement of the
original judgment.

87. Once the High Court i.e., a superior court deems fit to interfere with an order of a
subordinate court, then any rectifications made to the order passed by the
subordinate court by such superior court in exercise of revisional powers under
Section 401 read with Section 397 of the CrPC must be treated on the same footing as
rectifications made by an appellate court and relate back to the original order.

88. This Court in Shankar Ramchandra Abhyankar v. Krishnaji Dattatreya Bapat
reported in (1969) 2 SCC 74 observed thus:

“6. Now when the aid of the High Court is invoked on the revisional side it is done
because it is a superior court and it can interfere for the purpose of rectifying the
error of the court below. Section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure circumscribes the
limits of that jurisdiction but the jurisdiction which is being exercised is a part of the
general appellate jurisdiction of the High Court as a superior court. It is only one of
the modes of exercising power conferred by the statute; basically and fundamentally
it is the appellate jurisdiction of the High Court which is being invoked and exercised
in a wider and larger sense. We do not, therefore, consider that the principle of
merger of orders of inferior courts in those of superior Courts would be affected or
would become inapplicable by making a distinction between a petition for revision
and an appeal.

7. It may be useful to refer to certain other decisions which by analogy can be of some
assistance in deciding the point before us. In U.J.S. Chopra v. State of Bombay [1955
SCC OnLine SC 57 : AIR 1955 SC 633], the principle of merger was considered with
reference to Section 439 of the Criminal Procedure Code which confers revisional
jurisdiction on the High Court. In the majority judgment it was held, inter alia, that a
judgment pronounced by the High Court in the exercise of its appellate or revisional
jurisdiction after issue of a notice and a full hearing, in the presence of both the
parties would replace the judgment of the lower court thus constituting the judgment
of the High Court—the only final judgment to be executed in accordance with law by

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

36

the Court below. […] ” (Emphasis supplied)

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

89. The reasoning assigned by this Court in Krishnaji Dattatreya Bapat (supra) and
U.J.S. Chopra v. State of Bombay reported in 1955 SCC OnLine SC 57 when read with
the reasoning in Maru Ram (supra) would indicate that the order of the High Court in
exercise of its revisional jurisdiction relates back to and replaces the order of the Trial
Court. It is of no consequence that the exercise of revisional jurisdiction is
discretionary as opposed to appellate jurisdiction. It is settled law that an appellate
court exercises its power in the place of the original court and the order passed by
such court shall have retroactive effect from the date of judgment of the Trial Court.
Similarly, once the High Court, being the superior court, decides to interfere with the
order of the Trial Court and passes an order in exercise of its revisional jurisdiction
with the purpose of rectifying any errors in the same, such order will replace the
order of the Trial Court.

90. What can be discerned from the aforesaid is that if the High Court passes an
order in exercise of its revisional jurisdiction either setting aside or modifying the
order of the Trial Court for the purpose of Section 319, the same would relate back to
the original order passed by the Trial Court and substitute it to the extent of
modification.

91. Besides above, the normal rule is that in any litigation the rights and obligations
of the parties are adjudicated upon as they obtain at the commencement of the lis.
But this is subject to an exception. Wherever subsequent events of facts or law which
have a material bearing on the entitlement of the parties to the relief or on aspects
which bear on the moulding of the relief occur, the court is not precluded from taking
a ‘cautious cognizance of the subsequent changes of fact and law to mould the relief
(See: Ramesh Kumar v. Kesho Ram reported in 1992 Supp (2) SCC

623). Justice Krishna Iyer in Pasupuleti Venkateswarlu v. Motor and General
Traders, reported in (1975) 1 SCC 770 has observed thus:

“4. … It is basic to our processual jurisprudence that the right to relief must be judged
to exist as on the date a suitor institutes the legal proceeding. Equally clear is the
principle that procedure is the handmaid and not the mistress of the judicial process.
If a fact, arising after the lis has come to court and has a fundamental impact on the
right to or the manner of moulding it, is brought diligently to the notice of the
tribunal, it cannot blink at it or be blind to events which stultify or render inept the
decretal remedy. Equity justifies bending the rules of procedure, where no specific
provision or fair play is violated, with a view to promote substantial justice - subject,
of course, to the absence of other disentitling factors or just circumstances. Nor can
we contemplate any limitation on this power to take note of updated facts to confine
it to the trial court. If the litigation pends, the power exists, absent other special
circumstances repelling resort to that course in law or justice. Rulings in this point

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

37

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

are legion, even as situations for applications of this equitable rule are myriad.”
Though the aforesaid observations are in the context of civil proceedings, the legal
principle enshrined therein is based on a well-known latin maxim “actus curaie
neminen gravabit” – “an act of court shall prejudice no man”, which is of universal
application. As a sequitur, no man should suffer because of the fault of the court or
delay in the procedure.

92. In the present case, the High Court, in exercise of its revisional jurisdiction, set
aside the order of the Trial Court rejecting the second application under Section 319
of the CrPC and directed the Trial Court to reconsider the application under Section
319. At the stage of issuing the aforesaid direction, the High Court was conscious that
the trial had concluded, yet to do substantial justice, it deemed it necessary to issue
such a direction. In doing so, the High Court’s order, which relates back to the date of
the Trial Court’s order, did not mandate the Trial Court to do something which was
barred by law because, as already noticed above, holding a joint trial is directory.
Therefore, in complying with the said direction of the High Court, the Trial Court
committed no act which was prohibited by law.

93. There is not an iota of doubt that if the Trial Court would have proceeded against
the appellants under Section 319 of the CrPC in the absence of the order passed by
the High Court in the revision petition, the same would have been illegal for having
being done after the conclusion of the trial of the original accused in light of the clear
guidelines laid down in Sukhpal Singh Khaira (supra). However, by virtue of relating
back of the order passed by the High Court in the revision petition, the summoning
order passed by the Trial Court in compliance with the order of the High Court would
also relate back to the initial order rejecting the second application under Section
319, and for this reason could be said to have been passed before the conclusion of
the trial.

94. This Court in Sukhpal Singh Khaira (supra) had no occasion to consider a factual
situation like the one at hand, and thus the guidelines laid down by the Constitution
Bench did not prescribe anything as regards the application of Section 319 of the
CrPC in the context of revisional jurisdiction of the High Court. In such
circumstances, the spirit underlying Section 319 requires us to adopt an approach
which furthers and fulfils the object of the provision rather than rendering it
nugatory.

95. If the order of the High Court passed in its revisional jurisdiction is not related
back, the consequence would be that although from the evidence, it appears that
there are some other persons who might be involved in the offence, yet those persons
will go scot-free solely because the Trial Court erred in not exercising its powers
under Section 319 which it ought to have.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

38

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

Relating back the High Court’s revisional order to the date of the Trial Court’s order strikes a
balance between the interests of the newly summoned persons and the general public/victims
without causing prejudice to either.

96. While we have clarified the position of the effect of an order passed in exercise of revisional
jurisdiction on an order passed under Section 319, we deem it equally necessary to address the
mechanism for exercise of powers under Section 319 in cases where the trial is over but the
revisional order relates back to the date of the rejection of an application under the said section by
the Trial Court. It is axiomatic that in such a case there is no occasion for a joint trial to be
conducted with the original accused persons. Therefore, when the order of the High Court passed in
revision after the conclusion of trial relates back to the order of the Trial Court passed before the
conclusion of trial, it must be taken to mean that the new accused would be proceeded against in a
separate trial. Such a situation shall be governed by the guidelines provided in Sukhpal Singh Khaira
(supra), more particularly, by the guideline in para 41.6 thereof which states that “if the decision is
that the summoned accused can be tried separately, on such order being made, there will be no
impediment for the court to continue and conclude the trial against the accused who were being
proceeded with.” We clarify with a view to obviate any confusion that there is no requirement for a
decision by the Trial Court on the question of separation of trial in cases like the present one since
the trial has already concluded in respect of the original accused and the only manner in which the
order of the High Court can be given effect to is by proceeding in a separate trial qua the new
accused persons.

97. We deem it appropriate to refer to the decision of this Court in Uday Mohanlal Acharya v. State
of Maharashtra reported in (2001) 5 SCC 453. In the said case, the appellant before this Court was
an accused in relation to certain offences for which he was remanded to judicial custody. Upon
expiry of sixty days, the accused-appellant moved an application for the grant of default bail as no
chargesheet was filed by the investigating agency. However, the application came to be rejected by
the Magistrate who took the view that provisions of Section 167(2) would not be applicable to the
offence committed under the Maharashtra Protection of Interest of Depositors (in Financial
Establishments) Act, 1999 (“MPID Act”). The appellant filed a revision before the High Court
against the order passed by the Magistrate. During the pendency of the revision, chargesheet was
filed by the investigating authorities. In such circumstances, although the High Court set aside the
order of the Magistrate on the ground that Section 167(2) of the CrPC would apply to offences under
the MPID Act yet it held that the accused-appellant was not entitled to be released on bail as
chargesheet had come to be filed during the pendency of the revision thereby rendering the right
accrued in favour of the appellant unenforceable. The matter travelled to this Court, wherein G.B.
Pattanaik, J. speaking for himself and U.C. Banerjee, J. took the view that a purposive interpretation
had to be given to the proviso to sub-section (2) of Section 167 of the CrPC and the object of the
proviso to curb the mischief of indefinite and prolonged investigation had to be kept in mind while
interpreting the provision. The relevant paragraphs from the said decision are reproduced
hereinbelow:

“10. In Bipin Shantilal Panchal (Dr) v. State of Gujarat [(1996) 1 SCC 718 : 1996 SCC
(Cri) 200] , a three-Judge Bench decision, this Court referred to the proviso to

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

39

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

sub-section (2) of Section 167 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and held that though
the aforesaid provisions would apply to an accused under the NDPS Act, but since the
charge-sheet had already been filed and the accused is in custody on the basis of
orders of remand passed under other provisions of the Code the so-called
indefeasible right of the accused must be held to have been extinguished, as was held
by the Constitution Bench in Sanjay Dutt [(1994) 5 SCC 410 :

1994 SCC (Cri) 1433] . The Court observed thus: (SCC p. 720, para 4) “Therefore, if
an accused person fails to exercise his right to be released on bail for the failure of the
prosecution to file the charge-sheet within the maximum time allowed by law, he
cannot contend that he had an indefeasible right to exercise it at any time
notwithstanding the fact that in the meantime the charge-sheet is filed. But on the
other hand if he exercises the right within the time allowed by law and is released on
bail under such circumstances, he cannot be rearrested on the mere filing of the
charge-sheet, as pointed out in Aslam Babalal Desai v. State of Maharashtra [(1992) 4
SCC 272 : 1992 SCC (Cri) 870].”

--xxx--

13. […] In such a case, therefore, even if the application for consideration of an order
of being released on bail is posted before the court after some length of time, or even
if the Magistrate refuses the application erroneously and the accused moves the
higher forum for getting a formal order of being released on bail in enforcement of
his indefeasible right, then filing of challan at that stage will not take away the right
of the accused. […] With the aforesaid interpretation of the expression “availed of” if
the charge-sheet is filed subsequent to the availing of the indefeasible right by the
accused then that right would not stand frustrated or extinguished, necessarily
therefore, if an accused entitled to be released on bail by application of the proviso to
sub-

section (2) of Section 167, makes the application before the Magistrate, but the Magistrate
erroneously refuses the same and rejects the application and then the accused moves the higher
forum and while the matter remains pending before the higher forum for consideration a
charge-sheet is filed, the so-called indefeasible right of the accused would not stand extinguished
thereby, and on the other hand, the accused has to be released on bail. Such an accused, who thus is
entitled to be released on bail in enforcement of his indefeasible right will, however, have to be
produced before the Magistrate on a charge-sheet being filed in accordance with Section 209 and
the Magistrate must deal with him in the matter of remand to custody subject to the provisions of
the Code relating to bail and subject to the provisions of cancellation of bail, already granted in
accordance with the law laid down by this Court in the case of Mohd. Iqbal v. State of Maharashtra
[(1996) 1 SCC 722 : 1996 SCC (Cri) 202].” (Emphasis supplied)

98. We are conscious of the fact that unlike Section 167(2), where an indefeasible right accrues in
favour of the accused upon the expiry of the period of sixty/ninety days, Section 319 is a

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

40

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

discretionary provision and no right can be said to accrue in the applicant upon making of the
application under Section 319. However, as held by this Court in a number of its decisions, Section
319 casts a duty on the court to ensure that any person who appears to have committed the crime
must be brought before the court and tried along with other accused. In the present case, the
application under Section 319 was made by the respondent no. 2 during the pendency of the trial. As
per the guidelines laid down in Sukhpal Singh Khaira (supra), if an application under Section 319 is
made before a trial court, the court must stop the trial and proceed to determine the application first
before proceeding further with the trial. In the present case, the Trial Court considered the
application under Section 319 of the CrPC and after rejecting the same proceeded with the trial and
concluded the same. The High Court, in exercise of its revisional jurisdiction, held that the rejection
of the application under Section 319 by the Trial Court suffered from a patent illegality and thus
directed the Trial Court to reconsider the application. In such circumstances, more particularly,
keeping in mind the avowed objective of Section 319 of the CrPC, it cannot be held that the order
passed by the High Court in revision cannot be given effect to merely because the trial came to be
concluded before an order could be passed by the High Court. The present, unlike the facts in
Sukhpal Singh Khaira (supra), is not a case wherein the application under Section 319 came to be
filed or decided by the Trial Court after the conclusion of the trial. Instead, the case at hand is one
wherein the application under Section 319 though decided at the correct stage, came to be decided
wrongly owing to a patent illegality committed by the Trial Court. In such circumstances, an
approach which gives full effect to the legislative intention behind Section 319 of the CrPC must be
adopted.

99. Having discussed the position of law on the exercise of power under Section 319 of the CrPC, we
shall now proceed to apply them to the facts of the present case. The sequence of applications under
Section 319 of the CrPC and the consequential High Court proceedings arising therefrom are
tabulated below:

      APPLICATION        COURT       DATE OF               REMARKS
        UNDER                          THE
      SECTION 319                     ORDER

Trial Court 29.01.2010 The first application was rejected.

Grounds:

• Investigation against the proposed accused was ongoing and remained pending.

                                                  • The cross-examination of
      First                                          PW-1 & PW-2 was
      Application                                    incomplete.

                        High        14.05.2010 The revision application
                        Court                  against the order dated
                                               29.01.2010 was allowed.

                                                 Direction:
                                                  • To the Trial Court to

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

41

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

                                                     consider application
                                                     under Section 319 after

(cid:12)                                                     the cross-examination of
                                                     PW-1 & PW-2.

Trial Court 19.07.2010 The second application was rejected on merits.

Trial was concluded on 19.10.2011 – Original accused were convicted and, inter alia,
sentenced to life imprisonment.

                       High        14.09.2021 The revision application
                       Court                     against the order dated
                                                 19.07.2010 was allowed on
                                                 merits.
      Second
                                                Direction:
      Application
                                                 • To the Trial Court to
      dated
                                                    reconsider the application
      10.06.2010
                                                    under Section 319 within
                                                    three months from the
                                                    date of the order.

                                                 Note:
                                                 • It was noted by the High
                                                    Court that the trial in
                                                    respect of the original
                                                    accused had already
                                                    concluded.

Trial Court 21.02.2024 The third application was allowed on merits.

      Third
      Application                               Direction:
      dated
                                                 • To summon the appellants
      22.09.2021
                                                    herein as accused.
      (the
                                                 Note:
      complainant
                                                 • It was recorded that the
      renewed the
                                                    Trial Court had been
      prayer under

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

42

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

                                                    authorized by the order
      Section 319)
                                                    dated 14.09.2021 of the
                                                    High Court to allow the

(cid:12)                                                        application under Section

                       High         01.04.2024 The application preferred by
                       Court                   the appellants herein under
Section 482 of the CrPC was

                                               dismissed and the order dated
                                               21.02.2024 was upheld.

                                                  Note:
                                                   • It was recorded that as per
                                                      Section 319(4), the trial
                                                      against the summoned
                                                      accused has to be
                                                      commenced afresh and
                                                      the witnesses re-heard.
                                                      Therefore, the conclusion
                                                      of trial in respect of the
                                                      accused summoned
                                                      originally would not
                                                      cause any prejudice to the
                                                      appellants herein.

100. What is clear from the above is that as the Trial Court rejected the application
under Section 319, no summoning order could be passed before the conclusion of
trial. However, the High Court in exercise of its revisional jurisdiction set aside the
said order and directed the Trial Court to reconsider the application under Section
319.

101. We have discussed in the preceding parts of this judgment that the revisional
jurisdiction of the High Court cannot be rendered nugatory solely because the trial
was not stayed by the High Court and stood concluded before the High Court could
pass the order in exercise of its revisional jurisdiction.

Therefore, unlike cases where an application under Section 319 is being decided in the first instance
by the Trial Court, the conclusion of trial will not have a bearing on the adjudication of an
application under Section 319 in terms of the directions of the High Court passed by way of a
revisional order.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

43

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

102. As discussed hereinabove, an order passed by the High Court in exercise of its revisional
jurisdiction would relate back to the order of the Trial Court. In the present case, the Trial Court in
its discretion rejected the second application filed under Section 319 before the conclusion of trial
vide order dated 19.07.2010. The High Court, more than ten years after the conclusion of trial, set
aside the said order and directed the Trial Court to reconsider the application under Section 319
afresh. In our considered view, such order passed by the High Court on the second application
under Section 319 travels back to 19.07.2010 i.e., the date when the Trial Court rejected the said
application. The effect of the order of the High Court relating back to the original order of the Trial
Court is that the Trial Court cannot be considered functus officio as regards considering the
application under Section 319 after the conclusion of the trial. We say so because the Trial Court, in
considering the application under Section 319 after the conclusion of the trial, is merely giving effect
to a revisionary order directing it to freshly consider the application which it had originally rejected.

103. Ordinarily, an application under the Section 319 cannot be moved after the conclusion of trial
as a necessary corollary of the dictum laid down in Sukhpal Singh Khaira (supra). However, the
peculiar facts and circumstances presented by the case on hand indicate that an application under
Section 319 dated 10.06.2010 was directed to be considered afresh by the High Court vide order
dated 14.09.2021 and, therefore, the third application dated 22.09.2021 was not even required,
though moved by the respondent no. 2 in pursuance of the order of the High Court order dated
14.09.2021 allowing the revision petition. Accordingly, the summoning order, in exercise of the
powers under Section 319, came to be passed by the Trial Court on 21.02.2024.

104. The summoning order dated 21.02.2024 was passed by the Trial Court in pursuance of the
direction issued by the High Court vide its revisional order dated 14.09.2021. Therefore, it has to
been seen as an extension of the revisional order passed by the High Court. The combined effect of
the revisional order passed by the High Court and the summoning order passed by the Trial Court
on 21.02.2024 is that the order of the Trial Court dated 19.07.2010 rejecting the second Section 319
application is replaced and substituted by the summoning order dated 21.02.2024. Thus, although
the summoning order in the present case came to be passed on 21.02.2024, that is, after the
conclusion of the trial, yet it would be deemed to have been passed on 19.07.2010 by virtue of the
law expounded by this Court in Maru Ram (supra) and Krishnaji Dattatreya Bapat (supra). Thus, as
the summoning order can be deemed to have been passed before the conclusion of the trial, there is
no impediment for the Trial Court to proceed with the appellants in the manner envisaged under
Section 319 of the CrPC. As the summoning order passed in compliance with the order passed by
High Court in revision takes effect from the date of the original order, this ensures that there is
compliance with the dictum laid in Sukhpal Singh Khaira (supra) that the summoning order has to
be necessarily passed before the conclusion of the trial.

105. We are also of the view that the relating back of the order of the High Court is not going to
cause any prejudice to the appellants. Considering that the original trial has already concluded,
there will have to be a separate trial so far as the appellants are concerned. Section 319(4)(a) takes
care of the rights of the newly summoned persons by providing that “the proceedings in respect of
such person shall be commenced afresh, and the witnesses re- heard”.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

44

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

106. In view of the aforesaid, we have arrived at the conclusion that the order passed in revision by
the High Court cannot be rendered ineffective merely on procedural grounds especially when it
involves substantive rights of the parties and seeks to cure a patent illegality. However, it is apposite
to clarify in the same breath that although the law allows for travelling back of the revisional order
of the High Court, yet it is far from ideal to do so after the passage of a substantial period of time, in
this case, ten years after the conclusion of trial. The correct approach to be adopted in cases like this
is that the High Court should direct the Trial Court to stay its proceedings till the revision
proceedings in respect of Section 319 are disposed of. At the same time, the High Court must also
expedite the revision proceedings so as to ensure that unreasonable delay is not caused in the
conclusion of trial.

107. The High Court in its impugned order has rightly observed that the summoning order dated
21.02.2024 was passed in compliance with the order passed by the High Court in exercise of its
revisional jurisdiction. It further correctly observed that the order passed by the High Court in
exercise of its revisional jurisdiction was in furtherance of the object of Section 319 of the CrPC
which is to ensure that the actual perpetrators of a crime are arraigned as accused to face trial. The
High Court was also right in observing that the conclusion of the trial qua the original accused
would not prejudice the appellants in any manner and their interest would be safeguarded by sub-
section (4) of Section 319 of the CrPC. The High Court also noted that the summoning order, though
having been passed after the conclusion of the trial, cannot be said to be vitiated in the peculiar facts
and circumstances of the case. For all the reasons that we have assigned in the preceding parts of
this judgment, we do not see any reason to interfere with the impugned order passed by the High
Court.

(vii) Right of the proposed accused to be heard at the stage of summoning under Section 319 of CrPC

108. Before we part with the matter, we deem it necessary to address the submissions of the
appellants as regards the violation of their right to be heard before the passing of the order in
Revision Petition 400/2010 by the High Court.

109. As regards the right of the proposed accused to be heard before an application under Section
319 is allowed by the court, we are in respectful agreement with a recent pronouncement of this
Court in Yashodhan Singh v. State of U.P. reported in (2023) 9 SCC 108 wherein it has been held
that Section 319 does not contemplate that a summoned person must be given an opportunity of
being heard before being added as an accused to face the trial. The relevant observations from the
said decision are reproduced hereinbelow:

“23. From the aforesaid observations of the Constitution Bench of this Court in
Hardeep Singh [Hardeep Singh v. State of Punjab, (2014) 3 SCC 92 : (2014) 2 SCC
(Cri) 86] , it is noted that an inquiry is contemplated as against a person who has
been discharged prior to the commencement of the trial in terms of Section 227 CrPC
as extracted above but on an inquiry, if it appears that there is evidence against such
a discharged person, then power under Section 319 CrPC can be exercised against
such a discharged person. This clearly would mean that when a person who is not

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

45

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

discharged but is to be summoned as per Section 319 CrPC on the basis of satisfaction
derived by the court on the evidence on record, no inquiry or hearing is
contemplated. This would clearly indicate that principle of natural justice and an
opportunity of hearing a person summoned under 319 CrPC are not at all
contemplated. Such a right of inquiry would accrue only to a person who is already
discharged in the very same proceeding prior to the commencement of the trial. This
is different from holding that a person who has been summoned as per Section 319
CrPC has a right of being heard in accordance with the principles of natural justice
before being added as an accused to be tried along with other accused.

--xxx--

35. This Court in the subsequent paragraphs of Jogendra Yadav [Jogendra Yadav v.
State of Bihar, (2015) 9 SCC 244 : (2015) 3 SCC (Cri) 756] has also not stated that if a
person is to be summoned under Section 319 CrPC to be added as an accused, then
an opportunity must be given to such a person and only after hearing him, he could
be added as an accused in the trial. We do not find that the ratio of Jogendra Yadav
[Jogendra Yadav v. State of Bihar, (2015) 9 SCC 244 : (2015) 3 SCC (Cri) 756] turns
on the said aspect.

36. However, it is contented by the learned Senior Counsel Shri Nagamuthu that what has been
observed in para 9 of Jogendra Yadav [Jogendra Yadav v. State of Bihar, (2015) 9 SCC 244 : (2015) 3
SCC (Cri) 756] will make it a necessary mandate or a rule that a person who is to be summoned
under Section 319 CrPC to be added as an accused will necessarily be heard before being so added.
Para 9 cannot be considered to be the ratio of Jogendra Yadav [Jogendra Yadav v. State of Bihar,
(2015) 9 SCC 244 : (2015) 3 SCC (Cri) 756] . Further, the context in which the observations are made
in the paragraph must relate to the facts of the said case where an opportunity was in fact provided
to the persons summoned therein.

37. Similarly, in Ram Janam Yadav [Ram Janam Yadav v. State of U.P., (2023) 9 SCC 130] , on facts,
it was noticed that the person summoned was, in fact, provided an opportunity of hearing.

38. Merely because in certain proceedings the persons summoned had been provided an
opportunity of being heard cannot be the same thing as stating that it is a mandatory requirement or
a precondition that at the time of summoning a person under Section 319 CrPC, he should be given
an opportunity of being heard. That is not the mandate of law inasmuch as Section 319 clearly uses
the expression “to proceed” which means to proceed with the trial and not to jeopardise the trial at
the instance of the person(s) summoned by conducting a mini trial or a trial within a trial thereby
derailing the main trial of the case and particularly against the accused who are already facing trial
and who may be in custody.

39. A person who is summoned in exercise of the power under Section 319 CrPC cannot hijack the
trial so to say and deviate from its focus and take it to a tangent in order to bolster his own case in a
bid to escape trial. All that is contemplated when a person is summoned to appear is to ascertain

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

46

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

that he is the very person who was summoned and if any summoned person fails to appear on the
given date. On the appearance of the summoned person, no procedure of an inquiry or opportunity
of being heard is envisaged before been added as an accused to the list of accused already facing trial
unless such a summoned person had already been discharged, in which event, an inquiry is
contemplated as discussed above.

40. Thus, the contention that a summoned person must be given an opportunity of being heard
before being added as an accused to face the trial is clearly not contemplated under Section 319
CrPC. It is also observed by this Court in Hardeep Singh [Hardeep Singh v. State of Punjab, (2014) 3
SCC 92 : (2014) 2 SCC (Cri) 86] that such a summoned person can assail a summoning order before
a superior Court and will also have the right of cross-examining the witnesses as well as can let in his
defence evidence, if any.” (Emphasis supplied)

110. However, in the facts of the present case, the application under Section 319 was rejected by the
Trial Court but the revision against such rejection was entertained by the High Court without
allegedly putting the proposed accused to notice. Upon a careful perusal of the decision in
Yashodhan Singh (supra), we are of the view that the right of hearing is not available to the
proposed accused only in the first instance, that is only at the stage when the application is being
heard for the first time.

111. However, after the rejection of an application under Section 319, a right enures in favour of the
proposed accused. Thereafter, if in exercise of revisional jurisdiction, the High Court is to pass an
order which is prejudicial to the benefit which has enured in favour of the proposed accused, then
the High Court is required to provide an opportunity of hearing to the proposed accused. This is also
the mandate as contained in sub-section (2) of Section 401 of the CrPC. The said provision is
reproduced hereinbelow:

“401. High Court’s powers of revision.

(1) In the case of any proceeding the record of which has been called for by itself or
which otherwise comes to its knowledge, the High Court may, in its discretion,
exercise any of the powers conferred on a Court of Appeal by sections 386, 389, 390
and 391 or on a Court of Session by section 307, and, when the Judges composing the
Court of Revision are equally divided in opinion, the case shall be disposed of in the
manner provided by section 392.

(2) No order under this section shall be made to the prejudice of the accused or other
person unless he has had an opportunity of being heard either personally or by
pleader in his own defence.

(3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorise a High Court to convert a
finding of acquittal into one conviction.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

47

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

(4) Where under this Code an appeal lies and no appeal is brought, no proceeding by
way of revision shall be entertained at the instance of the party who could have
appealed.

(5) Where under this Code an appeal lies but an application for revision has been
made to the High Court by any person and the High Court is satisfied that such
application was made under the erroneous belief that no appeal lies thereto and that
it is necessary in the interests of Justice so to do, the High Court may treat the
application for revision as a petition of appeal and deal with the same accordingly.”
(Emphasis supplied)

112. The aforesaid principle was also recognised by this Court in Manharbhai
Muljibhai Kakadia (supra). The relevant portion of the said decision is reproduced
below:

“48. In a case where the complaint has been dismissed by the Magistrate under
Section 203 of the Code either at the stage of Section 200 itself or on completion of
inquiry by the Magistrate under Section 202 or on receipt of the report from the
police or from any person to whom the direction was issued by the Magistrate to
investigate into the allegations in the complaint, the effect of such dismissal is
termination of complaint proceedings. On a plain reading of sub-section (2) of
Section 401, it cannot be said that the person against whom the allegations of having
committed the offence have been made in the complaint and the complaint has been
dismissed by the Magistrate under Section 203, has no right to be heard because no
process has been issued. The dismissal of complaint by the Magistrate under Section
203—although it is at preliminary stage— nevertheless results in termination of
proceedings in a complaint against the persons who are alleged to have committed
the crime. Once a challenge is laid to such order at the instance of the complainant in
a revision petition before the High Court or the Sessions Judge, by virtue of Section
401(2) of the Code, the suspects get the right of hearing before the Revisional Court
although such order was passed without their participation. The right given to
“accused” or “the other person” under Section 401(2) of being heard before the
Revisional Court to defend an order which operates in his favour should not be
confused with the proceedings before a Magistrate under Sections 200, 202, 203 and
204. In the revision petition before the High Court or the Sessions Judge at the
instance of the complainant challenging the order of dismissal of complaint, one of
the things that could happen is reversal of the order of the Magistrate and revival of
the complaint. It is in this view of the matter that the accused or other person cannot
be deprived of hearing on the face of the express provision contained in Section
401(2) of the Code. The stage is not important whether it is pre-process stage or post
process stage.” (Emphasis supplied)

113. In view of the principles explained in Manharbhai Muljibhai Kakadia (supra), the
right of hearing is available to the proposed accused at the stage of revision as the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

48

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

High Court by setting aside the order rejecting the application under Section 319 may
revive the proceedings against the proposed accused under Section 319. Providing the
proposed accused with a mandatory right of hearing allows him to defend himself
against a prejudicial order that may be passed in the course of the hearing of the
revision petition.

114. However, a perusal of the order dated 14.09.2021 passed in Revision Petition No.
400/2010 clearly indicates that the appellants were respondent nos. 2 and 4,
respectively, before the High Court. Hence, we do not find any merit in the
submission of the appellants that the order rejecting the 2nd application under
Section 319 of the CrPC was set aside by the High Court without providing any
opportunity of hearing to them.

F. CONCLUSION

115. We summarise our findings on the issues framed for consideration as follows:

a. The High Court in exercise of its revisional jurisdiction was justified in setting
aside the order passed by the Trial Court rejecting the second application preferred
by respondent no. 2 under Section 319 of the CrPC as the same was found to have
been passed contrary to the settled position of law, suffering from a patent illegality,
thus, leading to serious miscarriage of justice.

b. Once a superior court deems fit to interfere with an order passed by a subordinate
court, then any rectifications to such order passed in exercise of revisional powers
under Section 401 read with Section 397 of the CrPC must be treated on the same
footing as rectifications made by an appellate court and as a result would relate back
to the time the original order was passed.

c. By virtue of relating back of the order passed by the High Court in a revision
petition, the summoning order passed by the Trial Court in compliance with the
order of the High Court would also relate back to the initial order rejecting the second
application under Section 319, and therefore could be said to have been passed before
the conclusion of the trial.

d. Unlike cases where an application under Section 319 is being decided in the first
instance by the Trial Court, the conclusion of trial will have no bearing on the
adjudication of an application under Section 319 in terms of the directions of the
High Court passed in exercise of revisional jurisdiction.

e. The legal effect of the order passed by the High Court relating back to the original
order of the Trial Court is that the Trial Court would not be rendered functus officio
for the purpose of considering the application under Section 319 after the conclusion
of the trial. We say so because the Trial Court, in considering the application under

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

49

Jamin vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 March, 2025

Section 319 after the conclusion of the trial, merely gave effect to a revisional order
directing it to consider the application afresh which it had originally rejected.

f. The summoning order dated 21.02.2024 was passed by the Trial Court in
pursuance of the directions issued by the High Court vide the revisional order dated
14.09.2021. Therefore, the same should be construed as an extension of the revisional
order passed by the High Court. The combined effect of the revisional order passed
by the High Court and the summoning order passed by the Trial Court dated
21.02.2024 would be that the order of the Trial Court dated 19.07.2010 rejecting the
second Section 319 application stood replaced and substituted by the summoning
order dated 21.02.2024.

Thus, although the summoning order in the present case came to be passed on 21.02.2024, that is,
after the conclusion of the trial, yet, it would be deemed to have been passed on 19.07.2010 by virtue
of the law expounded by this Court in Maru Ram (supra) and Krishnaji Dattatreya Bapat (supra).

g. Section 319 does not contemplate that a summoned person must be given an opportunity of being
heard before being added as an accused to face the trial. A right of hearing would accrue only to a
person who is already discharged in the very same proceeding prior to the commencement of the
trial. This is different from holding that a person who has been summoned as per Section 319 CrPC
has a right of being heard in accordance with the principles of natural justice before being added as
an accused to be tried along with the other accused. However, after the rejection of an application
under Section 319, a right enures in favour of the proposed accused. Thereafter, if in exercise of
revisional jurisdiction, the High Court is to pass an order which is prejudicial to the benefit which
had already enured in favour of the proposed accused, then the High Court is obligated in law to
provide an opportunity of hearing to the proposed accused. This is also the mandate as contained in
sub-section (2) of Section 401 of the CrPC.

116. For all the foregoing reasons, the appeal fails and is hereby dismissed.

117. The Trial Court is directed to take necessary steps in furtherance of the summoning order dated
21.02.2024 to ensure that the appellants are produced before the court to face the trial.

118. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.

.……………………………J. (J.B. Pardiwala) ………………………………J. (Manoj Misra) New Delhi.

6th March, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175484450/

50

