The Registrar General High Court Of ... vs M. Narasimha Prasad on 10 April, 2023

The Registrar General High Court Of ... vs M. Narasimha Prasad
on 10 April, 2023

Author: V. Ramasubramanian

Bench: Pankaj Mithal, V. Ramasubramanian

1

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NOS.               OF 2023
(@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NOS. 25714-17 OF 2019)

THE REGISTRAR GENERAL,
HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA & ANR.                        … APPELLANT(S)

VERSUS

SRI M. NARASIMHA PRASAD                              …RESPONDENT(S)

JUDGMENT

V. Ramasubramanian, J.

Leave granted.

2. Challenging a common order passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of Karnataka,
setting aside a penalty of dismissal from service imposed upon the respondent herein, who
happened to be a Civil Judge (Junior Division), the Registrar General of the High Court of
Karnataka has come up with the above appeals.

3. We have heard Mr. Basava Prabhu S. Patil, learned senior counsel appearing the appellant-High
Court and Ms. Anitha Shenoy, learned senior counsel appearing for the respondent.

4. The respondent was appointed as a Civil Judge (Junior Division) vide a notification dated
31.01.1995.

5. On certain allegations of gross misconduct, the respondent was placed under suspension by an
order dated 25.01.2005, followed by the initiation of disciplinary proceedings, with the issue of
Charge Memos dated 23.03.2005 in DI No.2/2005; DI No.3/2005; DI No.4/2005 and DI

1

The Registrar General High Court Of ... vs M. Narasimha Prasad on 10 April, 2023

No.5/2005.

6. Separate enquiries followed in connection with all the four Charge Memos namely DI Nos.2,3,4,5
of 2005, after the culmination of which, separate reports were submitted by the enquiry officer on
29.03.2007 and 27.04.2007. As per the enquiry reports, some charges stood proved and the other
charges were not proved.

7. Therefore, second show cause notices were issued and thereafter the Full Court of the High Court
of Karnataka resolved on 04.10.2008 to impose the penalty of dismissal from service upon the
respondent. Based on the resolution of the Full Court, an order of dismissal from service was passed
by the Governor of Karnataka, vide order dated 19.03.2009.

8. Challenging the findings of the enquiry officer, the respondent filed a set of three writ petitions
and challenging the order of dismissal from service, the respondent filed a separate writ petition. All
these writ petitions were dismissed by a learned Judge, through a common order dated 30.11.2011.

9. Aggrieved by the same, the respondent filed intra-court appeals. Those appeals were allowed by
the Division Bench of the High Court by a very strange order, not only setting aside the order of
penalty and the findings of the enquiry officer but also directing that no further inquiry can be held
against the respondent. It is against such a common order passed in a batch of four intra-court
appeals that the Registrar General of the High Court has come up with these civil appeals.

10. Before we proceed to consider the correctness of the view taken by the High Court, in the light of
the rival contentions, it will be useful to extract in a tabular column the charges framed against the
respondent under each of the Charge Memos; his reply to each of the charges and the findings of the
enquiry officer in respect of those charges.

Charges against the Judicial Officer S. Charge Reply to Charge Held to be No. proved/not proved by
the Inquiry Officer

1. That the judicial officer First suit- Absence of the Proved had granted an order of AGP (Mallaraja
Gowda) on status quo on an several occasions. Case was interlocutory not adjourned application for
unnecessarily. Within two temporary injunction months, the interim in a civil suit and had further
granted an ex- injunction granted was parte order of vacated.

temporary injunction Second suit- Case of in yet another civil. forcible eviction.

suit against the State,     Plaintiff had shown prima
which was represented       facie case, therefore order of
by the defendants in
status     quo     had     been
violation of Section
80(2) of the Code of        granted. This was as per
Civil Procedure.            procedure prescribed under
Order 39, Rule 3. Open to
the   defendants    to    file

2

The Registrar General High Court Of ... vs M. Narasimha Prasad on 10 April, 2023

application for vacating the
same, or advance the same
depending on urgency, no
such application was filed.
2.    That the judicial officer   Court was engaged in hearing     Not proved
had not examined the        other cases, and engaged in
witnesses present in        Lok Adalat.
court in several cases
and      was      merely
adjourning the same
even though it was
possible for him to
have     recorded     the
evidence     of    those
witnesses.
3.    That     the    judicial,   Court was engaged in hearing     Not proved
officer    had    issued    other/old matters
bailable    and     non-
bailable warrants to
witnesses in spite of
the witnesses in spite
of the witnesses having
appeared and seeking

to file applications for
recalling      of       the
warrants.
4.   That the judicial officer     Court was engaged in hearing   Not proved
had     entertained       a   other/old matters.
criminal     case      and
issued a non-bailable
warrant       to        six
witnesses and when
the     witnesses      not
appeared,      did     not
examine     them       and
ordered that the said
witnesses be bound
over and insisted that
they file applications to
recall the warrants.
5.   That the judicial officer     Forest offence - exclusively Proved
had granted bail to an        triable by magistrate. Not a
accused in a case             violation of Section 86, 87
involving         offences    nor was it an ivory case.
under the Karnataka
Was under Section, 104(A),
Forest Act, 1963.
bail was granted after
hearing APP who was given
opportunity       to      file
objections. That evidence of

3

The Registrar General High Court Of ... vs M. Narasimha Prasad on 10 April, 2023

the APP cannot be relied on
has he is an interested
witness, had reported an
incident of misbehaviour of
his after which contempt
proceedings     had     been
initiated against him, was
now     trying   to   falsely
implicate him.

1.   The    judicial   officer Denied the charge. Stated that Proved

without preparing the he had never pronounced a text of the judgment single judgment without had
pronounced the dictating it in its entirety. He operative portion of had a new stenographer, who the
judgment in open was not in the habit of court and that the maintaining the stenographer judgment
was a book, frequently made actually prepared later. mistakes and was irregular in taking dictation.
The stenographer had admitted his shortcomings in a letter annexed to the reply, had resigned from
service later.

Stenographer was a novice, was negligent and inefficient in his work. Text had several typographical
errors, on several occasions needed retyping. Inefficiency of stenographer, several memos issued to
him, he had tendered apology in writing.

No complaints from the parties in any of the cases, the complainant set up by Somasekhar and
Mallaraja Gowda to falsely implicate him.

Allegations pertain to three suits- two were money suits where no written statement was filed and
defendants place ex-parte.

Third suit, the judgment had been dictated, transcribed and pronounced in court. The text
contained several mistakes and stenographer had been directed to retype the same.

Signed judgment was kept in an almirah, key was with the stenographer, that he had deliberately
reproduced the typed unsigned text instead of the signed judgment, was aiding the two advocates-

trying to falsely implicate him.

2. That he had Denied the charge. Had Proved pronounced the dictated judgment well in judgment
in a civil advance and signed it. suit on 09.10.2002 whereas the Claimed that some mischief
judgment was may have been played by vested interests. There was no actually dictated on
complaint from litigants/ on 11.10.2002 which advocates in this matter. remained unsigned That the
present complainant by the judicial officer. is a fictitious person who is not a party in any of the
cases mentioned, created by Advocate Somashekhar and the Assistant Public Prosecutor to take
revenge against him.

Stenographer was also new and not accustomed to taking dictation, had admitted his shortcomings.

4

The Registrar General High Court Of ... vs M. Narasimha Prasad on 10 April, 2023

3. That the judicial officer Denied the charge. That he Proved prepared the judgment signed all
judgments before in O.S.31/2001 but did pronouncement. There was not sign the judgment. never
any complaint against him to this effect. That vested interests acting against him.

His stenographer was new and irregular in taking dictation, made mistakes, and admitted his
shortcomings in a letter.

4. That the judicial officer Denied the charge. Proved prepared the judgment That vested interests
may have in a civil suit on played mischief by replacing 5.2.2002 and it the signed full judgment
with remained incomplete. partly printed judgment.

No     complaint    from    any
persons.
Fictitious person who filed the
complaints.
Stenographer       new     and
unaccustomed to dictation.

5.   That the judicial officer  Denied the charge.               Proved
pronounced            the  That vested interests like

judgment in a civil suit sheristedar may have played on 23.10.2002 and a mischief by replacing the
portion of the judgment original judgment.

was typed on the           No      complaint    from   any
order-sheet     and     a  persons.
formal judgment was        Present complainant is a
prepared only six days     fictitious person created by
later.                     Somasekhar, the APP for
revenge.
Stenographer        new     and
unaccustomed to dictation.

1. The judicial officer had, Somasekhar was the advocate Proved in a case involving appearing for
the two accused, offences punishable had a grievance against him. under the Karnataka Conditional
bail had been Forest Act, at the granted, application for instance of the counsel cancellation of bail
was filed, for the accused, and counsel appearing for the preponed the case and accused did not
refute granted bail and at the allegations in the application request of the on their failure to comply
with Additional Public the conditions, Did not file Prosecutor, the case objections in writing or raise
was again preponed any objections orally. and thereafter an order Non-bailable warrant issued in
was issued for non- the interests of justice, acted bailable warrant to the in good faith. accused.

2. The judicial officer did Counter-claim by complainant Not proved not pass orders in a and
accused for release of criminal case on the same property, therefore did application filed u/s not
pass any order, and case 457 of Cr.P.C. and was to be taken for enquiry or released all the for trial
properties.

5

The Registrar General High Court Of ... vs M. Narasimha Prasad on 10 April, 2023

3. The judicial officer did That the advocate started to Not proved not allow Somashekar, put
irrelevant questions to the Advocate for the witness, even though warned accused to examine a
many times. When he witness in a criminal persisted, case was adjourned case.

4. Application filed by Not proved Somashekar, Advocate who was not called out, but to the dismay
of the advocate, it was found that the case had been adjourned earlier in the day without indicating
any reasons.

1. The judicial officer had Account shreistedar and Proved brought properties for property clerk
involved in sale in public auction preparing the sale list - all in criminal cases and ground work done
by these while having brought officers.

to auction certain These material witnesses were articles like choppers, not examined. sickles, etc.
had not Motor cycle was old, parked in placed teak-wood the open thus exposed to rain/ plants and
a motor sunlight for more than 6 cycle for such auction. months - sold for Rs. 7000/-. But however,
had Sheristedar misplaced auction recorded that the same records and thereafter tried to was sold at
auction to falsely implicate him to save one Linga Raju who himself.

was related to court If subordinates had done typist and this something and he had affixed
apparently was done in his signature due to oversight, the chambers of the should be pardoned for
the judge. While it was also lapses.

alleged      that      the
appellant     had      not
prepared the estimated
value of the properties

before the same were
sold.

11. It is seen that among the charges held proved, some related to the judicial orders passed by the
respondent. Therefore, we are prepared straightaway, to ignore those charges and see whether the
order of penalty of dismissal from service was justified qua the other charges and whether the
Division Bench of the High Court was right in setting aside the same.

12. Once those charges which revolve around the manner of disposal of certain cases are ignored,
what remains are certain serious charges that revolve around pronouncement of operative portion of
the judgment in open court without the whole text of the judgment being ready. Take for instance,
Charge Nos. 1, 2, 4 and 5 in DI No.3/2005. These Charges are very serious in nature, where the
respondent is alleged to have pronounced the operative portion of the judgment in open court
without the whole of the judgment being ready. Similarly Charge No.1 in DI No.5/2005 related to
the conduct of auction sale of properties, seized during the investigation. These are very serious in
nature and the reply given by the respondent to these charges is wishy washy.

6

The Registrar General High Court Of ... vs M. Narasimha Prasad on 10 April, 2023

13. A judicial officer cannot pronounce the concluding portion of his judgment in open court without
the entire text of the judgment being prepared/dictated. All that the respondent has done in the
departmental enquiry is just to pass on the responsibility to the inefficient and allegedly novice
stenographer. We do not know how the findings with regard to such serious charges have been
completely white-washed by the High Court in the impugned judgment.

14. A look at the impugned judgment of the High Court shows that the Division Bench of the High
Court was swayed away unduly by the animosity attributed by the respondent to a member of the
local Bar and the Assistant Public Prosecutor. Let us assume for a minute that the charges were on
the basis of complaints initiated by persons bearing ill-will and motive against the respondent. Even
then, such ill-will and motive may not make the conduct of the respondent in not preparing
judgments but pronouncing the outcome of the case, a condonable conduct.

15. It is true that some of the charges revolve around judicial pronouncements and the judicial
decision-making processes and that they cannot per se, without anything more, form the foundation
for departmental proceedings. Therefore, we are ignoring those charges. But the charges which
revolve around gross negligence and callousness on the part of the respondent in not
preparing/dictating judgments, but providing a fait accompli, is completely unacceptable and
unbecoming of a judicial officer.

16. The defence taken by the respondent that the lack of experience and the inefficiency on the part
of the stenographer has to be blamed, for the whole text of the judgment not getting ready even after
several days of pronouncement of the result in open court, was entirely unacceptable. But
unfortunately, the High Court not only accepted this panchatantra story, but also went to the extent
of blaming the administration for not examining the stenographer as a witness. Such an approach is
wholly unsustainable. If it was the case of the respondent that the entire blame lay upon the
stenographer, it was for him to have summoned the stenographer as a witness. The High Court
unfortunately reversed the burden of proof.

17. While considering a challenge to an order of penalty imposed upon a judicial officer pursuant to
the disciplinary proceedings followed by a resolution of the Full Court of the High Court, the Court
is obliged only to go by established parameters namely,

(i) whether the charges stood proved; (ii) whether the findings of the inquiry officer are reasonable
and probable and not perverse;

(iii) whether the rules of procedure and the principles of natural justice have been followed; and (iv)
whether the penalty is completely disproportionate, especially in the light of the gravity of the
misconduct, his past record of service and any other extenuating circumstances.

18. Unfortunately, the High Court did not test the correctness of the order of penalty in this case, on
the above parameters. Instead, the High Court has recorded a finding in Paragraph 26 of the
impugned order, as though the learned judges had first hand information about the problems that
the judicial officers faced at the lower level. The opinion of the High Court in Paragraph 26 of the

7

The Registrar General High Court Of ... vs M. Narasimha Prasad on 10 April, 2023

impugned order that the acts of omission and commission attributed to the respondent do not
constitute grave misconduct, is very-very curious. Adding fuel to fire, the High Court has recorded in
Paragraph 36 of the impugned order that “dismissing him from service itself is very atrocious”. Such
a finding is nothing but a veiled attack on the Full Court of the High Court. After holding so, the
High Court has gone to the extent of certifying the respondent as an innocent and honest officer. We
do not know wherefrom the High Court came to such a conclusion.

19. One more reason articulated in the impugned order of the High Court is that the second show
cause notice indicated the penalty proposed and that therefore, the same was contrary to law. In this
regard the High Court placed reliance upon the decision of this Court in Himachal Pradesh State
Electricity Board Limited vs. Mahesh Dahiya1.

20. But the decision of this Court in Himachal Pradesh State Electricity Board Limited (supra), is
one where the disciplinary authority-cum-whole time members of the Electricity Board were found
to have formed an opinion to impose a major penalty even before forwarding the copy of the enquiry
report to the delinquent. But in this case the Full Court of the High Court did not consider the
enquiry report and did not take a decision in advance to impose the penalty of removal from service.

21. As a matter of fact, the history of evolution of law relating to second show cause notice is almost
forty years old. The requirement of a second show cause notice relating to the proposed penalty was
removed from Article 311 of the Constitution by the Constitution (42nd Amendment) Act, 1976. The
same was upheld by a Constitution Bench of this Court in Union of India 1 (2017) 1 SCC 768 and
Anr. vs. Tulsiram Patel2. However, a two-member Bench of this Court opened a small window in
Union of India and Ors. vs. E. Bashyan3, which led to the decision in Union of India and Ors. vs.
Mohd. Ramzan Khan4, wherein this Court held that the opportunity to respond to the findings of
the inquiry officer is different from the opportunity to respond to the penalty proposed. Eventually,
the issue got clarified in The Managing Director, ECIL, Hyderabad and Ors. vs. B. Karunakar and
Ors.5.

22. It is not the case of the respondent that the Full Court of the High Court took a decision to
impose the penalty of dismissal from service even before furnishing the copies of the enquiry reports
to the respondent. The show cause notices enclosing the enquiry reports, are dated 11.10.2007. The
representations made by the respondent are dated 26.10.2007. It is only thereafter that the
Administrative Committee No.1 considered the matter on 28.08.2008 and it was placed before the
Full Court on 04.10.2008. Therefore, the opinion of the High Court that the second show 2 (1985) 3
SCC 398 3 (1988) 2 SCC 196 4 (1991) 1 SCC 588 5 (1993) 4 SCC 727 cause notices were in violation
of the principles of natural justice is not factually and legally correct.

23. We have not come across a case where the High Court, while setting aside an order of penalty
has held that there shall not be any further inquiry against the delinquent. But in this case, the High
Court has done exactly the same, creating a new jurisprudence. The relevant portion of the
impugned order of the High Court reads as follows:-

8

The Registrar General High Court Of ... vs M. Narasimha Prasad on 10 April, 2023

“Writ Appeal is allowed. Impugned order passed by the learned Single Judge in
W.P.Nos.10756/2009 & 11030-32 of 2009 (S.DIS) dated 30.11.2011 is hereby set
aside. Punishment order dismissing the appellant from service is hereby quashed. All
Inquiry reports are quashed. There shall not be any further enquiry against the
appellant. The appellant is to be treated as if he had been in service till the date of
superannuation and pay all consequential monetary benefits with interest at 8% p.a.
The compliance shall be within a period of three months.”

24. For all the above reasons, the appeals are liable to be allowed. Accordingly, they are allowed and
the impugned order of the Division Bench of the High Court is set aside. The order of penalty
imposed upon the respondent is upheld and the writ petitions filed by the respondent shall stand
dismissed. No costs.

…………………………….. J.

(V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN) ..………………………….. J.

(PANKAJ MITHAL) New Delhi;

April 10, 2023

9