The State Of Gujarat vs Dilipsinh Kishorsinh Rao on 9 October, 2023

The State Of Gujarat vs Dilipsinh Kishorsinh Rao on 9 October,
2023

Author: Aravind Kumar

Bench: Aravind Kumar, S. Ravindra Bhat

1

2023INSC894                                                        REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

CRIMINAL APPEALLATE JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.2504 OF 2023

STATE OF GUJARAT                          .... APPELLANT

VERSUS

DILIPSINH KISHORSINH RAO                 .…RESPONDENT

JUDGMENT

Aravind Kumar, J.

1. The proceedings initiated under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (hereinafter referred to as
‘Act’) against the respondent herein came to be questioned by him by filing an application for
discharge on the ground of investigating officer (hereinafter referred to as ‘IO’) having failed to
consider the written explanation offered by him with supporting documents and the conclusion
reached by the sanctioning authority was also without considering the same reflecting
non-application of mind and thereby the conclusion reached by the sanctioning authority that
respondent accused possessed assets disproportionate to his known source of income is erroneous
and the charge-sheet material do not reveal any circumstances or evidence to arrive at a conclusion
that accused had disproportionate source of income. The said application having been rejected by
the trial court by order dated 13.04.2016, respondent moved the High Court under Section 397 read
with Section 401 of Cr.P.C. by filing Criminal Revision Application No.387 of 2016 and same having
been allowed by the impugned order dated 11.01.2018, the State has approached this Court.

1

The State Of Gujarat vs Dilipsinh Kishorsinh Rao on 9 October, 2023

2. The sole question that arises for our consideration is whether the order of the sanctioning
authority dated 05.03.2015 is liable to be set aside and consequently, the charge-sheet filed by
Anti-Corruption Bureau, Anand Police Station on 17.06.2015 is liable to be quashed?

3. The case of the prosecution as laid in the charge- sheet filed against the respondent is to the effect
that during the period 2005 to 2011 the respondent by misuse of his power while discharging his
duties as Sub-Inspector of Borsad Town Police Station and based on corrupt practices had acquired
assets in his and his wife’s name to the tune of Rs.1,15,35,319/- which was beyond his known source
of income and it was disproportionate to the tune of Rs.32,68,258/- which is more than 40% of his
known source of income.

4. An application for discharge (Annexure P-29) came to be filed under Section 227 read with
Section 228 of Cr.P.C. contending inter alia that during investigation, the IO had failed to consider
the written statement dated 13.08.2014 and the permission obtained by him to visit Australia and
also the details of the purchase of movable and immovable properties furnished to the department
on every occasion of his investment, and yet, the IO had failed to consider the same in proper
perspective. It was also contended that sanction granted by the department for purchase of the
property has also not been taken into account by the I.O. It was further contended, that error in
calculation of disproportionate asset though brought to the notice of the investigating agency, same
had not been considered as also the statement of the witnesses who had loaned amounts to the
respondent. It was further urged that the sanctioning authority had failed to consider the
documentary proof furnished for purchase of properties from various sources of income and
investigating agency had failed to take into consideration the amount which was obtained under
loans from friends and family members which was duly supported by documentary evidences.
Hence, contending that charge-sheet material does not disclose the commission of offence alleged,
respondent pleaded in the application for being discharged.

5. Trial Court taking into consideration the principles enunciated by this Court in catena of
judgments and applying the ratio laid down to the facts on hand observed as under:

“(4) xxxxx Thus, from the afore-stated settled principles and record of the case, the following aspects
emerges from the record.

(a) Whether the accused has taken loan from his brother, mother and father is a
question of fact which is to be decided during the trial;

(b) The fact of Rs.10 lacs as loan from the friends is also a question of fact which is to
be decided during the trial;

(c) Other two friends namely, Iliyashbhai and Niteshbahai who have given amount to
the accused as loan is also a question of fact which is to be decided during the trial;

(d) The fact of accused informing with regard to purchase of property to the
department under the Gujarat Civil Services rules does not gave him a clean chit with

2

The State Of Gujarat vs Dilipsinh Kishorsinh Rao on 9 October, 2023

regards to his income. This can merely be said to be complying with the rules and
regulations of service, however, this does not give him a seal of authenticity with
regards to the value of consideration which is disproportionate to the known source
of income.

(e) The explanation given by the accused with regard to disproportionate income is
also taken into consideration while filing the charge-sheet against the accused and
also while granting sanction.

(f) Necessary sanction has been obtained and hence, the question where sanction is
given without application of mind is also a question of fact to be decided at the time
of trial.

(g) The bulk of records placed on record by way of charge-sheet papers prima facie
shows that if they are taken at their face value if discloses all the ingredients of
disproportionate income with the known source of income;

(h) Even considering the broad principles whatever defence the accused is taking,
even if the same are considered, it cannot be said that the ingredients constituting the
alleged offence are not attracted.

(i) There does not seems to be any basis infirmities prima facie on record which
nullifies the case of prosecution. Even if two views are possible, present case papers
clearly creates grave a suspicion against the accused with regards to the loan amount
taken from his brother, father, mother and other friends and also with regards to the
income of his son, who was residing at Australia and his agricultural income and
there are sufficient grounds for proceeding against the accused.

(5) Considering the facts recorded hereinabove emerging from the documents on
record, it cannot be said that the accused is liable to be discharged since this Court is
not required to make roving inquiry into pros and cons of the matter and weighing
the evidence as if the trial is conducted. Even otherwise the allegations with regards
to the disproportionate assets against the known source of income is a subject matter
which cannot be decided at the outset without conducting full fledge trial, more
particularly, when it is the accused who has the knowledge with regard to the source
of income from while purchase of the properties both movable and immovable are
made by him and the Court at this juncture is able to see prima facie case against the
accused. Under the circumstances, the application is substance less and hence the
following order is passed.” and for the aforesaid reasons dismissed the application by
order dated 13.04.2016 (Annexure P-30).

6. Being aggrieved by the above said order respondent herein carried the same in revision before the
High Court. As already noticed hereinabove the High Court by impugned order allowed the Revision
Application by perusing the material on record placed by the respondent

3

The State Of Gujarat vs Dilipsinh Kishorsinh Rao on 9 October, 2023

-accused and arrived at a conclusion that trial court had committed an error in dismissing the
application and accepting the plea of the respondent which was virtually by way of defence and
discharged the respondent. DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

7. It is trite law that application of judicial mind being necessary to determine whether a case has
been made out by the prosecution for proceeding with trial and it would not be necessary to dwell
into the pros and cons of the matter by examining the defence of the accused when an application
for discharge is filed. At that stage, the trial judge has to merely examine the evidence placed by the
prosecution in order to determine whether or not the grounds are sufficient to proceed against the
accused on basis of charge sheet material. The nature of the evidence recorded or collected by the
investigating agency or the documents produced in which prima facie it reveals that there are
suspicious circumstances against the accused, so as to frame a charge would suffice and such
material would be taken into account for the purposes of framing the charge. If there is no sufficient
ground for proceeding against the accused necessarily, the accused would be discharged, but if the
court is of the opinion, after such consideration of the material there are grounds for presuming that
accused has committed the offence which is triable, then necessarily charge has to be framed.

8. At the time of framing of the charge and taking cognizance the accused has no right to produce
any material and call upon the court to examine the same. No provision in the Code grants any right
to the accused to file any material or document at the stage of framing of charge. The trial court has
to apply its judicial mind to the facts of the case as may be necessary to determine whether a case
has been made out by the prosecution for trial on the basis of charge-sheet material only.

9. If the accused is able to demonstrate from the charge- sheet material at the stage of framing the
charge which might drastically affect the very sustainability of the case, it is unfair to suggest that
such material should not be considered or ignored by the court at that stage. The main intention of
granting a chance to the accused of making submissions as envisaged under Section 227 of the
Cr.P.C. is to assist the court to determine whether it is required to proceed to conduct the trial.
Nothing in the Code limits the ambit of such hearing, to oral hearing and oral arguments only and
therefore, the trial court can consider the material produced by the accused before the I.O.

10. It is settled principle of law that at the stage of considering an application for discharge the court
must proceed on an assumption that the material which has been brought on record by the
prosecution is true and evaluate said material in order to determine whether the facts emerging
from the material taken on its face value, disclose the existence of the ingredients necessary of the
offence alleged. This Court in State of Tamil Nadu Vs. N. Suresh Rajan And Others (2014) 11 SCC
709 adverting to the earlier propositions of law laid down on this subject has held:

“29. We have bestowed our consideration to the rival submissions and the
submissions made by Mr. Ranjit Kumar commend us. True it is that at the time of
consideration of the applications for discharge, the court cannot act as a mouthpiece
of the prosecution or act as a post office and may sift evidence in order to find out
whether or not the allegations made are groundless so as to pass an order of
discharge. It is trite that at the stage of consideration of an application for discharge,

4

The State Of Gujarat vs Dilipsinh Kishorsinh Rao on 9 October, 2023

the court has to proceed with an assumption that the materials brought on record by
the prosecution are true and evaluate the said materials and documents with a view
to find out whether the facts emerging therefrom taken at their face value disclose the
existence of all the ingredients constituting the alleged offence. At this stage,
probative value of the materials has to be gone into and the court is not expected to
go deep into the matter and hold that the materials would not warrant a conviction.
In our opinion, what needs to be considered is whether there is a ground for
presuming that the offence has been committed and not whether a ground for
convicting the accused has been made out. To put it differently, if the court thinks
that the accused might have committed the offence on the basis of the materials on
record on its probative value, it can frame the charge; though for conviction, the court
has to come to the conclusion that the accused has committed the offence. The law
does not permit a mini trial at this stage.”

11. The defence of the accused is not to be looked into at the stage when the accused seeks to be
discharged. The expression “the record of the case” used in Section 227 Cr.P.C. is to be understood
as the documents and articles, if any, produced by the prosecution. The Code does not give any right
to the accused to produce any document at the stage of framing of the charge. The submission of the
accused is to be confined to the material produced by the investigating agency.

12. The primary consideration at the stage of framing of charge is the test of existence of a
prima-facie case, and at this stage, the probative value of materials on record need not be gone into.
This Court by referring to its earlier decisions in the State of Maharashtra Vs. Som Nath Thapa
(1996) 4 SCC 659 and the State of MP Vs. Mohan Lal Soni (2000) 6 SCC 338 has held the nature of
evaluation to be made by the court at the stage of framing of the charge is to test the existence of
prima-facie case. It is also held at the stage of framing of charge, the court has to form a
presumptive opinion to the existence of factual ingredients constituting the offence alleged and it is
not expected to go deep into probative value of the material on record and to check whether the
material on record would certainly lead to conviction at the conclusion of trial.

13. The power and jurisdiction of Higher Court under Section 397 Cr.P.C. which vests the court with
the power to call for and examine records of an inferior court is for the purposes of satisfying itself
as to the legality and regularities of any proceeding or order made in a case. The object of this
provision is to set right a patent defect or an error of jurisdiction or law or the perversity which has
crept in such proceedings. It would be apposite to refer to the judgment of this court in Amit Kapoor
Vs. Ramesh Chandra (2012) 9 SCC 460 where scope of Section 397 has been considered and
succinctly explained as under:

“12. Section 397 of the Code vests the court with the power to call for and examine the
records of an inferior court for the purposes of satisfying itself as to the legality and
regularity of any proceedings or order made in a case. The object of this provision is
to set right a patent defect or an error of jurisdiction or law. There has to be a
well-founded error and it may not be appropriate for the court to scrutinise the
orders, which upon the face of it bears a token of careful consideration and appear to

5

The State Of Gujarat vs Dilipsinh Kishorsinh Rao on 9 October, 2023

be in accordance with law. If one looks into the various judgments of this Court, it
emerges that the revisional jurisdiction can be invoked where the decisions under
challenge are grossly erroneous, there is no compliance with the provisions of law,
the finding recorded is based on no evidence, material evidence is ignored or judicial
discretion is exercised arbitrarily or perversely. These are not exhaustive classes, but
are merely indicative. Each case would have to be determined on its own merits.

13. Another well-accepted norm is that the revisional jurisdiction of the higher court
is a very limited one and cannot be exercised in a routine manner. One of the inbuilt
restrictions is that it should not be against an interim or interlocutory order. The
Court has to keep in mind that the exercise of revisional jurisdiction itself should not
lead to injustice ex facie. Where the Court is dealing with the question as to whether
the charge has been framed properly and in accordance with law in a given case, it
may be reluctant to interfere in exercise of its revisional jurisdiction unless the case
substantially falls within the categories aforestated. Even framing of charge is a much
advanced stage in the proceedings under the CrPC.”

14. This Court in the aforesaid judgement has also laid down principles to be
considered for exercise of jurisdiction under Section 397 particularly in the context of
prayer for quashing of charge framed under Section 228 Cr.P.C. is sought for as
under:

“27. Having discussed the scope of jurisdiction under these two provisions i.e. Section
397 and Section 482 of the Code and the fine line of jurisdictional distinction, now it
will be appropriate for us to enlist the principles with reference to which the courts
should exercise such jurisdiction. However, it is not only difficult but is inherently
impossible to state with precision such principles. At best and upon objective analysis
of various judgments of this Court, we are able to cull out some of the principles to be
considered for proper exercise of jurisdiction, particularly, with regard to quashing of
charge either in exercise of jurisdiction under Section 397 or Section 482 of the Code
or together, as the case may be:

27.1. Though there are no limits of the powers of the Court under Section 482 of the
Code but the more the power, the more due care and caution is to be exercised in
invoking these powers. The power of quashing criminal proceedings, particularly, the
charge framed in terms of Section 228 of the Code should be exercised very sparingly
and with circumspection and that too in the rarest of rare cases.

27.2. The Court should apply the test as to whether the uncontroverted allegations as
made from the record of the case and the documents submitted therewith prima facie
establish the offence or not. If the allegations are so patently absurd and inherently
improbable that no prudent person can ever reach such a conclusion and where the
basic ingredients of a criminal offence are not satisfied then the Court may interfere.

6

The State Of Gujarat vs Dilipsinh Kishorsinh Rao on 9 October, 2023

27.3. The High Court should not unduly interfere. No meticulous examination of the
evidence is needed for considering whether the case would end in conviction or not at
the stage of framing of charge or quashing of charge.

27.9. Another very significant caution that the courts have to observe is that it cannot
examine the facts, evidence and materials on record to determine whether there is
sufficient material on the basis of which the case would end in a conviction; the court
is concerned primarily with the allegations taken as a whole whether they will
constitute an offence and, if so, is it an abuse of the process of court leading to
injustice.

27.13. Quashing of a charge is an exception to the rule of continuous prosecution.
Where the offence is even broadly satisfied, the Court should be more inclined to
permit continuation of prosecution rather than its quashing at that initial stage. The
Court is not expected to marshal the records with a view to decide admissibility and
reliability of the documents or records but is an opinion formed prima facie.”

15. The revisional court cannot sit as an appellate court and start appreciating the
evidence by finding out inconsistency in the statement of witnesses and it is not
legally permissible. The High Courts ought to be cognizant of the fact that trial court
was dealing with an application for discharge.

16. In the teeth of the above analysis of law when the impugned order of the High
Court is perused, it would not detain us for too long to brush aside the contentions
raised by the respondent-accused for reasons more than one.

Firstly, the charge-sheet has been filed after taking into consideration the written submissions filed
by the accused before the Investigating Authority which included the documentary evidences
tendered by the respondent accused. Secondly, the statement of friends and acquaintances from
whom loans of large amounts had been borrowed by the accused which had been relied upon by the
accused to stave off the prosecution in his written submissions filed before the Investigating
Authority and which material had persuaded the High Court to accept the same on its evaluation to
be true, is nothing but short of accepting the same as defence evidence and examining the
truthfulness of its contents even before trial could be commenced or held. Thirdly, the High Court
has proceeded to examine the pros and cons of defense by weighing the defence-evidence and
probabilities of the conclusion that may ultimately be arrived at, as the basis for exercising the
revisional jurisdiction which was impermissible. Fourthly, the purported loans said to have been
obtained by the respondent accused from his mother, brother and father are all question of facts
which requires adjudication and this could be done only during trial and the explanation relating to
borrowing of large sums raises a reasonable suspicion, which has been termed by the Investigating
Agency as strong material to file the charge sheet and based on such material the sanctioning
authority also recorded its satisfaction under sanction order dated:

7

The State Of Gujarat vs Dilipsinh Kishorsinh Rao on 9 October, 2023

05.03.2015 to prosecute the respondent-accused. Hence, raising reasonable
suspicion cannot be held or construed at the primary stage for discharging the
accused.

17. The plea or the defence when requiring to be proved during course of trial is itself
sufficient for framing the charge. In the instant case, the learned Trial Judge has
noticed that explanation provided by the respondent accused pertaining to purchase
of shop No.7 of Suman City Complex of plot No.19, Sector-11 from the loan borrowed
and paid by the respondent was outside the check period and hence the explanation
provided by respondent is a mere eye wash. This is an issue which has to be thrashed
out during the course of the trial and at the stage of framing the charge mini trial
cannot be held. That apart the explanation offered by the respondent accused with
regard to buying of Maruti Wagon-R car, Activa scooter, purchase of house etc.,
according to the prosecution are all the subject matter of trial or it is in the nature of
defence which will have to be evaluated after trial.

18. In the afore-stated circumstances we are of the considered view that High Court
had committed a serious error in interfering with the well-reasoned order passed by
the trial court. Hence, the impugned judgment dated 11.01.2018 passed in Criminal
Revision Application No.387 of 2016 setting aside the trial court order dated
13.04.2016 requires to be set aside and accordingly it is set aside and appeal is
allowed. The trial court shall proceed with the trial having regard to the fact that
charge-sheet has been filed in the year 2015 and shall conclude the trial expeditiously
and preferably within a period of one year.

……………………………J. [S. RAVINDRA BHAT] ……………………………J. [ARAVIND KUMAR] NEW
DELHI;

October 09, 2023

8