The State Of Himachal Pradesh vs Chandervir Singh Negi on 24 February, 2023

The State Of Himachal Pradesh vs Chandervir Singh Negi on 24
February, 2023

Author: M. R. Shah

Bench: C.T. Ravikumar, M. R. Shah

1

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 1276−1277 of 2023

State of Himachal Pradesh & Ors.            .. Appellants

Versus

Chandervir Singh Negi                       .. Respondent

JUDGMENT

M. R. Shah, J.

1. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment and order dated 09.08.2019
passed by the High Court of Himachal Pradesh at Shimla passed in Regular Second Appeal No.270
of 2007 by which the High Court has allowed the said appeal and has quashed and set aside the
judgment and decree passed by the learned Trial Court dismissing the suit and consequently
decreeing the suit directing the appellant herein to initiate the acquisition proceedings qua the land
of the plaintiff as mentioned in the plaint as well as the order dismissing the review application
preferred by the appellant herein, the State of Himachal Pradesh and others have preferred the
present appeals.

2. That the respondent herein − original plaintiff instituted the suit before the learned Trial Court
for declaration, mandatory inunction and seeking direction to the appellants herein − original

1

The State Of Himachal Pradesh vs Chandervir Singh Negi on 24 February, 2023

defendants to initiate and complete the acquisition proceedings in respect of the land of the plaintiff
and damage to his fruit bearing trees. According to the plaintiff the appellants herein − original
defendant nos. 1, 2 & 3 without complying with the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act,
constructed a road known as “Tikkari−Larot− Bodra Kwar road” on the land of the plaintiff, but no
compensation was paid to the plaintiff. The fruit bearing plants were also damaged.

2.1 The appellants herein – original defendants contested the suit contending inter alia that the suit
is barred by law of limitation; that the plaintiff was working as Mate in the Department and in fact
the road was constructed on his request and as per the consent; the plaintiff waived off his claim of
compensation as the road was constructed with his consent in the year 1987. The learned Trial Court
framed the following issues:

“Issue no.l :− Whether the plaintiff is entitled for the relief of declaration, as prayed
for? OPP Issue no.2:− Whether the plaintiff is entitled compensation as alleged? OPP
Issue no. 3:− Whether the suit is not maintainable? OPD Issue no. 4:− Whether the
suit is time barred? OPD Issue no. 5:− Whether the plaintiff is estopped by his acts
and conduct? OPD Issue No.6:−Whether the suit has not been valued properly for the
purpose of court fee and jurisdiction? OPD Issue No. 7:−Whether the plaintiff has no
cause of action? OPD Issue No.8:−Whether the suit is bad for non−joinder of
necessary parties? OPD Issue No.9:− Relief”.

2.2 On appreciation of entire evidence on record and considering the fact that the
road was constructed in the year 1987 and till 2002 no grievance was made by the
plaintiff and as the cause of action arisen in the year 1987, the learned trial Court held
the issue No.4 in favour of the defendants and held that the suit was barred by
limitation taking into consideration Articles 58 and 72 of the Limitation Act. The
learned Trial Court also held the issue Nos.3, 5 & 7 against the plaintiff.
Consequently, the learned Trial Court dismissed the suit. The judgment and decree
passed by the learned Trial Court dismissing the suit came to be confirmed by the
First Appellate Court. By the impugned judgment and order the High Court has
allowed the Second Appeal preferred by the original plaintiff. The High Court framed
the following substantial question of law:

"Whether the findings or judgment and decree passed by the Court below are a result
of complete misreading, misinterpretation of the evidence and material on record
and against the settled position or law?"

Holding aforesaid question of law in favour of the plaintiff the High Court without even considering
the issue with respect to the limitation has allowed the Second Appeal and has quashed and set aside
the concurrent findings recorded by both the Courts below and consequently has decreed the suit.
2.3 Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the State has vehemently submitted that in the facts and
circumstances of the case the High Court has committed a very serious error in allowing the Second
Appeal and quashing and setting aside the concurrent findings recorded by both the Courts below
which as such were on appreciation of evidence on record. 2.4 It is submitted that the Hon’ble High

2

The State Of Himachal Pradesh vs Chandervir Singh Negi on 24 February, 2023

Court has not properly appreciated the fact that as such the road in question was constructed in the
year 1987 and that too with the help and consent of the plaintiff and that at no point of time till
2002, he made any grievance even with respect to non− payment of the compensation. It is
submitted that in the deposition the plaintiff witnesses including the plaintiff have specifically
admitted that the road in question has been constructed in the year 1987. It is submitted that for the
first time in the year 2002 the plaintiff in a representation to the Chief Minister made a grievance
with respect to non−payment of the compensation. It is submitted that therefore when on
appreciation of evidence on record both the courts below held that the suit was barred by limitation,
the High Court has committed an error in interfering with the said findings in exercise of powers
under Section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure.

2.5 Making above submissions, it is prayed to allow the present appeals and quashed and set aside
the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court and restore the judgment and decree
passed by the learned Trial Court dismissing the suit.

3. We have gone through the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court as well as the
findings recorded by the learned Trial Court confirmed by the First Appellate Court. We have also
considered the deposition of the plaintiff witnesses which were elaborately considered by the
learned Trial Court. From the deposition of the plaintiff witnesses it can be seen that the plaintiff
and other witnesses specifically admitted that the land in question on the land of the plaintiff was
constructed in the year 1987. The plaintiff witnesses have also admitted that the retaining wall was
constructed on the land of the plaintiff in the year 1987. Even according to the plaintiff and his
witnesses the fruit trees were damaged/destroyed in the year 1987. Even the cause of action pleaded
in the suit was construction of road in the year 1987. Considering the aforesaid facts and
circumstances when the learned Trial Court held that the suit was barred by limitation considering
Articles 58 and 72 of the Limitation Act and when the same was confirmed by the First Appellate
Court, the High Court ought not to have interfered with the said findings of facts in exercise of
powers under Section 100 of the CPC. 3.1 At this stage, it is required to be noted that it was the
specific case on behalf of the defendants that the road was constructed with the help and consent of
the plaintiff which is established and proved by the conduct on the part of the plaintiff mainly not
raising any dispute till 2002. 3.2 From the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court
and the substantial question of law framed it is to be noted that the High Court has not framed any
substantial question of law on the limitation and/or the suit being barred by limitation. The High
Court has gone on general and broad principles. However, the High Court has not at all considered
the real facts which are narrated hereinabove. Even the substantial question of law framed by the
High Court also cannot be said to be a substantial question of law at all. Be that it may the fact
remains that the road in question was constructed in the year 1987; the trees, if any, were
damaged/removed in the year 1987; the retaining/protection wall was constructed on the land of the
plaintiff in the year 1987 and the suit was filed in the year 2003 and therefore the suit was barred by
limitation considering Articles 58 and 72 of the Limitation Act, the impugned judgment and order
passed by the High Court is unsustainable and the same deserves to be quashed and set aside.

4. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the present appeals succeed. The impugned
judgment and order passed by the High Court is hereby quashed and set aside. The judgment and

3

The State Of Himachal Pradesh vs Chandervir Singh Negi on 24 February, 2023

decree passed by the learned Trial Court confirmed by the First Appellate Court dismissing the suit
is hereby restored.

Present appeals are accordingly allowed. No costs.

…………………………………J. (M. R. SHAH) …………………………………J. (C.T. RAVIKUMAR) New Delhi,
February 24, 2023

4