The State Of Madhya Pradesh vs Bhupendra Yadav on 20 September, 2023

The State Of Madhya Pradesh vs Bhupendra Yadav on 20
September, 2023

Author: Hima Kohli

Bench: Rajesh Bindal, Hima Kohli

CIVIL APPEAL NO.…. @ SLP (C) 27301 of 2018

REPORTABLE
2023INSC837
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NO.         OF 2023
ARISING OUT OF
PETITION FOR SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (CIVIL) NO. 27301 OF 2018

THE STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH AND OTHERS .…                                                APPELLANTS

Versus

BHUPENDRA YADAV                                                        ….                RESPONDENT

JUDGEMENT

HIMA KOHLI, J.

1. Leave granted.

2. A challenge has been laid in the present appeal to the judgement dated 24th January, 2018,
passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh at Gwalior, dismissing the
appeal1 filed by the appellant – State Government against the order dated 17th November, 2017,
passed by the learned Single Judge in a writ petition2 and relegating the matter back to the
competent authority for passing a fresh order.

3. We may first allude to the relevant facts of the case.

3.1 In May, 2015, a criminal case3 was registered against the respondent who was arrayed as an
accused in a Special Sessions Case4 in the Court of the First Additional Writ Petition No. 19621 of
2017 Vide Crime No.64/2015, registered at PS Isagarh, District Ashoknagar, under Sections 341, 354
(D), 323, 34 IPC 18:02:00 IST Reason: and under Sections 7, 8 and 11(d)/12 of the Protection of
Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012, for short ‘the POCSO Act’.

1

The State Of Madhya Pradesh vs Bhupendra Yadav on 20 September, 2023

Special Sessions Case No. 16 of 2015 instituted on 21st May, 2015 CIVIL APPEAL NO.…. @ SLP (C)
27301 of 2018 Sessions Judge, Ashok Nagar (MP). Charges were framed against the respondent
under Sections 341, 354(D) of the Indian Penal Code5 and Section 11 (D)/12 of the POCSO Act. The
case set up by the prosecution against the respondent was that on 14th February, 2015, he along
with the other co-accused had wrongfully restrained the complainant therein (a minor) and tried to
outrage her modesty. Despite the complainant spurring the repeated efforts made by the respondent
to befriend her, he had persistently stalked her, threw a letter and flowers at her and insisted that
she speaks to him. 3.2 Records reveal that during the course of the trial, the complainant had turned
hostile. On a perusal of the judgement6 passed by the First Additional Sessions Judge, Ashok Nagar,
MP in the Sessions Case4, it transpires that the parties arrived at a settlement. As a result, not only
the complainant but even her friends who had witnessed the incident, went into a denial mode and
refused to support the case set up by the prosecution. The trial Court recorded the fact that a
compromise was arrived at between the complainant and the respondent (accused therein) and
based on the compromise application preferred by the parties, the charges framed against him
under Section 341 of the IPC, were compounded. As the other offences for which the respondent was
charged, were non-compoundable, the case continued but because the prosecutrix and the witnesses
cited by the prosecution turned hostile, the trial Court passed an order, acquitting the respondent of
the charges framed under Section 354(D) of the IPC and Section 11 (D)/12 of the POCSO Act.

For short ‘IPC’ Dated 26th October, 2015 CIVIL APPEAL NO.…. @ SLP (C) 27301 of 2018 3.3 In the
very next year, i.e., 2016, the appellant – State Government conducted an entrance examination for
filling up vacancies of the post of constables. The respondent participated in the said examination
and qualified the same under the OBC category. Thereafter, a physical test was conducted which was
also cleared by the respondent. Finally, based on his performance, the respondent was selected and
posted at Ujjain. Vide letter dated 22nd July, 2017, the appellant No.3 – Superintendent of Police,
Ujjain directed the respondent to furnish requisite information in terms of the prescribed form. In
the verification form, the respondent disclosed information about his involvement in the aforesaid
criminal case and the order of acquittal passed by the trial Court. 3.4 On scrutinizing his verification
form, the appellant No. 3 – Superintendent of Police, Ujjain addressed a communication dated 24th
August, 20177 to the respondent informing him that he was found to be unfit for being recruited.
For ready reference, the contents of the said letter are extracted hereinbelow : – “OFFICE OF THE
SUPERINTENDENT OF POLICE, DISTRICT UJJAIN, MP No./SP/Ujjain/Est./P3756A/17, Dated:
24.08.17 To, Bhupendra Yadav Son of Shri Kalyan Singh Yadav R/o village Post Parsaul District
Ashok Nagar, MP Sub: About finding to be unfit in the character verification Ref.: Letter No.
Visha/21/Vaihar/2016-17 (F 515/17) dated 09.08.17 It is to intimate in reference to the subject
above that you were selected in the Constable Selection Examination 2016 and the District Ujjain
h a s   b e e n   a l l o t t e d   t o   y o u .   Y o u   h a v e   b e e n   f o u n d   t o   b e   a c q u i t t e d   i n   C r i m e   N o .
No./SP/Ujjain/Est./P3756A/17 dated: 24.08.17 CIVIL APPEAL NO.…. @ SLP (C) 27301 of 2018
64/15 Sections 341, 354-D, 323, 34 IPC and 7/8 POCSO Act, Section 354 (D) IPC and Section 11
(D)/12 Protection of Children from Sexual Offences, 2012 registered in the police station Isagarh
District Ashok Nagar because the offence was not proved 'beyond doubt In your character
verification. You have been found to be unfit for the Government Service because Sections 7 /8,
Section 354 IPC and 11 (D) 12 Protection of Children from Sexual Offences are related to the moral
degradation.

2

The State Of Madhya Pradesh vs Bhupendra Yadav on 20 September, 2023

Sd/-

Superintendent of Police District Ujjain Copy to:

01. Reserved Inspector Police Line Ujjain with two copies that one copy be given to
the concerned person and the acknowledgement of the receiving be sent to the office .

Sci/-

Superintendent of Police District Ujjain” 3.5 Aggrieved by the aforesaid decision taken by the
appellant No. 3 – Superintendent of Police, Ujjain, the respondent preferred a writ petition2 before
the High Court praying inter alia that the order dated 24th August, 2017, passed by the appellant
No.3 be quashed and directions be issued to reinstate him in service with all consequential benefits.
Vide judgement dated 17th November, 2017, the learned Single Judge dismissed the writ petition2
filed by the respondent with the following observations:

“From perusal of the impugned order dated 24.08.2017 (Annexure P/1) it appears
that in the light of the judgment rendered by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of
Avtar Singh Vs. Union of India and Ors. 2016 (4) MPLJ 332 case of the petitioner has
been considered and after considering the same impugned order has been passed
treating the case of the petitioner is of moral turpitude. Once the departmental
authorities have arrived to a conclusion then no interference can be made by this
Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India because this Court is not sitting
as a appellate authority. Even otherwise the matter pertains to Section 354(d) of IPC
and Section 7, 8, 11(D) and 12 of the POCSO Act which amounts to moral turpitude,
therefore, no case is made out” 3.6. The aforesaid order was challenged by the
respondent in an appeal1 filed under Section 2(1) of the Madhya Pradesh Uchcha
Nyayalaya (Khand Nyayapeeth Ko Appeal) CIVIL APPEAL NO.…. @ SLP (C) 27301 of
2018 Adhiniyam, 2005 which resulted in passing of the impugned judgment whereby
the Division Bench quashed and set aside the order dated 24th August, 20178, passed
by the Competent Authority and the order dated 17th November, 2017, passed by the
learned Single Judge and remanded the matter back to the Competent Authority to
pass a fresh order in the facts of the instant case. The two factors that weighed with
the High Court for allowing the appeal1 were that the respondent had fairly disclosed
his involvement in the criminal case wherein he had been acquitted and except for
the said case, there was no other criminal case pending against him. Aggrieved by the
said decision, the present appeal has been filed.

4. Mr. Bharat Singh, learned counsel for the appellants submitted that the Division
Bench of the High Court has erred in interfering with the judgment passed by the
learned Single Judge and overlooked the fact that a candidate who seeks recruitment
in police service, must be of impeccable character, integrity and clean antecedents;
that mere acquittal in the criminal case did not entitle the respondent for
appointment in police service; that it is always open to an employer to consider the

3

The State Of Madhya Pradesh vs Bhupendra Yadav on 20 September, 2023

antecedents of a candidate and examine as to whether he would be suitable for
appointment and such a discretion exercised by the Competent Authority ought not
to be interfered with unless the decision is arbitrary or mala fide. Lastly, learned
counsel submitted that even though a compromise was entered into between the
respondent and the complainant in the criminal case3 and he was acquitted on being
extended benefit of doubt, it still lies within the domain of the employer to decide as
to whether the respondent would be a suitable candidate for CIVIL APPEAL NO.…. @
SLP (C) 27301 of 2018 appointment to the post, considering the fact that the offence
for which he was charged involved moral turpitude. In support of the aforesaid
submission, learned counsel has cited Commissioner of Police, New Delhi and
Another v. Mehar Singh8; Avatar Singh v.

Union of India and Others9; Union Territory, Chandigarh Administration and Others v. Pradeep
Kumar and Others10 and Pawan Kumar v. Union of India and Another11.

5. Per contra, Ms. Savitri Pandey, learned counsel for the respondent, submitted that the learned
Single Judge of the High Court has committed an error in dismissing the writ petition2 filed by the
respondent in view of the fact that while filling up the verification form, he had furnished all the
requisite information and duly disclosed the criminal case3 in which he was involved and its final
outcome. Although, the respondent was acquitted of all the charges levelled against him, the learned
Single Judge had dismissed the writ petition2 which order was rightly overturned by the Division
Bench of the High Court. Referring to the order dated 26th October, 2015, passed by the learned
Sessions Judge, learned counsel for the respondent described it as a case of clean acquittal and
argued that the appellant No. 3 ought not to have declared the respondent unfit for being recruited
as a Constable.

6. We have heard the arguments advanced by learned counsel for the parties, perused the records
and the relevant judgements cited before us. The question that is required to be answered is whether
the appellants have erred in rejecting the candidature (2013) 7 SCC 685 (2016 8 SCC 471 (2018) 1
SCC 797 2022 SCC Online SC 532 CIVIL APPEAL NO.…. @ SLP (C) 27301 of 2018 of the respondent
to the post of Constable, despite the latter having truthfully disclosed in his affidavit the fact that he
had faced trial in a criminal case3 which had resulted in his acquittal.

7. It is not in dispute that in the verification form required to be filled up by the respondent, he had
made a disclosure of the case registered against him in the year 2015 and the fact that he had faced a
trial in the said case that ended in his acquittal vide judgement dated 26th October, 2015. In the
above circumstances, it cannot be said that the respondent had withheld material information from
the appellants while participating in the selection process for the subject post or at the time of filling
up the affidavit/verification form. The point on which there is a diversion of opinion between the
Division Bench and the learned Single Judge is that while the latter had relied on a decision of this
Court in Avatar Singh10 (supra) and observed that the Department could not be faulted for issuing
the letter dated 24th August, 20178 declaring the respondent as unfit for appointment in
government service on the ground that it was a case of moral turpitude, the Division Bench held to
the contrary and relying on the very same decision along with one rendered by this Court in Pradeep

4

The State Of Madhya Pradesh vs Bhupendra Yadav on 20 September, 2023

Kumar11 (supra) and a Full Bench decision of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh in Ashutosh Pawar
v. High Court of M.P and Another12 observed that in a case like the present one where there was no
other criminal case pending against the respondent, except for the one in which he had been 2018
SCC Online MP 72 (Writ Petition No. 5865 of 2016) CIVIL APPEAL NO.…. @ SLP (C) 27301 of 2018
acquitted and the Department had not undertaken a deeper look at the respondent’s past, it was a fit
case for relegating the matter to the appellants for fresh consideration.

8. The standard for assessing the suitability of a candidate is measured by the employer based on
various factors including the nature of the post, nature of duties, effect of suppression over
suitability, etc. However, no hard and fast rule can be laid down in this regard [Refer, Pawan
Kumar12 (supra)]. It must be emphasised that a candidate who proposes to participate in a selection
process, must furnish true and correct information in respect of his character and antecedents in the
affidavit/verification form required to be filled up during the selection process or after induction in
the service, as the case may be. A candidate who makes a false declaration or suppresses material
information or furnishes half–baked information which may not be the whole truth, can be visited
with adverse consequences to the point of his exclusion even though he may have qualified in the
entire selection process, based on the said falsity/suppression.

9. In view of the cleavage of opinion expressed in several decisions of this Court, a Division Bench in
Jainendra Singh v. State of Uttar Pradesh13, decided to refer the issue to a larger Bench for an
authoritative pronouncement on the question of suppression of information/submitting of false
information in the verification form by an aspirant of a job when the incumbent has faced criminal
prosecution, been arrested or on account of pendency of a criminal case. The aforesaid conflicting
opinions were finally settled by a three-Judges Bench of this Court in Avtar Singh10 (supra)
whereafter examining different (2012) 8 SCC 748 CIVIL APPEAL NO.…. @ SLP (C) 27301 of 2018
views expressed by Benches of this Court from time to time, broad guidelines were laid down as to
the yardstick to be applied for verification of disclosures made by a candidate to the employer for
deciding as to whether the incumbent would be fit for appointment or not. In this context, we may
usefully extract the following observations made in Avatar Singh10 (supra) : – “29. The verification
of antecedents is necessary to find out fitness of incumbent, in the process if a declarant is found to
be of good moral character on due verification of antecedents, merely by suppression of involvement
in trivial offence which was not pending on date of filling attestation form, whether he may be
deprived of employment? There may be case of involving moral turpitude/serious offence in which
employee has been acquitted but due to technical reasons or giving benefit of doubt. There may be
situation when person has been convicted of an offence before filling verification form or case is
pending and information regarding it has been suppressed, whether employer should wait till
outcome of pending criminal case to take a decision or in case when action has been initiated there
is already conclusion of criminal case resulting in conviction/acquittal as the case may be. The
situation may arise for consideration of various aspects in a case where disclosure has been made
truthfully of required information, then also authority is required to consider and verify fitness for
appointment. Similarly in case of suppression also, if in the process of verification of information,
certain information comes to notice then also employer is required to take a decision considering
various aspects before holding incumbent as unfit. If on verification of antecedents a person is found
fit at the same time authority has to consider effect of suppression of a fact that he was tried for

5

The State Of Madhya Pradesh vs Bhupendra Yadav on 20 September, 2023

trivial offence which does not render him unfit, what importance to be attached to such
non-disclosure. Can there be single yardstick to deal with all kinds of cases?

xxx xxx xxx

36. What yardstick is to be applied has to depend upon the nature of post, higher post would involve
more rigorous criteria for all services, not only to uniformed service. For lower posts which are not
sensitive, nature of duties, impact of suppression on suitability has to be considered by authorities
concerned considering post/nature of duties/services and power has to be exercised on due
consideration of various aspects.

xxx xxx xxx

38. We have noticed various decisions and tried to explain and reconcile them as far as possible. In
view of the aforesaid discussion, we summarise our conclusion thus:

CIVIL APPEAL NO.…. @ SLP (C) 27301 of 2018 38.1. Information given to the
employer by a candidate as to conviction, acquittal or arrest, or pendency of a
criminal case, whether before or after entering into service must be true and there
should be no suppression or false mention of required information.

38.2. While passing order of termination of services or cancellation of candidature for
giving false information, the employer may take notice of special circumstances of the
case, if any, while giving such information. 38.3. The employer shall take into
consideration the government orders/instructions/rules, applicable to the employee,
at the time of taking the decision.

38.4. In case there is suppression or false information of involvement in a criminal
case where conviction or acquittal had already been recorded before filling of the
application/verification form and such fact later comes to knowledge of employer,
any of the following recourses appropriate to the case may be adopted:

38.4.1. In a case trivial in nature in which conviction had been recorded, such as
shouting slogans at young age or for a petty offence which if disclosed would not have
rendered an incumbent unfit for post in question, the employer may, in its discretion,
ignore such suppression of fact or false information by condoning the lapse.

38.4.2. Where conviction has been recorded in case which is not trivial in nature,
employer may cancel candidature or terminate services of the employee.

38.4.3. If acquittal had already been recorded in a case involving moral turpitude or
offence of heinous/serious nature, on technical ground and it is not a case of clean
acquittal, or benefit of reasonable doubt has been given, the employer may consider
all relevant facts available as to antecedents, and may take appropriate decision as to

6

The State Of Madhya Pradesh vs Bhupendra Yadav on 20 September, 2023

the continuance of the employee.

38.5. In a case where the employee has made declaration truthfully of a concluded
criminal case, the employer still has the right to consider antecedents, and cannot be
compelled to appoint the candidate. 38.6. In case when fact has been truthfully
declared in character verification form regarding pendency of a criminal case of
trivial nature, employer, in facts and circumstances of the case, in its discretion, may
appoint the candidate subject to decision of such case.

38.7. In a case of deliberate suppression of fact with respect to multiple pending cases
such false information by itself will assume significance and an employer may pass
appropriate order cancelling candidature or terminating services as appointment of a
person against whom multiple criminal cases were pending may not be proper.

38.8. If criminal case was pending but not known to the candidate at the time of
filling the form, still it may have adverse impact and the appointing authority would
take decision after considering the seriousness of the crime. 38.9. In case the
employee is confirmed in service, holding departmental enquiry would be necessary
before passing order of termination/removal or dismissal on the ground of
suppression or submitting false information in verification form.

CIVIL APPEAL NO.…. @ SLP (C) 27301 of 2018 38.10. For determining suppression or false
information attestation/verification form has to be specific, not vague. Only such information which
was required to be specifically mentioned has to be disclosed. If information not asked for but is
relevant comes to knowledge of the employer the same can be considered in an objective manner
while addressing the question of fitness. However, in such cases action cannot be taken on basis of
suppression or submitting false information as to a fact which was not even asked for.

38.11. Before a person is held guilty of suppressio veri or suggestio falsi, knowledge of the fact must
be attributable to him.” (emphasis added)

10. As can be discerned from the above decision, an employer has the discretion to terminate or
condone an omission in the disclosure made by a candidate. While doing so, the employer must act
with prudence, keep in mind the nature of the post and the duties required to be discharged. Higher
the post, more stringent ought to be the standards to be applied. Even if a truthful disclosure has
been made, the employer is well within its right to examine the fitness of a candidate and in a
concluded criminal case, keep in mind the nature of the offence and verify whether the acquittal is
honourable or benefit has been extended on technical reasons. If the employer arrives at a
conclusion that the incumbent is of a suspect character or unfit for the post, he may not be
appointed or continued in service.

11. In Daya Shankar Yadav. v. Union of India and Others14, where this Court was called upon to
examine the purpose of seeking information with respect to the antecedents of a candidate, it was
observed that the same were essential so as to ascertain the (2010) 14 SCC 103 CIVIL APPEAL

7

The State Of Madhya Pradesh vs Bhupendra Yadav on 20 September, 2023

NO.…. @ SLP (C) 27301 of 2018 suitability for the post and the disclosures made in the verification
form relating to the character and antecedents of the candidate can result in the following
consequences:

“15. When an employee or a prospective employee declares in a verification form,
answers to the queries relating to character and antecedents, the verification thereof
can therefore lead to any of the following consequences:

(a) If the declarant has answered the questions in the affirmative and furnished the
details of any criminal case (wherein he was convicted or acquitted by giving benefit
of doubt for want of evidence), the employer may refuse to offer him employment (or
if already employed on probation, discharge him from service), if he is found to be
unfit having regard to the nature and gravity of the offence/crime in which he was
involved.

(b) On the other hand, if the employer finds that the criminal case disclosed by the
declarant related to offences which were technical, or of a nature that would not
affect the declarant's fitness for employment, or where the declarant had been
honourably acquitted and exonerated, the employer may ignore the fact that the
declarant had been prosecuted in a criminal case and proceed to appoint him or
continue him in employment.

(c) Where the declarant has answered the questions in the negative and on
verification it is found that the answers were false, the employer may refuse to
employ the declarant (or discharge him, if already employed), even if the declarant
had been cleared of the charges or is acquitted. This is because when there is
suppression or non-disclosure of material information bearing on his character, that
itself becomes a reason for not employing the declarant.

(d) Where the attestation form or verification form does not contain proper or
adequate queries requiring the declarant to disclose his involvement in any criminal
proceedings, or where the candidate was unaware of initiation of criminal
proceedings when he gave the declarations in the verification roll/attestation form,
then the candidate cannot be found fault with, for not furnishing the relevant
information. But if the employer by other means (say police verification or
complaints, etc.) learns about the involvement of the declarant, the employer can
have recourse to courses (a) or (b) above.” (emphasis added)

12. In State of Madhya Pradesh and Others v. Abhijit Singh Pawar15 where the State Government
had invited applications for filling up the post of Subedars, Platoon Commanders and Inspectors of
Police, the respondent candidate who participated in the (2018) 18 SCC 733 CIVIL APPEAL NO.….
@ SLP (C) 27301 of 2018 selection process, filed an affidavit disclosing pendency of a criminal case
against him which was subsequently compounded on a compromise arrived at between him and the
complainant under Section 320 of the Code of Criminal Procedure16. Though the respondent was

8

The State Of Madhya Pradesh vs Bhupendra Yadav on 20 September, 2023

selected on clearing the written examination his candidature was rejected. The reasons offered for
declining him an appointment were that the candidate selected is required to maintain law and
order of the State and it was considered improper to appoint a person having a criminal record. The
said decision was overturned by the learned Single Judge of the High Court and the view taken was
affirmed by the Division Bench. When the State Government approached this Court in appeal, citing
the decisions in Mehar Singh9 (supra); R.K. Kapur v. Union of Indian and Another17; State of
Madhya Pradesh and Others v. Parvez Khan18; Pradeep Kumar11 (supra); and Avatar Singh10
(supra), the following observations were made :–

13. In Avtar Singh [Avtar Singh v. Union of India, (2016) 8 SCC 471 :

(2016) 2 SCC (L&S) 425] , though this Court was principally concerned with the
question as to non-disclosure or wrong disclosure of information, it was observed in
para 38.5 that even in cases where a truthful disclosure about a concluded case was
made, the employer would still have a right to consider antecedents of the candidate
and could not be compelled to appoint such candidate.

xxx xxx xxx

16. We must observe at this stage that there is nothing on record to suggest that the
decision taken by the authorities concerned in rejecting the candidature of the
respondent was in any way actuated by mala fides or suffered on any other count. The
decision on the question of suitability of the respondent, in our considered view, was
absolutely correct and did not call for any interference. We, therefore, allow this
appeal, set aside the decisions rendered by the Single Judge [Abhijit Singh Pawar v.
State of M.P., WP No. 9412 of 2013, order dated 31-7-

2014 (MP)] as well as by the Division Bench [State of M.P. v. Abhijit For short ‘the Cr.P.C’ AIR 1964
SC 787 (2015) 2 SCC 591 CIVIL APPEAL NO.…. @ SLP (C) 27301 of 2018 Singh Pawar, 2015 SCC
OnLine MP 7517] and dismiss Writ Petition No. 9412 of 2013 preferred by the respondent. No costs.

13. In Rajasthan Rajya Vidhut Prasaran Nigam Limited and Another v. Anil Kanwaria19, where the
employer had invited applications for the post of a Technical Helper and on qualifying for the said
post, the respondent therein was appointed as a probationer trainee, in the course of his police
verification which was a pre-condition for confirming him to the post, it had transpired that he had
been convicted by the trial Court for offences under Sections 323 and 341 of the IPC but was
extended benefit under the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 and released on good conduct. This
Court observed that at the time of submitting an application for appointment, the respondent had
already suffered a conviction by the competent Court which fact was withheld by him and he had
filed a false declaration. These facts emerged only after receiving the police verification report. After
distilling the law on appointments obtained by fraud or misrepresentation/by suppression of
material facts, this Court proceeded to quash and set aside the order passed by the learned Single
Judge and upheld the order passed by the Division Bench of the High Court, directing reinstatement
of the respondent – employee and held that said decision was unsustainable in view of the fact that

9

The State Of Madhya Pradesh vs Bhupendra Yadav on 20 September, 2023

the employee had not disclosed/suppressed material facts and had filed a false declaration.

14. In the captioned case, this Court expressed a view that even where there was a subsequent
acquittal, the employee having furnished false information/indulged in suppression of material fact
of a pending criminal case, cannot claim appointment as a (2021) 10 SCC 136 CIVIL APPEAL NO.….
@ SLP (C) 27301 of 2018 matter of right. Following are the observations made regarding the
credibility of such an employee from the perspective of the employer:

“14. The issue/question may be considered from another angle, from the employer's
point of view. The question is not about whether an employee was involved in a
dispute of trivial nature and whether he has been subsequently acquitted or not. The
question is about the credibility and/or trustworthiness of such an employee who at
the initial stage of the employment i.e. while submitting the declaration/verification
and/or applying for a post made false declaration and/or not disclosing and/or
suppressing material fact of having involved in a criminal case. If the correct facts
would have been disclosed, the employer might not have appointed him. Then the
question is of trust. Therefore, in such a situation, where the employer feels that an
employee who at the initial stage itself has made a false statement and/or not
disclosed the material facts and/or suppressed the material facts and therefore he
cannot be continued in service because such an employee cannot be relied upon even
in future, the employer cannot be forced to continue such an employee. The
choice/option whether to continue or not to continue such an employee always must
be given to the employer. At the cost of repetition, it is observed and as observed
hereinabove in catena of decision such an employee cannot claim the appointment
and/or continue to be in service as a matter of right.”

15. On applying the law expounded by this Court in a series of decisions to the facts of the instant
case, we find that the Division Bench of the High Court has dismissed the appeal1 preferred by the
appellant – State Government and set aside the order passed by the learned Single Judge who had
upheld the order passed by the Competent Authority8, terminating the services of the respondent
on the ground that he was candid enough to make a disclosure in his verification form stating that
he had been chargesheeted in a criminal case3 wherein he was later on acquitted and there was no
other criminal case pending against him at the relevant time.

16. We are, however, unable to concur with the aforesaid view. Even though the respondent had
truthfully declared that he was involved in a criminal case which was decided by the trial Court vide
judgement 26th October, 2015, on perusing the facts of the CIVIL APPEAL NO.…. @ SLP (C) 27301
of 2018 said case as noted hereinabove and the observations made in the judgement, quite clearly,
this was not a case of clean acquittal. It is evident from the facts narrated that after the chargesheet
was filed, the respondent had arrived at a compromise with the complainant and filed an application
under Section 320 of the CrPC, based on which the offence under Section 341 IPC was compounded.
As for the remaining offences for which the respondent was charged i.e. Section 354(D) of the IPC
and Section 11 (D)/12 of the POCSO Act, they were non compoundable and therefore, the matter was
taken to trial. The respondent was acquitted by the trial Court primarily on account of the fact that

10

The State Of Madhya Pradesh vs Bhupendra Yadav on 20 September, 2023

the complainant did not support the case set up by the prosecution and the other prosecution
witnesses had turned hostile. In such circumstances, the respondent’s plea that he had been given a
clean acquittal in the criminal case, is found to be devoid of merits.

17. This is a classic example of the situation contemplated in para 38.4.3 of Avatar Singh10 (supra)
where the charges framed against the respondent herein involved moral turpitude and though he
was acquitted on the prosecution witnesses having turned hostile, but given the facts and
circumstances of the case which led to his acquittal, we are of the view that the appellant – State
Government was well within its right to exercise its discretion against the respondent and terminate
his services on the ground that he was unfit for appointment in the police department. Here was a
case where the complainant had reneged from the statement made to the police in view of a
settlement arrived at with the respondent. It is noteworthy that the incident, subject matter of the
criminal case3 had occurred on 14th February, 2015, and judgement was pronounced by the trial
Court on 26th CIVIL APPEAL NO.…. @ SLP (C) 27301 of 2018 October, 2015. In the very next year,
when the appellant – State Government invited applications for appointment to the post of
Constable, the respondent had submitted his application. Even though this is a case of candid
disclosure of the criminal case3 on the part of the respondent, which had culminated in an acquittal,
but having regard to the fact that the prosecution could not succeed in proving the case against the
respondent for the reasons noted hereinabove and further, being mindful of the fact that the case
involved moral turpitude and the respondent was charged with non-compoundable offences of a
serious nature, we are of the firm view that the judgment of the trial Court cannot be treated as a
clean acquittal.

18. The aforesaid aspects were rightly factored in by the appellant – State Government while issuing
the communication dated 24th August, 20178 and declaring that the respondent was unfit for
appointment to the said post. The yardstick to be applied in cases where the appointment sought
relates to a Law Enforcement Agency, ought to be much more stringent than those applied to a
routine vacancy. One must be mindful of the fact that once appointed to such a post, a responsibility
would be cast on the respondent of maintaining law and order in the society, enforcing the law,
dealing with arms and ammunitions, apprehending suspected criminals and protecting the life and
property of the public at large. Therefore, the standard of rectitude to be applied to any person
seeking appointment in a Law Enforcement Agency must always be higher and more rigourous for
the simple reason that possession of a higher moral conduct is one of the basic requirements for
appointment to a post as sensitive as that in the police service. CIVIL APPEAL NO.…. @ SLP (C)
27301 of 2018

19. We are, therefore, of the opinion that mere acquittal of the respondent in the criminal case3
would not automatically entitle him to being declared fit for appointment to the subject post. The
appellant–State Government has judiciously exercised its discretion after taking note of all the
relevant factors relating to the antecedents of the respondent. In such a case, even one criminal case
faced by the respondent in which he was ultimately acquitted, apparently on the basis of being
extended benefit of doubt, can make him unsuitable for appointment to the post of a Constable. The
said decision taken by the appellant–State Government is not tainted by any malafides or
arbitrariness for the High Court to have interfered therewith. As a result, the judgement dated 17th

11

The State Of Madhya Pradesh vs Bhupendra Yadav on 20 September, 2023

November, 2017, passed by the learned Single Judge is upheld while quashing and setting aside the
impugned judgment dated 24th January, 2018, passed by the Division Bench of the High Court. The
appeal is allowed. Parties are left to bear their own costs.

…………………….J. [HIMA KOHLI] …………………….J. [RAJESH BINDAL] New Delhi;

September 20, 2023

12