The State Of Punjab vs Dil Bahadur on 28 March, 2023

The State Of Punjab vs Dil Bahadur on 28 March, 2023

Author: M.R. Shah

Bench: C.T. Ravikumar, M.R. Shah

REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 844 OF 2023
(@ SLP (Crl) No. 2984 OF 2018)

State of Punjab                                            ...Appellant(s)

Versus

Dil Bahadur                                               …Respondent(s)

JUDGMENT

M.R. SHAH, J.

1. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment and order passed by the High
Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh in Criminal Revision Application being CRR No.
4113/2016, by which, though the High Court has upheld the conviction of respondent herein for the
offence under Section 304A of the Indian Penal Code, however, has reduced the sentence from two
years to eight months, subject to a prior deposit of Rs. 25,000/- towards compensation to be paid to
family/legal heir of the deceased, the State of Punjab has preferred the present appeal.

2. That respondent herein – original accused was driving a Scorpio Car rashly and negligently, due
to which one person died while over taking the ambulance from the left side. Because of the rash
and negligent driving on the part of the respondent – accused two persons sitting in the ambulance
also suffered injuries. Due to the collision, in fact, the ambulance turned turtle, which shows the
manner in which the accused was driving the Scorpio with high speed. The respondent herein came
to be tried for the offences under Sections 279 and 304A of the IPC. The learned Trial Court
convicted the accused for the offences under Sections 279 and 304A of the IPC and the sentence of
the accused came to be confirmed by the learned Sessions Court. The accused preferred the present
revision application before the High Court. By the impugned judgment and order, though the High
Court has confirmed the conviction of the accused for the offence under Section 304A of the IPC,
however, has reduced the sentence to eight months SI subject to a prior deposit of Rs. 25,000/-. At
this stage, it is required to be noted that at the time when the High Court decided the revision
application, the accused had undergone an actual sentence period of seven months and fifteen days
and therefore, the High Court seems to have reduced the sentence to eight months only. 2.1 Against
the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court by which the High Court has reduced

1

The State Of Punjab vs Dil Bahadur on 28 March, 2023

the sentence to eight months for the offence under Section 304A of IPC, the State of Punjab has
preferred the present appeal.

3. Ms. Kanika Ahuja, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the State has vehemently submitted
that in the facts and circumstances of the case, the High Court has seriously erred in interfering with
the sentence imposed by the learned Trial Court confirmed by the First Appellate Court. 3.1 It is
submitted that while reducing the sentence the High Court has shown un-due sympathy to the
accused. It is submitted that while reducing the sentence the High Court has not properly
appreciated and/or considered the manner in which the accused committed the offence. It is
submitted that the High Court has not properly appreciated the fact that because of the rash and
negligent driving on the part of the accused one innocent person lost his life and two persons
suffered injuries who were travelling in the ambulance.

3.2 It is submitted that the accused was driving the Scorpio (car) with such a high speed and that too
when he was on the cross road, rashly and negligently and due to the collision, the ambulance
turned turtle. It is submitted that therefore, the High Court ought not to have shown un-due
sympathy in favour of such an accused person, because of whose act of rash and negligent driving
one innocent person lost his life and two persons sustained injuries. 3.3 Making the above
submissions and relying upon the decisions of this Court in the case of State of Madhya Pradesh Vs.
Surendra Singh (2015) 1 SCC 222 and in the case of State of Punjab Vs. Saurabh Bakshi (2015) 5
SCC 182, it is prayed to allow the present appeal and restore the sentence imposed by the learned
Trial Court and confirmed by the learned Sessions Court.

4. While opposing the present appeal Shri Aftab Ali Khan, learned counsel appearing on behalf of
the respondent – accused, appointed by the Supreme Court Legal Aid Committee, has submitted
that when considering the mitigating circumstances the High Court has reduced the sentence to
eight months on a prior deposit of Rs. 25,000/- towards compensation to be paid to the family/legal
heir of the deceased, the same may not be interfered with by this Court.

4.1 It is submitted that the respondent – accused is a poor person and was only a driver and
therefore, if he is sent to undergo two years RI, he and his family members will suffer. It is
submitted that when the aforesaid facts have been considered by the High Court and the High Court
has reduced the sentence, the same may not be interfered with by this Court.

5. Heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respective parties at length. At the outset, it is
required to be noted that the respondent – accused has been convicted for the offences under
Sections 279 and 304A of IPC. His conviction for the aforesaid offences have been confirmed by the
High Court by the impugned judgment and order. However, by the impugned judgment and order,
the High Court has interfered with the sentence imposed by the` learned Trial Court affirmed by the
learned Sessions Court and has reduced the sentence from two years to eight months. However,
while reducing the sentence, the High Court has not at all considered the gravity of the offence and
the manner in which the accused committed the offence and driving the Scorpio in rash and
negligent manner due to which one innocent person lost his life and two persons who were
travelling in the ambulance sustained the injuries. The High Court has also not properly appreciated

2

The State Of Punjab vs Dil Bahadur on 28 March, 2023

and considered the fact that due to collision the ambulance turned turtle. This shows the impact on
the ambulance and the rash and negligent driving on the part of the accused. Cogent reasons were
given by the learned Trial Court while sentencing the accused to undergo two years RI for the
offence under Section 304A of IPC. From the impugned judgment and order passed by the High
Court, it appears that the case on behalf of the accused that he is coming from a poor family, is
considered as mitigating circumstance. However, the High Court has not properly considered that
because of the rash and negligent driving on the part of the accused one innocent person died and
two persons who were travelling in the ambulance sustained injuries. 5.1 The High Court has not at
all considered the fact that the IPC is punitive and deterrent in nature. The principal aim and object
are to punish offenders for offences committed under IPC. Sections 279 and 304A can be invoked
only if act of the accused is negligent and rash. As observed by this Court in the case of State of
Himachal Pradesh Vs. Ramchandra Rabidas (2019) 10 SCC 75, this Court time and again
emphasised on the need to strictly punish offenders responsible for causing motor vehicle accidents.
With rapidly increasing motorisation, India is facing an increasing burden of road traffic injuries
and fatalities. The financial loss, emotional and social trauma caused to a family on losing a bread
winner, or any other member of the family, or incapacitation of the victim cannot be quantified. As
observed and held, the principle of proportionality between the crime and punishment has to be
borne in mind. As observed that the principle of just punishment is the bedrock of sentencing in
respect of a criminal offence.

5.2 At this stage, the decision of this Court in the case of Saurabh Bakshi (supra), in which this Court
was considering the offence under Section 304A of IPC is required to be referred to. On the principle
of sentencing, this Court has observed and held as under: -

“The eminent thinker and author, Sophocles, said centuries back : “Laws can never be
enforced unless fear supports them.” The statement has its pertinence, in a way, with
the enormous vigour, in today's society. It is the duty of every right-thinking citizen
to show veneration to law so that an orderly, civilised and peaceful society emerges. It
has to be borne in mind that law is averse to any kind of chaos. It is totally intolerant
of anarchy. If anyone defies law, he has to face the wrath of law, depending on the
concept of proportionality that the law recognises. It can never be forgotten that the
purpose of criminal law legislated by the competent legislatures, subject to judicial
scrutiny within constitutionally established parameters, is to protect the collective
interest and save every individual that forms a constituent of the collective from
unwarranted hazards. It is sometimes said in an egocentric and uncivilised manner
that law cannot bind the individual actions which are perceived as flaws by the large
body of people, but, the truth is and has to be that when the law withstands the test of
the constitutional scrutiny in a democracy, the individual notions are to be ignored.
At times certain crimes assume more accent and gravity depending on the nature and
impact of the crime on the society. No court should ignore the same being swayed by
passion of mercy. It is the obligation of the court to constantly remind itself that the
right of the victim, and be it said, on certain occasions the person aggrieved as well as
the society at large can be victims, never be marginalised. In this context one may
recapitulate the saying of Justice Benjamin N. Cardozo “Justice, though due to the

3

The State Of Punjab vs Dil Bahadur on 28 March, 2023

accused, is due to the accuser too.” And, therefore, the requisite norm has to be the
established principles laid down in precedents. It is neither to be guided by a sense of
sentimentality nor to be governed by prejudices.” 5.2.1 It is further observed that the
principle of sentencing recognises the corrective measures but there are occasions
when the deterrence is an imperative necessity depending upon the facts of the case.

5.2.2 In the aforesaid decision, the High Court reduced the sentence and shown the
mercy while applying the principle that payment of compensation is a factor for
reduction. To that, this Court has observed that it is absolutely in the realm of
misplaced sympathy. It is, in a way mockery of justice. It is observed and held as
under:-

“Needless to say, the principle of sentencing recognises the corrective measures but
there are occasions when the deterrence is an imperative necessity depending upon
the facts of the case. In our opinion, it is a fit case where we are constrained to say
that the High Court has been swayed away by the passion of mercy in applying the
principle that payment of compensation is a factor for reduction of sentence to 24
days. It is absolutely in the realm of misplaced sympathy. It is, in a way mockery of
justice. Because justice is “the crowning glory”, “the sovereign mistress” and “queen
of virtue” as Cicero had said. Such a crime blights not only the lives of the victims but
of many others around them. It ultimately shatters the faith of the public in judicial
system.” 5.2.3 Showing the concern about increasing the road accidents, it is
observed in the said decision as under: -

“India has a disreputable record of road accidents. There is a nonchalant attitude
among the drivers. They feel that they are the “Emperors of all they survey.”
Drunkenness contributes to careless driving where the other people become their
prey. The poor feel that their lives are not safe, the pedestrians think of uncertainty
and the civilised persons drive in constant fear but still apprehensive about the
obnoxious attitude of the people who project themselves as “larger than life.” In such
obtaining circumstances, the lawmakers should scrutinise, relook and revisit the
sentencing policy in Section 304-A IPC, so with immense anguish.” 5.3 At this stage,
another decision of this Court in the case of Surendra Singh (supra) which is also on
the offences under Sections 279 and 304A of IPC, is required to be referred to. In the
case before this Court, the learned Trial Court while convicting the accused for the
offence under Section 304A sentenced the accused to undergo two years RI. The High
Court while maintaining the conviction, reduced the sentence awarded by the learned
Trial Court from two years RI to the period already undergone and granted a further
compensation of Rs. 2000/- payable to the widow/mother of the deceased. While
disapproving the view taken by the High Court and setting aside the order passed by
the High Court reducing the sentence, this Court has observed in paragraphs 6 to 14
as under: -

4

The State Of Punjab vs Dil Bahadur on 28 March, 2023

“6. In the instant case, after proper appreciation of evidence the trial court came to
the conclusion that the accused had endangered the life of Vijay by driving the jeep
on a public road in a rash and negligent manner. The accused dashed the jeep against
a pulia first and then against a babul tree. As a result of such accident Vijay Singh,
who was travelling in the jeep got injured and died, and another person Mangilal,
who was also in the jeep, received injuries. We are of the opinion that the trial court
has not committed any illegality in passing the order of conviction and in the appeal
preferred by the accused findings of the trial court were affirmed. However, without
proper appreciation of the evidence and consideration of gravity of the offence, the
learned Single Judge of the High Court has shown undue sympathy by modifying the
conviction to the period already undergone.

7. In our considered opinion, the High Court while passing the impugned order
[Surendra Singh v. State of M.P., Criminal Revision No. 3 of 2008, decided on 22-

8-2012 (MP)] has completely failed to follow the principles enunciated by this Court in a catena of
decisions. Undue sympathy by means of imposing inadequate sentence would do more harm to the
justice system to undermine the public confidence in the efficacy of law and the society cannot
endure long under serious threats. If the courts do not protect the injured, the injured would then
resort to personal vengeance. Therefore, the duty of any court is to award proper sentence having
regard to the nature of the offence and the manner in which it was committed. (See Sevaka Perumal
v. State of T.N. [(1991) 3 SCC 471 : 1991 SCC (Cri) 724 : AIR 1991 SC 1463] )

8. In Dhananjoy Chatterjee v. State of W.B. [(1994) 2 SCC 220 : 1994 SCC (Cri) 358] this Court held
as under: (SCC p. 239, paras 14-15) “14. In recent years, the rising crime rate—particularly violent
crime against women has made the criminal sentencing by the courts a subject of concern. Today
there are admitted disparities. Some criminals get very harsh sentences while many receive grossly
different sentence for an essentially equivalent crime and a shockingly large number even go
unpunished thereby encouraging the criminal and in the ultimate making justice suffer by
weakening the system's credibility. Of course, it is not possible to lay down any cut and dry formula
relating to imposition of sentence but the object of sentencing should be to see that the crime does
not go unpunished and the victim of crime as also the society has the satisfaction that justice has
been done to it. In imposing sentences, in the absence of specific legislation, Judges must consider
variety of factors and after considering all those factors and taking an overall view of the situation,
impose sentence which they consider to be an appropriate one. Aggravating factors cannot be
ignored and similarly mitigating circumstances have also to be taken into consideration.

15. In our opinion, the measure of punishment in a given case must depend upon the atrocity of the
crime; the conduct of the criminal and the defenceless and unprotected state of the victim.
Imposition of appropriate punishment is the manner in which the courts respond to the society's cry
for justice against the criminals. Justice demands that courts should impose punishment befitting to
the crime so that the courts reflect public abhorrence of the crime. The courts must not only keep in
view the rights of the criminal but also the rights of the victim of crime and the society at large while
considering imposition of appropriate punishment.”

5

The State Of Punjab vs Dil Bahadur on 28 March, 2023

9. While considering this aspect, the Supreme Court in Mahesh v. State of M.P. [(1987) 3 SCC 80 :
1987 SCC (Cri) 379 : (1987) 2 SCR 710] remarked that:

(SCC p. 82, para 6) “6. … it will be a mockery of justice to permit these appellants to
escape the extreme penalty of law when faced with such evidence and such cruel acts.
To give the lesser punishment for the appellants would be to render the justicing
system of this country suspect. The common man will lose faith in courts. In such
cases, he understands and appreciates the language of deterrence more than the
reformative jargon. When we say this, we do not ignore the need for a reformative
approach in the sentencing process.”

10. In Hazara Singh v. Raj Kumar [(2013) 9 SCC 516 :

(2014) 1 SCC (Cri) 159] this Court has observed that:

(SCC p. 521, para 10) “10. … it is the duty of the courts to consider all the relevant
factors to impose an appropriate sentence. The legislature has bestowed upon the
judiciary this enormous discretion in the sentencing policy, which must be exercised
with utmost care and caution. The punishment awarded should be directly
proportionate to the nature and the magnitude of the offence. The benchmark of
proportionate sentencing can assist the Judges in arriving at a fair and impartial
verdict.” This Court further observed that: (Hazara Singh case [(2013) 9 SCC 516 :
(2014) 1 SCC (Cri) 159] , SCC p. 521, para 11) “11. The cardinal principle of sentencing
policy is that the sentence imposed on an offender should reflect the crime he has
committed and it should be proportionate to the gravity of the offence. This Court has
repeatedly stressed the central role of proportionality in sentencing of offenders in
numerous cases.”

11. In Shailesh Jasvantbhai v. State of Gujarat [(2006) 2 SCC 359 : (2006) 1 SCC (Cri) 499] the Apex
Court opined that: (SCC pp. 361-62, paras 7-8) “7. The law regulates social interests, arbitrates
conflicting claims and demands. Security of persons and property of the people is an essential
function of the State. It could be achieved through instrumentality of criminal law. Undoubtedly,
there is a cross-cultural conflict where living law must find answer to the new challenges and the
courts are required to mould the sentencing system to meet the challenges. The contagion of
lawlessness would undermine social order and lay it in ruins. Protection of society and stamping out
criminal proclivity must be the object of law which must be achieved by imposing appropriate
sentence. Therefore, law as a cornerstone of the edifice of ‘order’ should meet the challenges
confronting the society. Friedman in his Law in Changing Society stated that:

‘State of criminal law continues to be—as it should be —a decisive reflection of social
consciousness of society.’ Therefore, in operating the sentencing system, law should
adopt the corrective machinery or deterrence based on factual matrix. By deft
modulation, sentencing process be stern where it should be, and tempered with
mercy where it warrants to be. The facts and given circumstances in each case, the

6

The State Of Punjab vs Dil Bahadur on 28 March, 2023

nature of the crime, the manner in which it was planned and committed, the motive
for commission of the crime, the conduct of the accused, the nature of weapons used
and all other attending circumstances are relevant facts which would enter into the
area of consideration.

8. Therefore, undue sympathy to impose inadequate sentence would do more harm to
the justice system to undermine the public confidence in the efficacy of law and
society could not long endure under such serious threats. It is, therefore, the duty of
every court to award proper sentence having regard to the nature of the offence and
the manner in which it was executed or committed, etc.”

12. A three-Judge Bench of this Court in Ahmed Hussein Vali Mohammed Saiyed v.
State of Gujarat [(2009) 7 SCC 254 : (2009) 3 SCC (Cri) 368] observed as follows:
(SCC p. 281, paras 99-100) “99. … The object of awarding appropriate sentence
should be to protect the society and to deter the criminal from achieving the avowed
object to (sic break the) law by imposing appropriate sentence. It is expected that the
courts would operate the sentencing system so as to impose such sentence which
reflects the conscience of the society and the sentencing process has to be stern where
it should be. Any liberal attitude by imposing meagre sentences or taking too
sympathetic view merely on account of lapse of time in respect of such offences will
be resultwise counterproductive in the long run and against the interest of society
which needs to be cared for and strengthened by string of deterrence inbuilt in the
sentencing system.

100. Justice demands that courts should impose punishment befitting the crime so
that the courts reflect public abhorrence of the crime. The court must not only keep
in view the rights of the victim of the crime but the society at large while considering
the imposition of appropriate punishment. The court will be failing in its duty if
appropriate punishment is not awarded for a crime which has been committed not
only against the individual victim but also against the society to which both the
criminal and the victim belong.”

13. We again reiterate in this case that undue sympathy to impose inadequate
sentence would do more harm to the justice system to undermine the public
confidence in the efficacy of law. It is the duty of every court to award proper
sentence having regard to the nature of the offence and the manner in which it was
executed or committed. The sentencing courts are expected to consider all relevant
facts and circumstances bearing on the question of sentence and proceed to impose a
sentence commensurate with the gravity of the offence. The court must not only keep
in view the rights of the victim of the crime but also the society at large while
considering the imposition of appropriate punishment. Meagre sentence imposed
solely on account of lapse of time without considering the degree of the offence will
be counterproductive in the long run and against the interest of the society.

7

The State Of Punjab vs Dil Bahadur on 28 March, 2023

14. In a recent decision in State of M.P. v. Bablu [(2014) 9 SCC 281 : (2014) 6 SCC
(Cri) 1] , after considering and following the earlier decisions, this Court reiterated
the settled proposition of law that one of the prime objectives of criminal law is the
imposition of adequate, just, proportionate punishment which is commensurate with
the gravity, nature of crime and the manner in which the offence is committed. One
should keep in mind the social interest and conscience of the society while
considering the determinative factor of sentence with gravity of crime. The
punishment should not be so lenient that it shocks the conscience of the society. It is,
therefore, the solemn duty of the court to strike a proper balance while awarding the
sentence as awarding lesser sentence encourages any criminal and, as a result of the
same, the society suffers.

5.4 Applying the law laid down by this Court in the case of Surendra Singh (supra) to
the facts of the case on hand, the impugned judgment and order passed by the High
Court interfering with the sentence imposed by the learned Trial Court confirmed by
the First Appellate Court by showing undue sympathy to the accused is unsustainable
and the same deserves to be quashed and set aside.

6. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the present appeal succeeds.
The impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court reducing the sentence
while maintaining the conviction for the offence under Section 304A of IPC from two
years RI to eight months SI is hereby quashed and set aside. The sentence imposed
by the learned Trial Court confirmed by the First Appellate Court (learned Sessions
Court) is hereby restored. Now the accused be taken into custody to undergo the
remaining sentence. The accused is granted four weeks’ time to surrender. Present
appeal is accordingly, allowed.

………………………………….J. [M.R. SHAH] NEW DELHI; ………………………………….J. MARCH 28, 2023
[C.T. RAVIKUMAR]

8