Union Of India vs Cosmo Films Limited on 28 April, 2023

Union Of India vs Cosmo Films Limited on 28 April, 2023

Author: S. Ravindra Bhat

Bench: Dipankar Datta, S. Ravindra Bhat

1

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 290 OF 2023

UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                     ...APPELLANT(S)

VERSUS

COSMO FILMS LIMITED                                     ...RESPONDENT(S)

WITH

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 298 OF 2023

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 303 OF 2023

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 297 OF 2023

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 296 OF 2023

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 295 OF 2023

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 294 OF 2023

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 293 OF 2023

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 292 OF 2023

TRANSFER PETITION (CIVIL) NO(S). 1526 OF 2020
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
NEETA SAPRA
Date: 2023.04.28

1

Union Of India vs Cosmo Films Limited on 28 April, 2023

17:08:23 IST
Reason:
(cid:12)                                            2

JUDGMENT

S. RAVINDRA BHAT, J.

1. These appeals are directed against a judgment and order of the Gujarat High Court,1 wherein
mandatory fulfilment of a ‘pre-import condition’2 incorporated in the Foreign Trade Policy of
2015-2020 (“FTP”) and Handbook of Procedures 2015-2020 (“HBP”) by Notification No. 33 /
2015-20 and Notification No. 79 / 2015-Customs, both dated 13.10.2017, was set aside. According to
the High Court, such fulfilment in order to claim exemption of Integrated Goods and Services Tax
(“IGST”)3 and GST compensation cess4 on input imported into India for the production of goods to
be exported from India, on the strength of an advance authorization5 (“AA”) was arbitrary and
unreasonable.

I. Background

2. In terms of the Foreign Trade (Development & Regulation) Act, 1992 (“FTDRA”) the Central
Government (“Union”) had been framing, from time to time, Export-Import Policies (or FTPs) for
the development, regulation and control of imports and exports in the country. The Union
announced duty M/s Shri Jagdamba Polymers Ltd. & Ors. v Union of India & Ors., Special Civil
Application No. 19324 of 2018.

Paragraph 4.13 of FTP, read with the HBP.

Leviable under Section 3(7) of The Customs Tariff Act, 1975. Leviable under Section 3(9) of The
Customs Tariff Act, 1975. Paragraph 4.03 of FTP.

exemption schemes as well. One among these was the AA. To regulate and guide the procedure to be
followed for implementing the provisions of the FTP and the rules framed thereunder, the Director
General of Foreign Trade (“DGFT”) notified the HBP, chapter 4 of which prescribed the procedure
for availing duty exemption / remission schemes. By paragraph 4.27, exports in “anticipation of
authorisation” were permitted, so as not to create hindrances and delays in execution of export
orders. At the time, Notification No. 18 / 2015-Customs dated 1.04.2015 exempted payment of basic
customs duty (“BCD”), additional duty (countervailing duty (“CVD”), special additional duty
(“SAD”)), safeguard duty and anti-dumping duty on inputs imported against a valid AA.

3. The GST regime was introduced with effect from 01.07.2017. However, no amendment was made
to Notification No. 18 / 2015-Customs with respect to IGST and compensation cess, resulting in the
collection of these levies for the inputs imported into India against AAs.

4. On 13.10.2017, six existing notifications were amended. Notification No. 79 / 2017-Customs
amended Notification No. 18 / 2015-Customs by granting IGST and compensation cess exemption,

2

subject to the following two conditions:

Union Of India vs Cosmo Films Limited on 28 April, 2023

“Provided further that notwithstanding anything contained hereinabove for the said
authorisations where the exemption from integrated tax and the goods and services
tax compensation cess leviable thereon under sub-section (7) and sub-section (9) of
section 3 of the said Customs Tariff Act, has been availed, the export obligation shall
be fulfilled by physical exports only.”6 Proviso to clause (viii), as contained in
Notification No. 79 / 2017.

*** “That the exemption from integrated tax and the goods and services tax
compensation cess leviable thereon under sub-section (7) and sub- section (9) of
section 3 of the said Customs Tariff Act shall be subject to pre-import condition”7
(emphasis supplied) At the same time, Notification No. 33 / 2015-2020 was issued,
amending various provisions of the FTP, whereby this ‘pre-import condition’ was
incorporated in paragraph 4.14 thereof with effect from 13.10.2017. The writ
petitioners before the High Court / respondents herein claimed that they were
unaware about this condition, and continued exports in anticipation of grant of AA,
and consequently expected exemption from all custom duty levies, including IGST
and compensation cess.

5. The Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (“DRI”) Kolkata noticed the above
amendments and thereupon, initiated investigation and issued summons to various
manufacturers located across the country importing goods against AAs.

The respondents were of the view that the scope of ‘pre-import condition’ was unclear, whereas the
DRI officers conducting the inquiry and investigation, however, were of the view that ‘pre-import
condition’ meant that goods had to be imported first, and then the final products manufactured with
such imported goods were to be exported. When it was established that goods imported against a
particular AA were used in relation to manufacture of finished goods exported Addition of clause
(xii), as contained in Notification No. 79 / 2017. for fulfilment of export obligation of that particular
authorisation, the ‘pre-import condition’ stood satisfied.

6. In view of this development, the exemption granted by Notification No. 18 / 2015-Customs was
inadmissible where manufacturer-exporters, who undertook manufacturing and export of goods in a
continuous cycle, could not prove the above. Exemption was also not admissible when goods
manufactured were exported in anticipation of licence / authorisation, since they were exports made
first, with duty-free import against the authorisation having been undertaken later. Consequently,
the manufacturer-exporters aggrieved by this interpretation approached the High Court.

II. Arguments of the Revenue before the High Court

7. The Revenue contended that exemption from paying duty was not a matter of right, and was
granted by the State keeping in mind general public interest. The criterion for determination of
legality of any notification was always whether the authority acted within its jurisdiction while

3

Union Of India vs Cosmo Films Limited on 28 April, 2023

issuing such notification or not, and not if the Union benefitted from the same. The Revenue
contended that exporters were free to export first and import at a later stage in terms of paragraphs
4.27 and 4.28 of the HBP. Those provisions however did not offer absolute freedom to the importers
to regulate their imports and exports without complying with other conditions imposed in the policy
and the relevant customs notification. The provisions were an exception, to keep the option open for
willing exporters, subject to the condition that it would be availed at their risk. Further, exercising
the option was available only when either of the ‘pre-import conditions’ was not fixed in the SION8,
or exporters were willing to first fulfil their export obligation. As the process of fixing norms was
time consuming, the provisions granted an opportunity to importers to export in advance, at the risk
of not being considered towards discharge of export obligation.

8. The Revenue submitted that before the introduction of the GST regime, imports allowed under
AAs were exempt from payment of many duties.9 Thereafter, CVD and SAD were subsumed in
IGST. Under Section 3 of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, IGST was made payable at specified rates
upon imports. However, a major change that was brought into the policy was to not allow exemption
from payment of IGST directly at the time of import under AA. Such exemption was allowed
indirectly by allowing refund of IGST paid at the time of imports under AA within a specified time.
The importers, therefore, started paying IGST on goods imported under AA with effect from
1.7.2017, and were getting outright exemption from BCD, ADD, safeguard duty, etc., and IGST paid
was refunded. The legislative intent was clear in imposing IGST on all imports made under AAs, on
or after 1.7.2017, without differentiating between the status of such authorisations, whether or not it
was issued prior to or after Standard Input Output Norms, which are standard norms which define
the number of input/inputs required to manufacture units of output for export purposes. They are
applicable differently for different products.

Supra, para 2.

introduction of GST. It was a policy decision, which could have been reversed or altered only by the
GST Council. The Revenue also pointed out that due to problems in Goods and Service Tax Network
(GSTN)10, the committed refund of IGST was getting delayed. This resulted in blocking of working
capital for many business houses. To obviate this problem, the GST Council allowed exemption from
IGST when imported under AAs. The Directorate General of Foreign Trade (“DGFT”) accordingly,
issued Notification No. 33/2015-20 dated 13.10.2017 which was backed by Customs Notification No.
79/2017 dated 13.10.2017, issued by the Department of Revenue, amending the Notification No. 18 /
2015- Customs, dated 1.4.2015. The Revenue further urged that exemption from the IGST leviable
under Section 3 (7) was available and subject to two specific conditions. The conditions were (i)
export obligation was to be fulfilled through physical exports only; and (ii) the exemption was
subject to ‘pre-import condition’, which implied that only after the import of the goods commenced,
were they required to be used for manufacture of export goods, which were ultimately exported.

9. According to the Revenue, a cut-off date could have been declared, and only AAs issued after
13.10.2017 could have been declared eligible for such benefits, but the same was not done. It was
kept open-ended to extend benefit to Which provides shared IT infrastructure and service to both
central and state governments including taxpayers and other stakeholders. The registration front

4

end services, returns, and payments to all taxpayers were provided by GSTN.

Union Of India vs Cosmo Films Limited on 28 April, 2023

the importers, who followed those two conditions, even in respect of the AAs issued to them earlier.
A cut-off date would have made exporters ineligible for the benefit. Therefore, policy makers, in
their own wisdom, kept the door open for the eligible importers, to enjoy the benefit, irrespective of
the date / period of issuance of AA, subject to compliance with the conditions imposed.

10. The Revenue further stated that paragraph 4.13 of the FTP had been in existence under different
paragraphs in different policy periods for years. Since 2003, all drug companies had been importing
their raw materials sourced from unregistered sources, under the ‘pre-import condition’. Silk in any
form, raw sugars, natural rubbers, tea, spices and precious metals etc., were allowed to be imported
under ‘pre-import condition’ only. The ‘pre-import condition’ was in- built within the AA scheme
itself under paragraph 4.03 of the policy.

11. Additionally, the AA scheme was not a replenishment scheme. Were it so, the DGFT would not
have launched other schemes like ‘Duty-Free Incentive Scheme’, which allowed exports prior to
import, and transferable licences under the FTP. To prevent cash blockage of exporters due to
upfront payment of IGST and compensation cess on imports of inputs, the exemption from their
payment was granted, subject to ‘pre-import condition’. In case of replenishment imports after
exports, the issue of cash blockage did not arise. Since exports had already taken place and GST
legislation provided for complete zero-rating, extending IGST exemption on replenishment imports
would imply double benefit to the authorisation holder. Therefore, the AA holders were not
adversely affected and not prejudiced by the impugned notifications. The IGST paid on
replenishment material could be availed as input tax credit for payment of GST.

III. Findings of the High Court

12. The High Court, after considering the notifications and taking into account the exporters’
submissions, held that paragraph 4.27 of the FTP envisaged exports in anticipation of authorisation,
in terms of the cycle of import-manufacture- export carried out, including delivery time of 3-4
months allowed normally by overseas buyers, within minimum six months’ time for completion of
the cycle. The court considered this to be an unfeasible condition:

“Considering the above interpretation of the condition of physical export and
pre-import put forth by the DRI, it is more or less impossible to make any exports
under an Advance Authorisation without violating the condition of pre-import. In
effect and substance, what is given by one hand is taken away by the other. In other
words, in the light of the condition of pre-import, the benefit of exemption from levy
of integrated tax and GST compensation cess becomes more or less illusory.”11

13. It was noted that while the ‘pre-import condition’ was levied on duties collected under Sections 3
(7) and (9) of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, in respect of the levies under Sections 3 (1), (3) and (5)
no ‘pre-import condition’ was imposed. The result was that if the importer wanted benefit of
exemption from the levy of integrated tax and compensation cess, the fact that other levies were not

5

subject to ‘pre-import condition’ was immaterial because the same inputs Supra note 1, para 27.

Union Of India vs Cosmo Films Limited on 28 April, 2023

were subject to it. This resulted in inputs being subject to ‘pre-import condition’ in respect of all the
levies. The High Court then took note of the objects of the FTDRA and the FTP, and the subsequent
Notification No. 01/2019-Cus dated 10- 01-2019, whereby condition (xii) was omitted. The court
held that the Union found it to be in public interest not to continue with the ‘pre-import condition’,
for availing exemption from IGST and compensation cess leviable on material imported against an
AA. This, according to the impugned judgment, vindicated the exporter/respondents’ stand. It was
held accordingly that:

“The condition of pre-import militates against the Advance Authorisation Scheme
and therefore, the impugned condition (xii) in Notification No. 18/2015-Cus dated 1st
April, 2015 introduced vide Notification No. 79/2017 : MANU/CUST/0095/2017
dated 13th October, 2017 as well as the amendment in paragraph 4.14 of the Foreign
Trade Policy made vide Notification No. 33/2015-2020 dated 13th October, 2017, to
the extent the same imposes a "pre-import condition" in case of imports under
Advance Authorisation for physical export for exemption from the whole of the
integrated tax and GST compensation cess leviable under sub-section (7) and
sub-section (9) respectively, of section 3 of the Customs Tariff Act, do not meet with
the test of reasonableness and are also not in consonance with the scheme of Advance
Authorisation”.12

14. The court also concluded that though paragraph 4.27 of HBP clearly permitted exports in
anticipation of authorisation by endorsing the file number or authorisation number to establish
co-relation of export/supplies with authorisation issued, the Revenue wished to treat such
permissible imports made in anticipation of authorisation as replenishment. This was despite the
fact that for the purpose of exemption from the other levies imposed under Sections 3(1),  Supra
note 1.

3(3) and 3(5) of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 for decades the procedure was permitted, and
continued to be permitted, (for the purpose of exemption from levy of IGST and compensation cess),
yet, such imports were “suddenly” treated as “replenishment imports” which was held to be
“incomprehensible”.13 The court held that that the impugned exemption notification and paragraph
4.14 of the FTP, to the extent they were impugned did not meet with the test of reasonableness and
were held to be ultra vires the scheme of the FTP.

IV. The Union’s Contentions before this Court

15. Mr. N. Venkatraman, learned Additional Solicitor General (“ASG”) appearing for the Union,
urged that the essence of the AA was that the exporters were expected to import duty-free materials
first, and use them for the purpose of manufacture of products to be exported out of India or be
supplied under deemed export, if allowed by the FTP or the customs notifications. This aspect of
physical incorporation of input materials in the export goods was covered under paragraph 4.03 of
the FTP, which specifically demanded physical incorporation of imported materials in export goods

6

Union Of India vs Cosmo Films Limited on 28 April, 2023

which was possible only if imports were made prior to export. Therefore, such authorizations
principally had an inbuilt ‘pre-import condition’ which had to be followed. Paragraph 4.27 of the
HBP for the relevant period allowed exports / supplies in anticipation of an authorization. This was
an exception, to meet requirement in case of exigencies. However, importers and Supra note 1.

exporters were availing the benefit of that provision without exception and the export goods were
made out of domestically or otherwise procured materials and duty-free imported goods were used
for purposes other than for the manufacture of the export goods. Paragraph 4.27 (d) of the HBP
barred benefit of export in anticipation of authorization for the inputs with ‘pre-import condition’.
The ASG contested the exporters’ argument that there was no change in paragraph 4.27 of HBP and
that it merely imposed conditions in terms of paragraph 4.14 of the FTP by way of ‘pre-import
condition’.

16. It was stated that under paragraph 4.27(d), exports / supplies made in anticipation of
authorisation were not eligible for inputs with ‘pre-import condition’. That meant that the moment
input materials were subject to ‘pre- import condition’, they were ineligible for export in anticipation
of authorization, by virtue of paragraph 4.27 (d). Therefore, the respondent pleaded based on wrong
notion and understanding and knowledge of the relevant provisions, and the High Court
erroneously relied upon such an incorrect submission.

17. It was argued that paragraph 4.27 (a) & (b), i.e., export in anticipation of authorization and the
‘pre-import condition’ on the input materials were mutually exclusive and could not go hand in
hand. The impugned order did not take into consideration this aspect of paragraph 4.27(d).
Therefore, holding ‘pre-import condition’ as unreasonable as the same was in contrast with
paragraph 4.27 (a) and also that the Government did not take enough care to eradicate such
apparent paradox, was based on the wrong set of facts, and was contrary to the provisions of the law.

18. It was argued that the High Court erred in setting aside paragraph 4.14 of the FTP and the
corresponding provisions of the customs notifications, that imposed ‘pre-import’ and ‘physical
export’ conditions, and held that the contention of physical incorporation of the duty-free materials
under paragraph 4.03 of the FTP was contrary to paragraph 4.27 of the HBP which specifically
allowed imports in anticipation of authorization. The observation of the court was without merit.
The court erroneously granted primacy to paragraph 4.27 of the HBP over paragraph 4.03 of the
FTP, when infact the FTP had pre-eminence over the HBP for laying down the procedures to be
followed by an exporter or importer in terms of paragraph 1.03 of the FTP. Therefore, provision of
the HBP could not override the FTP in case of a conflict. It was argued that paragraph 4.27(d)
limited and confined the scope of paragraph 4.27(a). The moment paragraph 4.27(d) came into
picture, paragraph 4.27(a) became inoperative.

19. It was also urged that there was no conflict between paragraph 4.03 of the FTP and that of
4.27(a) of the HBP. The scope and field of operation of individual paragraphs were completely
different. Paragraph 4.03(a) of the FTP provided that:

7

Union Of India vs Cosmo Films Limited on 28 April, 2023

“(a) Advance Authorisation is issued to allow duty free import of input, which is
physically incorporated in export product (making normal allowance for wastage). In
addition, fuel, oil, catalyst which is consumed / utilized in the process of production
of export product, may also be allowed.”14

20. The object and spirit of the AA scheme to allow duty free import of input, which was to be
physically incorporated in export product, was clear. The relevant customs notifications too,
referred to paragraph 4.03, which provided that the AA was issued in terms of its provision for
extending exemption. The provision of physical incorporation of the inputs in the export goods, was
necessary for the purpose of the scheme, for two reasons. One, that input materials actually
imported were to be physically incorporated in the export goods and two, that the goods physically
incorporated in the export goods only could be imported as input. As far as the first situation was
concerned, there was no question of replenishment, because the inputs imported became part of the
exports. Such goods were to be imported prior to the commencement of export to enable the
importer to manufacture finished goods from them. Therefore, for one had to follow the ‘pre-import
condition’ and at the same time they could not avail the benefit of export in anticipation of
authorization. In the second situation however, the importer could use materials procured
otherwise, instead of duty-free materials to manufacture export goods, but the nature of materials
(so procured) had to be identical in all respects with the input materials to be imported. In other
words, materials which were to be used in export goods could only be allowed for import. In this
case, there was no need to follow the ‘pre-import condition’ -

Paragraph 4.03(a) of the FTP.

the importer could avail the benefit of export in anticipation of authorization. The Revenue
contended that therefore paragraph 4.03 of FTP was not in conflict with paragraph 4.27 of the HBP.
In the absence of 4.27(d), these two provisions were considered as complementary rather than in
conflict. By inserting 4.27 (d), the intent was clarified that the importer had to follow the provision
of paragraph 4.03 of the FTP.

21. It was urged that the High Court erred in holding that ‘pre-import condition’ had to be in respect
of inputs, mentioned in paragraph 4.13 of the FTP, which was not so in the present case. The court’s
insistence that pre-import goods were to be specifically mentioned under paragraph 4.13 of the FTP,
it was submitted, was misplaced. The Revenue pointed out that paragraph 4.13 (1) itself left the issue
of which inputs was to be subjected to ‘pre import condition’ open to the DGFT to notify:15 "DGFT
may, by Notification, impose pre-import condition for inputs under this Chapter."

The provision clearly left open, the scope of imposing ‘pre-import condition’ on any goods which
could have been covered by the said Chapter 4 of the Policy. Therefore, imposing, such condition
across the board for all goods imported under AA was well within the competence and authority of
the policy makers. It was argued that the High Court failed to notice that DGFT was duly
empowered to issue Notification No.33/2015-20 dated 13.10.2017. This notification was Paragraph
4.13(1) of FTP.

8

Union Of India vs Cosmo Films Limited on 28 April, 2023

general in nature and did not exclude any goods from its purview. The only condition was that
wherever the importer wanted to avail the benefit of IGST and compensation cess exemption, the
‘pre-import condition’ had to be satisfied. In absence of any negative list containing specific mention
of a set of goods, which were not to be covered by the said provision, all goods were covered by the
said notification and subject to a uniform condition. It was also urged that it was neither practicable
nor possible to specify each conceivable item for that purpose. In absence of any negative list in the
notification, such ‘pre-import condition’ was applicable for all goods to be imported.

22. The ASG urged that the High Court erred in construing the purpose of Appendix 4J- issued in
tandem with paragraph 4.22 of the FTP during the material period (under paragraph 4.42 of the
HBP), which stated the export obligation period with respect to various goods that were allowed to
be imported. Paragraph 4.22 was a general provision, specifying 18 months as the export obligation
period in general. It also provided that such a period was different for a set of goods mentioned in
Appendix-4J. Therefore, Appendix-4J was a part of paragraph 4.22 and not a part of paragraph
4.13. Further, Appendix-4J was a negative list for the purpose of paragraph 4.22, which specified a
set of goods for which export obligation period was different from the general provision. In addition,
in respect of those items additionally the ‘pre-import condition’ was applicable. The heading of
Appendix-4J ("Export Obligation Period for Specified Inputs") clearly referred to paragraph 4.22 of
the FTP and paragraph 4.42 of the HBP. It was clear that its purpose was to define export obligation
period of specified goods. It was submitted that merely because Appendix-4J provided for
compliance of ‘pre-import condition’, that did not mean that it became the list meant for only goods
on which the ‘pre-import condition’ was applicable.

23. It was argued that there was no conflict between paragraph 4.14 of the HBP and paragraph 4.13
of the FTP because paragraph 4.14 imposed ‘pre-import condition’ even in case of inputs not falling
within the ambit of paragraph 4.13. This conclusion was drawn based on an erroneous
understanding that only limited items covered under Appendix-4J were covered by paragraph 4.13.
All articles intended to be imported under AA, availing exemption from payment of IGST, were
covered by the Notification No. 33 / 2015-20 dated 13.10.2017, issued in terms of paragraph 4.13 of
the FTP. By virtue of the said notification, the moment any manufacturer decided to import any
item under AA availing IGST benefit, the ‘pre-import’ requirement, as enumerated under paragraph
4.14, was attracted. The notification acted as a bridge between paragraph 4.13 and 4.14 of the FTP.
They were in harmony with the spirit of the FTP.

24. The learned ASG urged that the notifications interpreted by the High Court amended the
conditions for granting exemption from the levy of certain taxes. The respondent exporters had not
challenged the power to impose the levies; their only argument was that the ‘pre-import’ condition,
which was introduced for the first time in the notification, was burdensome. They also contend that
these conditions were contradictory and made business cumbersome. The ASG submitted that once
the power to levy was undisputed, the conditions under which such levies were imposed, and the
manner in which they were collected, were within the domain of the legislature or Parliament.
Unless it was shown that the statute imposed a method of collection that was capricious, or
arbitrary, the courts ought not to interfere with the levy. Similarly, a levy could fail if there was no
mechanism for assessment and collection. Reliance was placed on the decisions reported as

9

Union Of India vs Cosmo Films Limited on 28 April, 2023

Khandige Sham Bhat v Agricultural Income Tax Officer16; Assistant Commissioner of Urban Land
Tax v Buckingham & Carnatic Co Ltd.17; R.K. Garg v Union of India18; Union of India v VKC
Footsteps India (P) Ltd19. It was submitted that the courts ought to be circumspect while
interpreting any fiscal legislation, and not hold either the provisions or terms of exemptions, or
conditions imposed by the law, or through delegated legislation, as unreasonable, or arbitrary. The
learned ASG urged that being a new legislation, the Union had to take into account divergent views
and norms, and refashioning of the entire indirect tax spectrum was called for.

25. It was lastly urged that the introduction of Notification No. 01/2019-Cus dated 10-01-2019 by
the Union, whereby, condition (xii) requiring the ‘pre- import condition’, was omitted, could not be
a ground to say that for the period such a condition existed, it could be disregarded. It was argued
that the said latter 1963 (3) SCR 809.

1970 (1) SCR 268.

1981 (1) SCR 947.

2022 (2) SCC 603.

notification could not by a process of judicial reasoning, be given retrospective effect to, as even the
substantive provisions of FTDRA did not permit subordinate retrospective legislation.

V. Contentions of the Respondent-Exporters

26. Ms. Meenakshi Arora, learned senior counsel, argued that an AA under the FTP could be issued
either to a manufacturer-exporter or a merchant exporter tied with a supporting manufacturer with
past export performance (in at least the preceding two financial years). The entitlement in terms of
CIF value of imports provided was up to 300% of the FOB value of the physical export and / or FOB
value of deemed export in preceding financial year or (cid:132) 1 crore, whichever was higher. On fulfilment
of the conditions prescribed under paragraph 4.03 of the FTP, respondents were issued AA licenses.

27. Upon notification of the levy IGST, the benefits of upfront exemption granted to exporters
through AA in the erstwhile FTP regime were rescinded through the amendment introduced in the
scheme by Notification No. 26 / 2017-Customs dated 29 June 2017 (“Amending GST Notification”).

28. It was submitted that the AA scheme was operating without hitch or misuse, from its inception
since 1986, without any ‘pre-import condition’. It had been successfully operating even from
10.01.2019 onwards when the Central Government deleted the ‘pre-import condition’ in public
interest. Thus, there was no rationale or justification in imposing the ‘pre-import condition’ only for
a limited period from 13.10.2017 to 09.01.2019 to a scheme operating successfully without any such
condition.

29. It was urged that the ‘pre-import condition’ was made applicable for such limited period only for
exemption from IGST and compensation cess, whereas other import duties, namely, BCD, ADD,

10

Union Of India vs Cosmo Films Limited on 28 April, 2023

Safeguard Duty etc. were exempt even during this period of about 13 months without the
‘pre-import condition’.

30. It was submitted that no reason or justification was provided for subjecting IGST and
compensation cess to this ‘pre-import condition’, and not applying this condition for other types of
import duties. If ‘pre-import condition’ was applicable for AA, then the whole scheme would be
nullified because it was impossible for any manufacturer-importer to satisfy the ‘pre-import
condition’ when the export orders were to be executed by supplying the final products within a short
period of 4 weeks to 8 weeks after receiving the purchase orders from overseas customers. In a
typical case, the manufacturer- exporter could export goods only after more than six months from
receiving the purchase orders, if the ‘pre-import condition’ was to be satisfied. Consequently, the
delivery schedule of about 4 to 8 weeks from receiving purchase orders could not have been fulfilled.
It was additionally argued that all imports under an authorization were subject to "actual user
condition". Therefore, manufacturer exporters were not allowed to sell or dispose of input raw
materials imported free of duties against any authorization. Regular exporters conducted their
business in a cycle, i.e., by importing input-raw materials free of duties against several
authorizations granted to them, and utilizing such goods for manufacturing final products for export
with reference to those several authorizations. Consequently, there could be no ‘one to one’
correlation between import of a consignment of inputs against one particular authorization and
utilization of such inputs for manufacturing final products for export against those particular
authorizations only – such a scenario was not possible for regular manufacturer-exporters. On
realizing that the ‘pre-import condition’ did not serve any purpose, the Union deleted the condition
on 10.01.2019, which vindicated the exporters’ stand that the condition was irrelevant to the
scheme, and that condition had no nexus with the objectives of the AA scheme.

31. It was submitted that the ‘pre-import condition’ violated Article 14, which permitted reasonable
classification to achieve specific ends. The respondents relied on Laxmi Khandsari vs. State of Uttar
Pradesh20; State of Haryana v Jai Singh21; Welfare Association ARP v Ranjit P. Gohil22; and urged
that for classification to be reasonable, it should fulfil the two tests. One, it should not be arbitrary,
artificial or evasive, and should be based on intelligible differentia, some real and substantial
distinction, which distinguished persons or things grouped together in the class from others left out
of it. Two, the differentia 1981(3) SCR 92.

2003 (9) SCC 114.

2003 (9) SCC 358.

adopted as the basis of classification must have a rationale or reasonable nexus with the object
sought to be achieved by the statute in question.

32. Counsel argued that the High Court concluded, correctly, that the introduction of the
‘pre-import condition’ was an instance of class legislation. The Union meted out differential
treatment to the same class of license holders by enabling only certain class of license holders to
avail the IGST benefit. This was because those who fulfilled the export obligation before importing

11

the goods were denied the opportunity to avail the benefit of IGST exemption.

Union Of India vs Cosmo Films Limited on 28 April, 2023

33. The imposition of ‘pre-import condition’ on AAs issued prior to 13.10.2017 placed the
exporter-respondents in the shoes of any importer who did not hold any license. The respondents
had imported the goods after fulfilling the corresponding export obligation. It was impossible to
fulfil the ‘pre-import condition’ mandated for old AAs through a retrospective application of an
amendment in the impugned notifications, even though the respondents could demonstrate that all
imported goods were subsequently used for manufacturing export products.

34. Learned counsel for the respondents highlighted that there was no reason for differential
treatment of BCD and IGST under the AA scheme. When the levy of IGST on imported goods was
treated like the levy of BCD, there was no reason why the unconditional exemption of BCD granted
to license holders under the scheme could not be extended to the IGST exemption available for
goods imported under the same scheme. This differential treatment meted out to the IGST benefit
when compared to the BCD exemption under the original Notification No. 18 / 2015-Customs was
not justified and failed the test of reasonable classification under Article 14 of the Constitution.
There was no intelligible differentia between the two in denying the benefit for IGST while granting
exemption for BCD. There was also no rationale behind the classification IGST and BCD for
exemption, at par with the objectives under the scheme.

35. Learned counsel for the respondents relied on Union of India (UOI) and Ors. vs. N.S. Rathnam
& Sons23 which held that grant of different exemption based on unintelligible differentia between
two categories of assesses for payment of customs duty was discriminatory and unreasonable.
Learned counsel also cited MRF Ltd., Kottayam v. Asst. Commissioner (Assessment) Sales Tax &
Ors.24 to submit that imposing the ‘pre-import’ stipulation in respect of two levies was arbitrary and
unreasonable.

36. Reliance was also placed upon the decision of this court in the case of Vasu Dev Singh v. Union
of India25, for the proposition that the nature of delegated legislation could be broadly classified as
rule- making power and grant of exemption from the operation of a statute. In the latter category,
the scope of judicial review would be wider as the statutory authority while exercising its statutory
power must show that the same had not only been done within the 2015 (8) SCR 751.

2006 Supp (6) SCR417.

2006 Supp (9) SCR 565.

four corners thereof but otherwise fulfilled the criteria laid down by this court in P. J. Irani v. State
of Madras26. The court held that if by a notification, the Act was effaced, it was liable to be struck
down.

37. It was submitted that the entire AA scheme was effaced by virtue of the ‘pre-import condition’
and therefore, such condition was required to be struck down. Reliance was placed upon Laxmi
Khandsari (supra), where the court held that in imposing restrictions, the State ought to adopt an

12

Union Of India vs Cosmo Films Limited on 28 April, 2023

objective standard amounting to social control by restricting the rights of the citizens ·where the
necessities of the situation demand. When the validity of a law placing restrictions upon the exercise
of fundamental rights in Article 19(1)(g) is challenged, the onus of proving to the satisfaction of the
court that the restriction is reasonable lies upon the State. It was submitted that this is not a case of
first- time exemption. As the Union sought to place restrictions, it had to show that the conditions
were remedial and necessary. It was hence contended that as there was no rationale behind
introducing the ‘pre-import condition’ (which had no nexus with the object sought to be achieved by
the AA scheme), it violated Article 19(1)

(g) of the Constitution, and was accordingly set aside.

VI. Analysis and Findings

38. The AA scheme is a duty exemption scheme introduced by the Union, under the FTP. Under the
scheme, exemption from the payment of import duties 1962 (2) SCR 169 is given to raw materials /
inputs required for the manufacture of export products i.e., one can import raw materials or inputs
at zero customs duty for production of export products. The purpose of this scheme is to ensure
competitiveness of India’s products in the global market. When duties paid on raw materials are
saved, it reduces the cost of the final export product. In terms of the scheme, the exporter can
import raw materials duty-free.27 These inputs either can be in a raw / natural / unrefined /
unmanufactured or manufactured state. Advance Licenses are issued to allow duty-free import of
inputs, which are then physically incorporated in export goods (after making normal allowance for
wastage). In addition to this, fuel, oil, the catalyst which is consumed / utilized in the process of
production of export product, may also be allowed. Imports under an AA were exempted from the
payment of Basic Customs Duty (BCD), Additional Customs Duty, Education Cess, Anti-dumping
Duty, Countervailing Duty (CVD), Safeguard Duty, and Transition Product Specific Safeguard Duty,
wherever applicable.

39. The principal challenge before the High Court, was to the ‘pre-import condition’ in paragraph
4.14 of FTP inserted by Notification No. 33/2015-2020 dated 13.10.2017 and the ‘pre-import
condition’ introduced by clause (xii) in Notification No. 18/2015-Cus dated 01.04.2015 by
Notification 79/2017- Customs dated 13.10.2017.

As per Chapter 9 of FTP paragraph 9.44, “Raw material” is input(s) required for manufacturing of
goods.

40. Chapter IV of the FTP provides for "Duty Exemption/Remission Schemes". One of the duty
exemption schemes is the AA. Paragraph 4.03 of the policy makes provision for AA and reads thus:

"4.03 Advance Authorisation

(a) Advance Authorisation is issued to allow duty free import of input, which is
physically incorporated in export product (making normal allowance for wastage). In
addition, fuel, oil, catalyst which is consumed/utilized in the process of production of

13

Union Of India vs Cosmo Films Limited on 28 April, 2023

export product, may also be allowed.

(b) Advance Authorisation is issued for inputs in relation to resultant product, on the
following basis:

(i) As per Standard Input Output Norms (SION) notified (available in Hand Book of
Procedures);

OR

(ii) On the basis of self declaration as per paragraph 4.07 of Handbook of
Procedures."28

41. The other relevant provisions of the FTP for purposes of this case, are paragraphs 4.13, 4.14 and
4.16, which, as they stood at the relevant time when FTP 2015-2020 was introduced, read as follows:

"4.13 "pre-import condition" in certain cases

(i) DGFT may, by Notification, impose "pre-import condition" for inputs under this
Chapter.

(ii) Import items subject to "pre-import condition" are listed in Appendix 4-J or will
be as indicated in Standard Input Output Norms (SION).

(iii) Import of drugs from unregistered sources shall have pre-import condition."

4.14 Details of Duties exempted Imports under Advance Authorisation are exempted from payment
of Basic Customs Duty, Additional Customs Duty, Education Cess, Anti- dumping Duty,
Countervailing Duty, Safeguard Duty, Transition Product Specific Safeguard Duty, wherever
applicable. Import against supplies covered under paragraph 7.02 (c), (d) and (g) of FTP will not be
exempted from payment of applicable Anti-dumping Duty, Countervailing Duty, Safeguard Duty
and Transition Product Specific Safeguard Duty, if any.

************** Paragraph 4.03 of the FTP.

4.16 Actual User Condition for Advance Authorisation

(i) Advance Authorisation and/or material imported under Advance Authorisation shall be subject
to 'Actual User' condition. The same shall not be transferable even after completion of export
obligation. However, Authorisation holder will have option to dispose of product manufactured out
of duty free input once export obligation is completed.

(ii) In case where CENVAT/input tax credit facility on input has been availed for the exported goods,
even after completion of export obligation, the goods imported against such Advance Authorisation

14

Union Of India vs Cosmo Films Limited on 28 April, 2023

shall be utilized only in the manufacture of dutiable goods whether within the same factory or
outside (by a supporting manufacturer). For this, the Authorisation holder shall produce a
certificate from either the jurisdictional Customs Authority or Chartered Accountant, at the option
of the exporter, at the time of filing application for Export Obligation Discharge Certificate to
Regional Authority concerned.

(iii) Waste/Scrap arising out of manufacturing process, as allowed, can be disposed off on payment
of applicable duty even before fulfillment of export obligation."

42. Exercising powers conferred under paragraph 1.03 of FTP, the DGFT notified the HBP by a
Public Notice dated 01.04.2015. Paragraph 4.27 (a) provides for "Exports in Anticipation of
Authorisation" which is extracted below:

"4.27 Exports in Anticipation of Authorisation Exports/supplies made from the date
of EDI generated file number for an Advance Authorisation, may be accepted towards
discharge of EO. Shipping/Supply document(s) should be endorsed with File Number
or Authorisation Number to establish co-relation of exports/supplies with
Authorisation issued.

(b) If application is approved, authorisation shall be issued based on input / output
norms in force on the date of receipt of application by Regional Authority. If in the
intervening period (i.e from date of filing of application and date of issue of
authorisation) the norms get changed, the authorization will be issued in proportion
to provisional exports / supplies already made till any amendment in norms is
notified.

For remaining exports, Policy / Procedures in force on date of issue of authorisation shall be
applicable.

(c) The export of SCOMET items shall not be permitted against an Authorisation until and unless
the requisite SCOMET Authorisation is obtained by the applicant.”

43. The provision permitted exports in anticipation of authorisation and permits exports towards
discharge of export obligation on the basis of the file number even prior to the grant of AAs. The
High Court held that this condition had not been modified and export in anticipation of
authorisation was permitted.

44. By the Notification No. 18/2015-Cus dated 01.04.2015, issued in exercise of powers under
Section 25 (1) of the Customs Act, 1962, goods imported into India against valid AAs were exempted
from the whole of the duty of customs leviable thereon which was specified in the First Schedule to
the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 and from the whole of the additional duty, safeguard duty, transitional
product specific safeguard duty and anti-dumping duty leviable thereon, respectively, under
Sections 3, 8B, 8C and 9A of the Act. The GST regime came into force with effect from 01-07-2017.
However, no corresponding amendment was carried out to this notification but Section 3 of the

15

Union Of India vs Cosmo Films Limited on 28 April, 2023

Customs Tariff Act, 1975 was amended by substituting Sections 3 (7) and (9), whereby levy of
integrated tax [under Section 5 of the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 and levy of
Goods and Service Tax compensation cess leviable under Section 8 of the GST Act (Compensation to
States) Cess Act, 2017] was incorporated:

"(7) Any article which is imported into India shall, in addition, be liable to integrated
tax at such rate, not exceeding 40% as is leviable under section 5 of the Integrated
Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 on a like article on its supply in India, on the value
of the imported article as determined under sub-section (8).

********* **************** (9) Any article which is imported into India shall, in
addition, be liable to the Goods and Services Tax compensation cess at such rate, as is
leviable under section 8 of the Goods and Services Tax (Compensation to States) Cess
Act, 2017 on a like article on its supply in India, on the value of the imported article
as determined under sub-section (10)."

45. Section 3 of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 as amended after the coming into force of the GST
regime, provided for levy of the following additional duties:

(1) levy of a duty (referred to as additional duty) equal to the excise duty for the time
being leviable on a like article if produced or manufactured in India [Section 3 (1)
CTA];

(2) levy of such additional duty as would counter-balance the excise duty leviable on
any raw materials, components, and ingredients of the same nature as, or similar to
those, used in the production or manufacture of such article [Section 3 (3) CTA];

(3) levy of additional duty as would counter-balance the sales tax, value added tax,
local tax or any other charges for the time being leviable on a like article on its sale,
purchase or transportation in India [SAD, under Section 3 (5) CTA];

(4) levy of integrated tax as leviable under section 5 of the Integrated Goods and
Services Tax Act, 2017; [under Section 3 (7) CTA] and; (5) levy of GST compensation
cess at such rate as is leviable under section 8 of the Goods and Services Tax
(Compensation to States) Cess Act, 2017 [SAD, under Section 3 (9) CTA].

46. As there was no corresponding notification exempting the additional duties leviable under
Sections 3 (7) and (9) CTA, exporters had to pay IGST and compensation cess and seek input tax
credit as applicable under the GST Rules. Import under AA, however, continued to be exempt from
payment of basic customs duty and additional customs duty specified in subsections (1), (3) and (5)
of section 3 of the CTA, education cess, anti-dumping duty, safeguard duty and transition product
specific safeguard duty, wherever applicable.

16

Union Of India vs Cosmo Films Limited on 28 April, 2023

47. Since IGST and compensation cess was levied against AAs, they were apparently challenged
before the Delhi High Court in several petitions, wherein interim relief was granted. Because of the
initial problems relating to GST, the committed refund of IGST got delayed, resulting in blocking of
working capital for many businesses. The Union then issued an amending notification dated 13-
10-2017 in exercise of powers under Section 25 (1) of the Customs Act, 1962 (Notification 79/2017 -
dated 13.10.2017) inter alia amending the opening paragraph of Notification 18 / 2015 (dated
1.4.2015) whereby goods imported into India were exempted from the whole of the duty of customs
leviable thereon, specified in the First Schedule to the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 and from the whole
of the additional duty leviable thereon under sub-sections (1), (3) and (5) of Section 3, IGST leviable
thereon under sub-section (7) of section 3 and compensation cess leviable under sub-section (9) of
section 3. The amending notification also introduced a proviso in condition (viii), after the proviso
which reads thus:

"Provided further that notwithstanding anything contained hereinabove for the said
authorisations where the exemption from integrated tax and the goods and services
tax compensation cess leviable thereon under sub-section (7) and sub-section (9) of
section 3 of the Customs Tariff Act, has been availed, the export obligation shall be
fulfilled by physical exports only."

The said notification also inserted condition (xii) which reads thus:

"(xii) that the exemption from integrated tax and the goods and services tax
compensation cess leviable thereon under sub-section (7) and sub-

section (9) of section 3 of the Customs Tariff Act shall be subject to pre- import condition."

48. Thus, exemption from levy of IGST under Section 3 (7) and compensation cess leviable under
Section 3 (9) of Customs Tariff Act, 1975 were subject to the conditions that the export obligation
shall be fulfilled by physical exports only and shall also be subject to ‘pre-import condition’.
Together with the amendment of the exemption notification, by Notification No. 33/2015-2020
(dated 13-10- 2017), paragraph 4.14 of the FTP was also amended to read as follows:

"4.14: Details of Duties exempted.

Imports under Advance Authorisation are exempted from payment of Basic Customs
Duty, Additional Customs Duty, Education Cess, Anti- dumping Duty, Countervailing
Duty, Safeguard Duty, Transition Product Specific Safeguard Duty, wherever
applicable. Import against supplies covered under paragraph 7.02 (c), (d) and (g) of
FTP will not be exempted from payment of applicable Anti-dumping Duty,
Countervailing Duty, Safeguard Duty and Transition Product Specific Safeguard
Duty, if any. However, imports under Advance Authorisation for physical exports are
also exempt from whole of the integrated tax and Compensation Cess leviable under
sub-section (7) and sub-section (9) respectively, of section 3 of the Customs Tariff
Act, 1975 (51 of 1975), as may be provided in the notification issued by Department of

17

Union Of India vs Cosmo Films Limited on 28 April, 2023

Revenue, and such imports shall be subject to pre-import condition."

49. It is important to notice, at this stage, that exporters were made aware of the changes brought
about due to the introduction of GST, through a trade notice, (Trade Notice 11/2017, dated
30-06-2017). To the extent it is relevant to the present case, is extracted below:

Subject: Important FTP provisions in the context of the implementation of the GST
regime applicable w.e.f 01.07.2017 Under the GST regime, no exemption from
payment of integrated GST and Compensation Cess would be available for imports
under Advance Authorisation.

The chapter wise provisions of the FTP 2015-20:

General Provision:

************                                          *************
Chapter 4

Under the GST regime, no exemption from payment of integrated GST and
Compensation Cess would be available for imports under Advance Authorisation.

Importers would need to pay IGST and take input tax credit as applicable under GST
rules.

However, imports under Advance Authorisation would continue to be exempted from
payment of Basic Customs Duty, Additional Customs Duty specified under Section 3(
l), 3(3) and 3(5) of the Customs Tariff Act, Education Cess, Anti-dumping Duty,
Safeguard Duty and Transition Product Specific Safeguard Duty, wherever
applicable.

Applicable GST would need to be paid white making local procurement, using an
invalidation letter of Advance Authorisation IDFIA. Recipient of goods can take Input
Tax Credit CITC) of the GST paid on such local procurement.

This Input Tax Credit can be utilized as per GST rules.

Advance Release Order facility shall not be available for procurement of inputs
11nder Advance Authorization scheme except for inputs listed in Schedule 4 of
Central Excise Act, 1944 read with The Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act 2017 No 18
of 2017, with effect from July l, 2017. RAs are directed not to issue ARO except for
Schedulc-4 items as stated above.

Imports/exports under the replenishment schemes for the Gems and Jewellery sector
covered under chapter 4 of FTP and HBP shall be subject to Customs Notification
issued/ to be issued in this regard.”

18

Union Of India vs Cosmo Films Limited on 28 April, 2023

50. The public notice clearly forewarned that AAs and their utilisation would not continue in the
same manner as the AA scheme was operating hitherto. This trade notice has escaped the attention
of the High Court, since there is no advertence to it in the impugned order, or a discussion about it.
Likewise, the HBP was amended, and paragraph 4.27 (d) was inserted, which stated that duty free
authorisation for inputs subject to ‘pre-import condition’ could not be issued. The said clause is as
follows:

“(iv) No Duty Free Import Authorisation shall be issued for an input which is
subjected to pre-import condition.”

51. By virtue of the trade notice, exporters were made aware of the fact that under the GST regime,
no exemption from payment of IGST and compensation cess would be available for imports under
AA. Importers had to pay IGST and take input tax credit as applicable under GST rules.

52. It is a matter of law that FTPs are statutory and are framed by the Union, exercising its powers
under Section 5 of the FTRA 29. On the other hand, the HBP does not have the status of rules or
regulations. It merely contains guidelines. In Hindustan Granites v Union of India30 this court
observed that:

“Handbook of Procedure merely implements the policy. It does not prevent the
Central Government from changing the policy.”

53. The facts in Hindustan Granites were that on 01.04.2004, FTP 2004-2009 came into force. The
said FTP permitted Domestic Tariff Area (“DTA”) sales by units, “other than gems and jewellery
units”, up to 50% of FOB value of exports subject to fulfilment of positive Net Foreign Exchange
Earnings (“NFE”) on payment of concessional duties. Paragraph 6.8 (h) stated that:

“(h) EOU/EHTP/STP/BTP units may sell finished products, which are freely
importable under the Policy in the DTA under intimation to the Development
Commissioner against payment of full duties provided they have achieved the
positive NFE.” Union of India v. Asian Food Industries, (2006) Supp (8) SCR 485.

2007 (4) SCR 743.

54. By a notification paragraph 6.8(a) and paragraph 6.8(h) of the said FTP were amended,
preventing EOUs from making DTA sales of the finished marble made from imported rough marble,
with immediate effect. The change was made a few months after renewal of letter of permission to
the unit, authorizing it to manufacture and export marble tiles for 5 years, subject to a specified
monetary limit. The contention that the FTP could not have been amended, was negatived, by this
court.

55. The impugned judgment, in the present case, is premised broadly on the reasoning that the
amendment by Notification 79/2017 dated 13.10.2017 to the extent it required payment of duty, and,
in the case of advance authorizations, the fulfilment of ‘pre-import conditions’ was unreasonable

19

Union Of India vs Cosmo Films Limited on 28 April, 2023

and arbitrary. It was concluded that the amendment is contrary to the objective of the FTP. Further,
it has been held that ‘pre-import conditions’ are in respect of specific goods and, the notifications
impugned, inasmuch as they apply ‘pre-import condition’ to all goods, is contrary to the provision.
Further, the absence of ‘pre-import conditions’ in respect of basic customs duty, and other levies,
where in anticipation of AAs, duty free imports can be made, in contradistinction with the need to
follow such ‘pre-import conditions’ in respect of IGST and compensation cess, rendered the AAs
worthless. Lastly, it was held that exporters, who have to import inputs, would face impossibility in
fulfilling the ‘pre-import condition’, because the normal cycle of import of inputs and export of
finished products would be for a period of six months, whereas the period, which the regime
permits, would work out to three months.

56. It would be necessary to first analyse the introduction of the ‘pre-import condition’. The FTP,
inter alia, facilitated AAs for duty-free import of input, which is physically incorporated in export
product, making normal allowance for wastage (paragraph 4.03 of the FTP). No doubt, the rationale
or object behind this was to smoothen and facilitate export trade, ensuring that finished goods,
meant for export, did not suffer a competitive price disadvantage. However, the concept of
‘pre-import condition’ was not alien – Appendix-4J (mentioned in paragraph 4.13 (ii) of the FTP)
listed several articles, such as spices, penicillin and its salts, tea, coconut oil, silk, drugs from
unregistered sources, precious metals, etc. as articles for which the ‘pre-import condition’ was
applicable, prior to the GST regime. Furthermore, by paragraph 4.13 of the FTP, the DGFT could
impose ‘pre-import conditions’ on articles other than those specified:

“(i) DGFT may, by Notification, impose "pre-import condition" for inputs under this
Chapter.”

57. The retention of the power to impose ‘pre-import conditions’ on articles other than those
specified in Appendix-4J, meant that the DGFT could exercise it, in relation to any goods. The High
Court has not discussed this aspect, and proceeded on the assumption that only specified goods
were subject to the ‘pre- import condition’. The existence of paragraph 4.13 (i) reserving the power
to insist upon the ‘pre-import condition’, meant that the policy was capable of change, depending on
the exigencies of the time. This omission, together with the High Court’s failure to notice paragraph
4.27 (d) of the HBP are serious infirmities in the impugned judgment.

58. Now, coming to the notifications dated 13.10.2017 (No. 79/2017, issued under the Customs Act,
1962) and No. 33 (issued in exercise of Section 5 of the FTDRA read with Para 1.02 of the FTP) the
exemption from payment of IGST at the time of import of input materials under AA was granted.
The exemption was, however, not absolute. The conditions incorporated in the Notification (No.
79/2017), were one, that the exemption could only be extended so long as exports made under the
AAs were physical exports in nature and the other that to avail such benefit, one was to follow the
‘pre-import condition’.

59. ‘Physical export’ is defined in paragraph 4.05(c) and paragraph 9.20 of the FTP read with
Section 2(e) of the FTDRA as follows:

20

Union Of India vs Cosmo Films Limited on 28 April, 2023

(e) "import" and 'export" means respectively bringing into, or taking out of, India ang
goods by land, sea or air” Essentially, therefore, export involves taking goods out of
India. AAs can be issued either to a manufacturer exporter or merchant exporter tied
to supporting manufacturer (as per paragraph 4.05). However, paragraph 4.05 of the
FTP defines categories for which AAs can be issued, somewhat expansively and
prescribes that – “(c) Advance Authorization shall be issued for:

(i) Physical export (including export to SEZ);

(ii) Intermediate supply; and/ or

(iii) Supply of goods to the categories mentioned in paragraph 7.02 (b),

(c), (e), (f) (g) and (h) of this FTP.

(iv) Supply of 'stores' on board of foreign going vessel / aircraft, subject to condition
that there is specific Standard Input Output Norms in respect of item supplied.” The
definition extends in specific terms (under Chapter 4 of FTP) - supplies made to SEZ
are considered as ‘physical exports’ despite not being an event in which goods are
being taken out of India. The other three categories defined under (c)

(ii), (iii) & (iv) are ineligible as ‘physical exports’. Supplies of intermediate goods are
covered by letter of invalidation, whereas supplies covered under Chapter 7 of the
FTP are considered as ‘deemed exports’. These supplies are ineligible for being
considered ‘physical exports’. Therefore, any category of supply, be it under letter of
invalidation and/or to EOU and/or under International Competitive Bidding (ICB)
and/or to Mega Power Projects, other than actual exports to other country and supply
to SEZ, cannot be considered as ‘physical exports’. One of the objects behind the
impugned notifications was to ensure that the entire exports made under AAs
towards discharge of export orders were physical exports. In case the entire exports
were not physical exports, the AAs were automatically ineligible for exemption.

60. The introduction of the GST regime resulted in a substantial and fundamental overhaul of the
indirect tax structure, at the State and Central levels. The GST regime is based on the idea of
removing cascading effect of the taxes. The cascading effect of taxes mean levy of tax on tax. The
GST is levied on the net value added portion and not on the entire transaction value as the taxpayer
would enjoy input tax credit. Barring few indirect taxes, all the major indirect taxes levied by the
Central and State governments are subsumed into the GST. Consequently, taxpayers and suppliers
are untroubled about paying multiple indirect taxes under different laws. In the GST framework,
simple rules have been prescribed to utilize the cross-sectional credit of input taxes. A trader who
could not claim credit of tax paid on services, can seek and get credit on goods as well as services.
This framework of seamless credit was introduced to safeguard that taxes on supplies are paid to the
extent of value additions and net liability- and to avoid double taxation.

21

Union Of India vs Cosmo Films Limited on 28 April, 2023

61. The introduction of GST meant considerable legislative exercise in the form of repeal of several
enactments (in the wake of the 101st Amendment to the Constitution, introducing Articles 246A,
269A, 279A, amendment to Articles 286 and 366, besides amending List I, II and III of the Seventh
Schedule) and enactment of an entirely new set of laws. In this scheme, the new levies were IGST
and compensation cess. These were not part of the original Notification No. 18/2015, and
necessitated its amendment. Since the entire GST universe, so to say, is dependent on a
comprehensive input credit and refund system, the policy makers (which in this case, were tax
administrators and the DGFT) were of the opinion that since countervailing duty (CVD) and special
additional duty (SAD), which were subsumed under the GST regime and the other levy
(compensation cess), the previous regime of permitting AAs to govern import of duty free articles, as
inputs, should continue, but that for the new levies, the system of input credit, and refunds should
prevail.

62. In this court’s opinion, the introduction of the ‘pre-import condition’ may have resulted in
hardship to the exporters, because even whilst they fulfilled the physical export criteria, they could
not continue with their former business practices of importing inputs, after applying for AAs, to
fulfil their overseas contractual obligations. The new dispensation required them to pay the two
duties, and then claim refunds, after satisfying that the inputs had been utilized fully (wastage
excluded) for producing the final export goods. The re-shaping of their businesses caused
inconvenience to them. Yet, that cannot be a ground to hold that the insertion of the ‘pre-import
condition’, was arbitrary, as the High Court concluded. It was held, in Rohitash Kumar & Ors. v Om
Prakash Sharma & Ors31 that inconvenience or hardship is not a ground for the court to interpret
the plain language of the statute differently, to give relief.

“In Mysore SEB v. Bangalore Woolen Cotton & Silk Mills Ltd. AIR 1963 SC 1128 a Constitution
Bench of this Court held that, "inconvenience is not" a decisive factor to be considered while
interpreting a statute. In Martin Burn Ltd. V. Corpn. Of Calcutta AIR 1966 SC 529, this Court, while
dealing with the same issue observed as under: (AIR p. 535, para 14) "14. . A result flowing from a
statutory provision is never an evil. A Court has no power to ignore that provision to relieve what is
considers a distress resulting from its operation. A statute must of course be given effect to whether
a court likes the result or not."

26. Therefore, it is evident that the hardship caused to an individual, cannot be a ground for not
giving effective and grammatical meaning to every word of the provision, if the language used
therein is unequivocal."

(2013) 11 SCC 451.

Again, in State of Madhya Pradesh v Rakesh Kohli32 it was observed that the court is not concerned
with the wisdom or unwisdom, the justice or injustice of the law as Parliament and State
Legislatures and that “hardship is not relevant in pronouncing on the constitutional validity of a
fiscal statute or economic law.”

22

Union Of India vs Cosmo Films Limited on 28 April, 2023

63. The respondents had relied on some decisions, notably Laxmi Khandsari (supra) which dealt
with the general theory of reasonableness; the court observed that imposition of reasonable
restrictions and its extent would depend upon the object which the law or policy seeks to serve. It
was held that it was difficult to lay down any hard and fast rule of universal application but in
imposing such restrictions the State must adopt an objective standard amounting to a social control.
In Ranjit P. Gohil (supra) the court in fact held that:

“It is difficult to expect the Legislature carving out a classification which may be
scientifically perfect or logically complete or which may satisfy the expectations of all
concerned, still the court would respect the classification dictated by the wisdom of
Legislature and shall interfere only on being convinced that the classification would
result in pronounced inequality or palpable arbitrariness on the touchstone of Article
14.”

64. The decision reported in MRF Ltd., Kottayam (supra) was relied upon to say that withdrawal of
exemptions or tax benefits cannot be resorted to. Facially, this court’s observations with respect to
withdrawal of tax exemption appear to be favourable to the respondents. Yet, what weighed with
this court was that the power of withdrawal of exemption was not retrospective:

“Thus while Sub-section (1) authorizes the grant of an exemption or reduction in rate
with retrospective effect in respect of any tax payable 2012 (6) SCR 661.

under the Act, Sub-section (3) does not provide for any cancellation or variation
retrospectively.” In the circumstances, this decision has no application to the facts of
this case, because the facility of AA without ‘pre import condition’ was introduced
prospectively.

65. The respondents had alleged discrimination on two counts: one, that for purposes of
classification, all exporters who were granted AAs were to be treated alike; and two, that insisting on
the ‘pre-import condition’ in respect to exemption from two levies only, while granting that benefit
in respect of other AAs, was discriminatory. As far as the first aspect is concerned, the impugned
judgment, in this court’s opinion, is on a misreading of the FTP. As noted earlier, paragraph 4.13 (i)
itself empowered the DGFT to include articles, which are not specified in Appendix-4J. The
existence of this discretion means that there is flexibility in regard to the nature of policies to be
adopted, having regard to the state of export trade, and concessions to be extended in the trade and
tax regime. Thus, the indication of a few items by virtue of paragraph 4.13 (ii) per se never meant
that other articles could not be subjected to ‘pre import conditions’. Clearly, therefore, all AA
holders were never treated alike. On the second aspect, what hurt the respondents was not
classification of AAs per se, but their differentiation in the newly introduced tax regimes, so far as
two new levies are concerned. If one keeps in mind that there cannot be a blanket right to claim
exemption, and that such a relief is dependent on the assessment of the State and tax
administrators, as well as the state of the economy and above all, the mechanism for its
administration, clearly the argument of discriminatory treatment of the two levies on the one hand,
and the other taxes on the other, has to fail. The exemption from the requirement of pre import

23

Union Of India vs Cosmo Films Limited on 28 April, 2023

conditions continues in respect of the old levies, which are, even as on date, not part of the GST
regime. That clearly sets them apart from the new levies, the payment of which is insisted (after
which refund can be sought) as a part of a unified system of levy, assessment, collection, payment,
and refund.

66. This court has held, on previous occasions, that when reform by way of new legislation is
introduced, the doctrine of classification cannot be applied strictly, and that some allowance for
experimentation, to observe the effect of the law, is available to the executive or legislature. This was
emphasized in State of Gujarat v Shri Ambica Mills33 “55. A classification is under-inclusive when
all who are included in the class are tainted with the mischief but there are others also tainted whom
the classification does not include. In other words, a classification is bad as under-inclusive when a
State benefits or burdens persons in a manner that furthers a legitimate purpose but does not confer
the same benefit or place the same burden on others who are similarly situated. A classification is
over-inclusive when it includes not only those who are similarly situated with respect to the purpose
but others who are not so situated as well. In other words, this type of classification imposes a
burden upon a wider range of individuals than are included in the class of those attended with
mischief at which the law aims. Herod ordering the death of all male children born on a particular
day because one of them would some day bring about his downfall employed such a classification.

56. The first question, therefore, is, whether the exclusion of establishments carrying on business or
trade and employing less than 1974 (3) SCR 760.

50 persons makes the classification under-inclusive, when it is seen that all factories employing 10
or 20 persons, as the case may be, have been included and that the purpose of the law is to get in
unpaid accumulations for the welfare of the labour. Since the classification does not include all who
are similarly situated with respect to the purpose of the law, the classification might appear, at first
blush, to be unreasonable. But the Court has recognised the very real difficulties under which
legislatures operate - difficulties arising out of both the nature of the legislative process and of the
society which legislation attempts perennially to reshape - and it has refused to strike down
indiscriminately all legislation embodying classificatory inequality here under consideration. Mr.
Justice Holmes, in urging tolerance of under-inclusive classifications, stated that such legislation
should not be disturbed by the Court unless it can clearly see that there is no fair reason for the law
which would not require with equal force its extension to those whom it leaves untouched.

*************** *********

64. Laws regulating economic activity would be viewed differently from laws which touch and
concern freedom of speech and religion, voting, procreation, rights with respect to criminal
procedure, etc. The prominence given to the equal protection Clause in many modern opinions and
decisions in America all show that the Court feels less constrained to give judicial deference to
legislative judgment in the field of human and civil rights than in that of economic Regulation and
that it is making a vigorous use of the equal protection Clause to strike down legislative action in the
area of fundamental human rights. [See "Developments Equal Protection", 32 Harv, Law Rev 1065,
1127]

24

Union Of India vs Cosmo Films Limited on 28 April, 2023

65. The question whether, Under Article 14, a classification is reasonable or unreasonable must, in
the ultimate analysis depend upon the judicial approach to the problem. The great divide in this area
lies in the difference between emphasising the actualities or the abstractions of legislation. The more
complicated society becomes, the greater the diversity of its problems and the more does legislation
direct itself to the diversities.

66. That the legislation is directed to practical problems, that the economic mechanism is highly
sensitive and complex, that many problems are singular and contingent that laws are not abstract
propositions and do not relate to abstract units and are not to be measured by abstract symmetry,
that exact wisdom and nice adaption of remedies cannot be required, that judgment is largely a
prophecy based on meagre and uninterpreted experience, should stand as reminder that in this area
the Court does not take the equal protection requirement in a pedagogic manner [See "General
theory of law and state"

The same idea was echoed in Ajoy Kumar Banerjee & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors34
“...Article 14 does not prevent legislature from introducing a reform i.e. by applying
the legislation to some institutions or objects or areas only according to the exigency
of the situation and further classification of selection can be sustained on historical
reasons or reasons of administrative exigency or piecemeal method of introducing
reforms. The law need not apply to all the persons in the sense of having a universal
application to all persons. A law can be sustained if it deals equally with the people of
well-defined class-employees of insurance companies as such and such a law is not
open to the charge of denial of equal protection on the ground that it had no
application to other persons.” Likewise, Javed v. State of Haryana35 observed that
there is no constitutional compulsion that a law or policy should be implemented all
at once:

“16. A uniform policy may be devised by the Centre or by a State. However, there is
no constitutional requirement that any such policy must be implemented at one go.
Policies are capable of being implemented in a phased manner. More so, when the
policies have far- reaching implications and are dynamic in nature, their
implementation in a phased manner is welcome for it receives gradual willing
acceptance and invites lesser resistance.”

67. Therefore, there is no constitutional compulsion that whilst framing a new law, or policies under
a new legislation – particularly when an entirely different set of fiscal norms are created,
overhauling the taxation structure, concessions hitherto granted or given should necessarily be
continued in the same fashion as they were in the past. When a new set of laws are enacted, the
legislature’s effort is to on the one hand, assimilate- as far as practicable, the past regime. On the
other hand, the object of the new law is creation of new rights and obligations, 1984 (3) SCR 252.

(2003) 8 SCC 369.

25

Union Of India vs Cosmo Films Limited on 28 April, 2023

with new attendant conditions. Inevitably, this process is bound to lead to some disruption. In this
case, the disruption is in the form of exporters needing to import inputs, pay the two duties, and
claim refunds. Yet, this inconvenience is insufficient to trump the legislative choice of creating an
altogether new fiscal legislation, and insisting that a section of assessees order their affairs, to be in
accord with the new law. Therefore, the exclusion of benefit of imports in anticipation of AAs, and
requiring payment of duties, under Sections 3 (7) and (9) of Customs Tariff Act, 1975, with the
‘pre-import condition’, cannot be characterized as arbitrary or unreasonable.

68. This court had also observed in State of Madhya Pradesh v Nandlal Jaiswal36 that “in complex
economic matters every decision is necessarily empiric, and it is based on experimentation” and that
the court, while considering the validity of executive action relating to economic matters grant a
certain measure of freedom or 'play in the joints' to the executive.” The Court crucially emphasized
that:

“The Court cannot strike down a policy decision taken by the State Government
merely because it feels that another policy decision would have been fairer or wiser or
more scientific or logical. The Court can interfere only if the policy decision is
patently arbitrary, discriminatory or mala fide.” In R.K. Garg (supra) this court
similarly spelt out the circumscribed role that the court has, in considering the
validity or constitutionality of fiscal laws, or economic measures, stating that “the
court should feel more inclined to give 1987 (1) SCR 01.

judicial deference to legislative judgment in the field of economic Regulation than in
other areas where fundamental human rights are involved.” Likewise, in Ashirwad
Films v. Union of India37 this court observed:

“The power of the Legislature to classify is of wide range and flexibility so that it can
adjust its system of taxation in all proper and reasonable ways. Even so, large latitude
is allowed to the State for classification upon a reasonable basis and what is
reasonable is a question of practical details and a variety of factors which the Court
will be reluctant and perhaps ill- equipped to investigate….”

69. The object behind imposing the ‘pre-import condition’ is discernible from paragraph 4.03 of
FTP and Annexure-4J of the HBP; that only few articles were enumerated when the FTP was
published, is no ground for the exporters to complain that other articles could not be included for
the purpose of ‘pre-import condition’; as held earlier, that is the import of paragraph 4.03 (i). The
numerous schemes in the FTP are to maintain an equilibrium between exporters’ claims, on the one
hand and on the other hand, to preserve the Revenue’s interests. Here, what is involved is
exemption and postponement of exemption of IGST, a new levy altogether, whose mechanism was
being worked out and evolved, for the first time. The plea of impossibility to fulfil ‘pre-import
conditions’ under old AAs was made, suggesting that the notifications retrospectively mandated new
conditions. The exporter respondents’ argument that there is no rationale for differential treatment
of BCD and IGST under AA scheme is without merit. BCD is a customs levy at the point of import.
At that stage, there is no question of (2007) 6 SCC 624, credit. On the other hand, IGST is levied at

26

Union Of India vs Cosmo Films Limited on 28 April, 2023

multiple points (including at the stage of import) and input credit gets into the stream, till the point
of end user. As a result, there is justification for a separate treatment of the two levies. IGST is levied
under the IGST Act, 2017 and is collected, for convenience, at the customs point through the
machinery under the Customs Act, 1962. The impugned notifications, therefore, cannot be faulted
for arbitrariness or under classification.

70. The High Court was persuaded to hold that the subsequent notification of 10.01.2019 withdrew
the ‘pre-import condition’ meant that the Union itself recognized its unworkable and unfeasible
nature, and consequently the condition should not be insisted upon for the period it existed, i.e.,
after 13.10.2017. This court is of the opinion that the reasoning is faulty. It is now settled that the
FTPRA contains no power to frame retrospective regulations. Construing the later notification of
10.01.2019 as being effective from 13.10.2017 would be giving effect to it from a date prior to the
date of its existence; in other words the court would impart retrospectivity. In Director General of
Foreign Trade & Ors. v Kanak Exports & Ors38 this court held that:

“Section 5 of the Act does not give any such power specifically to the Central
Government to make rules retrospective. No doubt, this Section confer powers upon
the Central Government to 'amend' the policy which has been framed under the
aforesaid provisions. However, that by itself would not mean that such a provision
empowers the Government to do so retrospective.” 2015 (15) SCR 287.

71. To give retrospective effect, to the notification of 10.01.2019 through
interpretation, would be to achieve what is impermissible in law. Therefore, the
impugned judgment cannot be sustained on this score as well.

72. This court recollects its recent decision, on the question of entitlement to refund,
under the old tax regime, which was subsumed and resulted in some businesses being
affected. Negativing the challenge to constitutionality of the provisions of GST, it was
held, in Union of India (UOI) & Ors. v VKC Footsteps India Pvt. Ltd39. that:

“A claim to refund is governed by statute. There is no constitutional entitlement to
seek a refund. Parliament has in Clause (i) of the first proviso allowed a refund of the
unutilized ITC in the case of zero-rated supplies made without payment of tax. Under
Clause (ii) of the first proviso, Parliament has envisaged a refund of unutilized ITC,
where the credit has accumulated on account of the rate of tax on inputs being higher
than the rate of tax on output supplies. When there is neither a constitutional
guarantee nor a statutory entitlement to refund, the submission that goods and
services must necessarily be treated at par on a matter of a refund of unutilized ITC
cannot be accepted. Such an interpretation, if carried to its logical conclusion would
involve unforeseen consequences, circumscribing the legislative discretion of
Parliament to fashion the rate of tax, concessions and exemptions. If the judiciary
were to do so, it would run the risk of encroaching upon legislative choices, and on
policy decisions which are the prerogative of the executive.”

27

Union Of India vs Cosmo Films Limited on 28 April, 2023

73. In this court’s opinion, what applies to refunds, (the right to which can be
curtailed legitimately) applies equally to exemptions. It has been held in Bannari
Amman Sugars Ltd. vs. Commercial Tax Officer & Ors40 that if there is any tax
concession, it “can be withdrawn at any time and no time limit should be insisted
upon before it was withdrawn”.

2021 (15) SCR 169.

2004 (6) Suppl. SCR 264.

74. Commentators and economists have spoken about how introduction of GST was one of the most
significant tax reforms undertaken by India. It was preceded by a series of meetings and
negotiations, whereby concerns of the states, and various other agencies were accommodated. It has
ushered a unified market driven by a single tax, converting different markets in states, with different
tariffs and governing principles. It has smoothened movement of goods between different states.
Before the advent of GST, the Union taxed production of goods and supply of services; and the states
taxed sale of goods. With GST, both the Union and the states are entitled to share the taxes of the
full value chain of goods and services. Such a transformation cannot be painless; disruptions –
especially in the beginning will be felt. Yet, that in the process of unification, if a certain section of
the business is inconvenienced, and would have to pay taxes (which exist as levies, newly
introduced) and conditions are imposed upon their ability to freely import inputs (for the purpose of
export), this alone cannot lead the court to conclude that such a change is unreasonable or arbitrary.

75. For the foregoing reasons, this court holds that the Revenue has to succeed. The impugned
judgment and orders of the Gujarat High Court are hereby set aside. However, since the
respondents were enjoying interim orders, till the impugned judgments were delivered, the Revenue
is directed to permit them to claim refund or input credit (whichever appliable and/or wherever
customs duty was paid). For doing so, the respondents shall approach the jurisdictional
commissioner, and apply with documentary evidence within six weeks from the date of this
judgment. The claim for refund/credit, shall be examined on their merits, on a case-by-case basis.
For the sake of convenience, the revenue shall direct the appropriate procedure to be followed,
conveniently, through a circular, in this regard.

76. The Revenue’s appeals are allowed, subject to the above terms.

...............................................J. [S. RAVINDRA BHAT] ...............................................J. [DIPANKAR
DATTA] NEW DELHI;

APRIL 28, 2023.

28