Jayshree Kanabar vs State Of Maharashtra on 2 January, 2025

Jayshree Kanabar vs State Of Maharashtra on 2 January, 2025

Author: C.T. Ravikumar

Bench: C.T. Ravikumar

2025 INSC 13

                                                                           Non-Reportable

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                        Criminal Appeal No.            of 2025
                                           (@ SLP (Crl.) No. 15341 of 2023)

                             Jayshree Kanabar
                                                                            …Appellant(s)
                                                                  Versus
                             State of Maharashtra & Ors.
                                                                           …Respondent(s)
                                                                   With

                                        Criminal Appeal No.            of 2025
                                           (@ SLP (Crl.) No. 15820 of 2023)

                                                         JUDGMENT

C.T. RAVIKUMAR, J.

1. Leave granted.

2. The widow of the victim in MCOCA No.274/2021 arising out of Crime No.413/2020 registered at
Bundgarden Police Station, Pune against respondent Nos.2 and 3 herein, who are respectively
accused Nos.2 and 3 therein, filed this Special Leave Petition against the order dated 06.11.2023 in
Criminal Bail Application No.2164/2022 of the High Court of Judicature at Bombay. Date:
2025.01.02 The said crime was registered for offences punishable 16:40:41 IST Reason:

under Sections 320, 120B, 201 and 212 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short, ‘the
IPC’), Section 3/25 of the Arms Act, 1959; Section 37(1)(3) read with Section 135 of
the Maharashtra Police Act, 1951 and Sections 3(1)(ii), 3(2) and 3(4) of the
Maharashtra Control of Organized Crime Act, 1999 (for short, ‘the MCOCA’). As per
the impugned order, accused Nos.2 and 3 were granted bail in the said case. Manifold
contentions have been raised to challenge the grant. Before delving into them,
compendiously, we will refer to the prosecution’s case which led to the case on hand.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127562991/

1

Jayshree Kanabar vs State Of Maharashtra on 2 January, 2025

3. There was a long-drawn civil dispute between the deceased Rajesh Haridas Kanabar on one side
and families of respondent Nos.2 and 3 on the other over certain extent of land comprised in Gat
No.348 situated at Bavdhan in Pune. Respondent Nos.2 and 3, who are accused Nos.1 and 2,
appointed accused No.3 as their agent to take care of their legal matter and other issues relating to
the aforesaid property. Though, a settlement was seemingly arrived at, the accused were under the
impression that the deceased was not favourably responding to the settlement. On 05.10.2020, the
revenue proceeding, which is an off-shoot of the civil dispute, was listed before the Collector of
Pune. The accused, as also the deceased attended the proceedings. On coming out of the office of the
Collector, when the deceased was purchasing fruits near the gate of State Bank of India at about
2:45 pm, accused No.4 viz., one Hasmukh Patel shot him with a country made pistol. The informant
Sri Vishwas Dayanand Gangavane carried him to a nearby hospital where he was declared dead.
Initially, charge sheet was filed against the accused sans accusation of commission of offences under
MCOCA. However, a supplementary charge sheet was filed on 03.04.2021 whereunder offences
under MCOCA were also inserted against them alleging that accused Nos.1 to 4 are members of the
Organised Crime Syndicate of which accused No.4 is the gang leader and based on the conspiracy
hatched between them, they killed Rajesh Kanabar to have unlawful gains.

4. It is the core contention of the appellant that a bare perusal of the impugned order itself would
bring home the fact that the order granting bail to respondent Nos.2 and 3 (accused Nos.1 and 2 in
the MCOCA case) is an outcome of consideration akin to a mini-trial. Instances of observations,
partaking the character of findings on the merits of the case, have been pointed out by the learned
Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant. It is further contention made on behalf of the appellant
that though there was an irrecusable duty on the Court to consider whether the twin conditions to be
satisfied in terms of Section 21 (4) of MCOCA the Court transgressed into impermissible area,
ignoring the fact that it was only considering an application for bail and made appreciation of the
materials on record and arrived at findings that respondent Nos.2 and 3 had not played any role in
the incident of shooting, that there is no evidence, even to suggest that respondent Nos.2 and
3/accused Nos.1 and 2 were directly or indirectly in contact with accused No.4, the gang leader and
that a perusal of the evidence would indicate that accused No.3 was directly in contact with accused
No.4, the gang leader and other members of the Crime Syndicate. It is submitted by the learned
Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant that it is such highly improper and impermissible
manner of consideration that culminated in the impugned order of granting bail to respondent
Nos.2 and 3 and it would certainly deprive a fair trial to the prosecution. Raising such contentions,
the impugned order granting bail to respondent Nos.2 and 3 is sought to be quashed and set aside
and that they be made to surrender soon.

5. Per contra, the learned counsel appearing for Respondent Nos.2 and 3 would contend that the
impugned order invites no interference. The contention of the learned counsel is to the effect that
initially, the accused were not accused of commission of offence(s) under MCOCA and they were
inserted later, through supplementary report, solely with the intention to ensure non-grant of bail to
the accused. It is also submitted that the respondent Nos.2 and 3 were arrested in connection with
the subject crime on 06.10.2020 and they were enlarged on bail as per the order impugned only on
06.11.2023. A perusal of the conditions of bail would reveal that they were adequate and appropriate
to ensure that the accused would not flee from justice and would face the trial, it was further

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127562991/

2

submitted.

Jayshree Kanabar vs State Of Maharashtra on 2 January, 2025

6. There cannot be any doubt with respect to the position that since MCOCA is involved in this case
on hand, the accused/respondent Nos.2 and 3 could not have sought for bail in exercise of the
discretion available under Section 439, Cr.P.C., in the matter, in view of the rigours under Section
21(4) of the MCOCA. A perusal of the impugned order would reveal that the public prosecutor
resisted the prayer for grant of bail and prayed the Court to consider the question of grant of bail
taking into account the rigour of Section 21(4) of the MCOCA. In fact, the impugned judgment
would reveal that the said contention was taken note of by the High Court. At the same time, it is a
fact that the impugned order did not reflect such consideration as has been required in respect of
matter involving offences under MCOCA in terms of the provisions thereunder as also the decisions
rendered by this Court in respect of grant of bail. When there is an embargo put in by a specific
provision under a special enactment in the matter of grant of bail in respect of offences allegedly
committed thereunder, the power to grant bail should necessarily be subject to satisfaction of the
conditions mentioned in such specific provision. In the case on hand, such a specific provision is
contained under Section 21(4) of the MCOCA. The learned counsel for the petitioners would submit
that bail was granted to respondent Nos.2 and 3 herein sans considering their entitlement in view of
the decision of this Court in Ramesh Bhavan Rathod v. Vishanbhai Hirabhai Makwan & Anr.1 At the
same time, the learned counsel appearing for the respondent would submit that even in the case of
offences under Prevention of Money Laundering Act (for short, ‘the PMLA’) which carries similar
rigour in the matter of grant of bail under Section 45(1), PMLA, this Court held that such stringent
provisions for the grant of bail would not take away the power of Constitution of Courts to grant bail
on grounds (2021) 6 SCC 230; 2021 INSC 265 of violation of Part-III of the Constitution of India.
But we may hasten to add that a critical examination of the impugned order would reveal that bail
was granted to respondent Nos.2 and 3 in the case on hand not on the ground of violation of Part-III
of the Constitution of India and instead, the High Court has considered the sufficiency or otherwise
of the evidence against them available on record. There can be no doubt with respect to the position
that materials collected during the investigation would not mature into evidence at the stage of
consideration of an appeal and as such, the admissibility and evidentiary value are matters to be
decided during the trial and are not matters for consideration at the present stage of the
proceedings.

7. In the light of the core contention raised by the appellant that the High Court had transgressed
into impermissible area inasmuch as the question of sufficiency or otherwise and correctness of the
prosecution case were considered while passing the impugned order instead of confining the
consideration in regard to the question of satisfaction or otherwise of the stringent conditions in the
matter of grant of bail where offences under MCOCA are involved. As noted above, grant of bail to
respondent Nos.2 and 3 by the High Court is not on the ground(s) of violation of Part-III of the
Constitution of India.

8. A mere glance at the impugned order would go to show that there is substance in the contentions
of the appellant. No serious effort is required to pick out such observations in the form of findings
made in the impugned order by the High Court in regard to the role of the accused persons involved
in the crime in question, including that of respondent Nos.2 and 3. In paragraph 11 of the impugned

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127562991/

3

order it was observed and held thus:-

Jayshree Kanabar vs State Of Maharashtra on 2 January, 2025

“……It is seen on perusal of the record that accused No.1 and 2 did not directly or
indirectly deal with the deceased at any point of time. Accused Nos.1 and 2 had given
this responsibility to accused No.3……”

9. In paragraph 12 of the impugned order with regard to respondent Nos.2 and 3
(accused Nos.1 and 2) and also accused No.3 the High Court observed and held as
under:-

“……There is no evidence even to suggest that accused Nos.1 and 2 were directly or
indirectly in contact with the gang leader accused and 3 had attended the Office of
the Collector for the purpose of the case. Similarly, the deceased has also attended the
Office of the Collector for attending the said case. It is not the case of prosecution that
before the actual incident of shooting of the deceased by accused No.4, there was any
quarrel or any dispute between accused Nos.1, 2 and 3 on one hand and deceased on
the other hand. The presence of accused Nos.1, 2 and 3 in the Office of the Collector
was for the purpose of the case. It is seen that in the incident of shooting, no role was
played by accused Nos.1, 2 and 3. It is seen that the witnesses, whose statements have
been recorded by the Investigating Officer, have not attributed any specific role or
overt act to the accused Nos.1 and 2 at any time.”

10. In paragraph 14 of the impugned order, it was observed and held:-

“Perusal of the evidence indicates that accused No.3 was directly in contact with the
gang leader and other members of the Crime Syndicate. Accused Nos.1 and 2 were
not at all in their contact. Accused No.3 was appointed as an agent by accused Nos.1
and 2 to take care of their litigation and to look after their interest. It is seen that the
role played by accused No.3 was direct role…”

11. In paragraph 22 of the impugned order, it was observed and held thus:-

had not connection with the gang leader or Crime Syndicate…”

12. In the light of the afore extracted observations partaking the character of findings, the appellant
is purportedly justified in contending that the manner of consideration and the conclusions arrived
at in pursuance thereof would cause prejudice to the prosecution during the trial and if they are
allowed to remain, it would deprive them of a fair trial. The fact is that besides such specific
observations in the nature of findings in regard to the roles played (or not played) by accused Nos.1,
2 and 3 and the consequential conclusion that respondent Nos.2 and 3 are entitled to bail, as
accused No.3 who played direct role was granted bail there was no consideration in the manner
required under law considering the fact that the case on hand carries allegation of commission of
offences under MCOCA against respondent Nos.2 and 3. We may hasten to add that we shall not be
understood to have held that respondent Nos.2 and 3 had played a definite roles in the commission

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127562991/

4

Jayshree Kanabar vs State Of Maharashtra on 2 January, 2025

of the offence involved in the case on hand which resulted in the death of Rajesh Haridas Kanabar.
Certainly, the question whether his death is homicide and if so, who is or are the culprit(s) are
matters to be decided by the trial Court on conclusion of the trial. In short, appreciation of materials
on record for the purpose of forming a definite opinion with respect to the question as to whether an
accused person(s) had played roles or not, in the crime concerned is not permissible while
considering an application for grant of bail. At any rate, the afore extracted observations ought not
to have been made by the High Court regarding the roles played or not played by the accused Nos.1,
2 and 3 in the above mentioned MCOCA case. Add to the aforesaid situation, the impugned order is
also infected with absence of consideration which ought to have been bestowed by the Court in the
matter of grant of bail taking note of the involvement of allegation of offence(s) under the MCOCA
Act against the respondent Nos. 2 and 3. It is also a matter of concern that in spite of the fact that
the accused No.3 was not a party before the High Court, the High Court made specific finding to the
effect that he played a direct role.

13. In view of the observations tantamounting to findings, as referred above and in the absence of
consideration in the required manner, the application for bail moved by the respondent Nos.2 and 3
ought to have been considered in view of the involvement of the allegation of commission of offences
under MCOCA in view of Section 21(4) of MCOCA, the impugned order invites interference. As
noted hereinbefore, it is a fact that the grant of bail was not in exercise of power of the High Court as
a constitutional Court on the ground of violation of Part-III of the Constitution. It is also a fact that
the case on hand involves allegation of commission of offences of murder punishable under Section
302, IPC.

14. In the circumstances we are of the considered view that the matter has to be remanded for fresh
consideration by the High Court of the application moved by respondent Nos.2 and 3 for bail in
MCOCA case No.274 of 2021 arising out of Crime No.413/2020 registered at Bundgarden Police
Station, Pune. In that regard the impugned order dated 06.11.2023 is set aside and Criminal Bail
Application No.2164 of 2022 is restored into the file of the High Court in its original number to be
considered afresh in accordance with law. The parties including the appellant herein who was the
petitioner in Intervention Application No.4644 of 2022 would be at liberty to raise all contentions
legally permissible to raise before the High Court during consideration of the application. In this
regard, the parties shall appear before the High Court on 29.01.2025 and the High Court may fix a
date for hearing of that application. Taking note of the fact that the respondent Nos.2 and 3 were on
bail from 06.11.2023, they shall be permitted to be on bail, despite the setting aside of the order,
with the same conditions as have been imposed under the impugned order till the disposal of the
abovementioned Criminal Bail Application No.2164 of 2022. The appeals are allowed as above.

15. In view of the fact that the crime is of the year 2020, the High Court is requested to dispose of
the application expeditiously, preferably within one month from the receipt of the copy of this order.
Let a copy of this order be sent to the Registrar General of the High Court of Judicature at Bombay.

……………………, J.

(C.T. Ravikumar) ……………………, J.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127562991/

5

Jayshree Kanabar vs State Of Maharashtra on 2 January, 2025

(Sanjay Karol) New Delhi;

January 02, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127562991/

6

