Veena Vadini Teachers Training ... vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 28 April, 2023

Veena Vadini Teachers Training ... vs The State Of Madhya
Pradesh on 28 April, 2023

Author: Sudhanshu Dhulia

Bench: Sudhanshu Dhulia, Dinesh Maheshwari

Page 1 of 14

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NO.               OF 2023
(ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) No.12656 OF 2022)

VEENA VADINI TEACHERS TRAINING INSTITUTE (RUN BY
VEENA VADINI SAMAJ KALYAN VIKASH SAMITI) … Appellant

Versus

STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH & ORS.                              …Respondent(s)

JUDGMENT

SUDHANSHU DHULIA, J.

Leave granted.

2. The appellant before this Court is a training institute, run by a registered society by the name of
“Veena Vadini Samaj Kalyan Vikash Samiti”. Inter-alia the institute trains teachers for B.Ed and
M.Ed courses. One of the courses, which is run by the appellant- institute in Gwalior, State of
Madhya Pradesh, is called B.Ed (Part time), which is designed to impart B.Ed training to in service
teachers. We have also been told at the Bar that the appellant- institute is only one of the three
institutes in the State of Madhya Pradesh which has been given permission to run this course, i.e.
B.Ed (Part time). We are presently concerned with the alleged difficulties the appellant-institute is
facing in making admissions to this course, for which the appellant blames the “admission policy” or
the “guidelines” of the State of MP, and has challenged its constitutional validity before us.

3. Earlier the writ petition filed by the appellant challenging the Government policy dated
12.05.2022 was dismissed by the Division Bench of the Madhya Pradesh High Court, by order dated
13.07.2022. The appellant as it appears, was seeking an interference from the High Court in the

1

Veena Vadini Teachers Training ... vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 28 April, 2023

abovementioned Government policy, on the ground that it was violative of Articles 14, 15 and
19(1)(g) of the Constitution, as the government had made 75% of the seats reserved for the residents
of Madhya Pradesh which is not permissible in law. The High Court, however, held against the
appellant and had dismissed the petition. While doing so, it did not go into the details and disposed
of the matter, in terms of the earlier Division Bench decision of the Madhya Pradesh High Court in
Preston College and Another v. State of M.P. & Ors. 2007 SCC Online MP 103, which, inter alia, had
held that residential requirement in admission was not violative of the Constitution. We may add
here that the challenge to the above 2007 decision of the Madhya Pradesh High Court was made in
an SLP (Civil) No. 5069 of 2007, before the court, which was dismissed as infructuous on
14.09.2018.

4. The appellant’s challenge to the above mentioned Policy dated 12.05.2022 (called “Admission
Process and Guiding Principles 2022-2023”) is mainly on clause 1.5(a) of the policy, which allocates
the B.Ed seats in the institute in the following manner:

“1.5 Division of seat numbers available in institutions

(a) The division of seats for admission in courses like the courses regulated by the
National Council for Teacher Education to be conducted in Madhya Pradesh, B.Ed.
M.Ed., B.Ed., M.P.Ed. (Two Years, B.Ed.-M.Ed.

(Integrated Three Years) B.A.B.Ed., B.Sc.B.Ed and B.L.Ed. (Integrated Four Years) and B.Ed. (Part
Time), shall be as follows –

1. Original Resident of Madhya Pradesh State

2. Candidates from other outside states The category and category-wise allotment of seats available
in the institution will be as per the 'Reservation related clause' mentioned in these guidelines and its
subparagraphs. Out of the total available seats in the institution, 75 percent seats will be reserved for
the residents of Madhya Pradesh state and maximum 25 percent seats will be available for the
residents outside the state of Madhya Pradesh. 25 For the original residents of Madhya Pradesh
state, as per the instructions of the General Administration Department's letter number C-3-
7-203-3-A, dated 25.09.20.4, self-attested testimonial for the local resident will have to be
submitted as per attached format 5.” As per the above provision, out of the total seats, 75% are
reserved for “the residents of Madhya Pradesh” and the remaining 25% of the seats will only be
available to the candidates who are from outside the State of Madhya Pradesh.

5. The appellant-institute, has given before this Court the figures of last two years, where although
the entire 25 percent seats allocated to the “outside” candidates have been filled, but almost all of
the 75 percent of seats, reserved for the residents of Madhya Pradesh, have remained unfilled. These
figures have not been denied by the State.

The figures are as follows:

Seats Available Seats    Seats

2

Veena Vadini Teachers Training ... vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 28 April, 2023

Filled   Vacant
AY          M.P. Quota        75              4        71
2021-2022   All India Quota   25              25       0
Total             100             29       71

AY          M.P. Quota        75              2        73
2022-2023   All India Quota   25              24       1
Total             100             26       74

6. The Case of the appellant, therefore, is that 75% of the seats which have been reserved for
permanent residents of Madhya Pradesh, remain vacant due to the non-availability of residential
candidates and as such the appellant may be permitted to fill these seats from outside candidates.
This permission is, however, not given to the appellant.

7. There are two questions here; first is whether the State Government can reserve seats for
“residents” of Madhya Pradesh and, then, in case if it is permissible; the second question would be
whether as large as 75% of the total seats, can be reserved for the residents.

8. As far as the first question is concerned, the same is no more res integra, as this Court in the case
of Dr. Pradeep Jain and Others v. Union of India and Others (1984) 3 SCC 654, had upheld such
reservation. Even prior to Pradeep Jain, residence based reservation was justified by this Court in
the case of D.P. Joshi v. State of Madhya Pradesh (1955) 1 SCR 1215, but it is only in Pradeep Jain
where an elaborate discussion on this aspect was done and such reservation were held to be valid.
This departure from the Rule of selection based on merit was justified on two grounds. Firstly, what
one may call as the State interest, which would mean the expenditure incurred by the State in
creating the educational infrastructure and the cost of its maintenance and the second was the
State’s claims to backwardness (Pradeep Jain Para 14). We must add that institutional and
residential requirements were further held to be permissible in the case of Saurabh Chaudhari and
Others. v. Union of India and Others reported in (2003) 11 SCC 146 which followed the ratio laid
down in Pradeep Jain (supra). Further, this Court in Magan Mehrotra and Others v. Union of India
and Others reported in (2003) 11 SCC 186 had upheld institutional preference given to those who
completed their undergraduate studies in the same institution and again in Rajdeep Ghosh v. The
State of Assam reported in (2018) 17 SCC 524 followed the ratio of law laid down in Pradeep Jain
(supra). All these cases though were in the field of medical education.

9. As far as “State interest” was concerned it was an admitted fact that it was the State which
contributed in the establishment and upkeep of the medical institutions, which required a
considerable amount of financial support and if the State has to spend money on these institutions,
it is not unreasonable that the State should ensure at least some of its benefits to flow exclusively for
its residents. It was for this reason that the different fee structure, one from the residents of Madhya
Bharat, and other from the students who belong to other States was justified as a reasonable
classification in D.P. Joshi1. In Pradeep Jain again this was reiterated.

3

Veena Vadini Teachers Training ... vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 28 April, 2023

“The claim of State interest in providing adequate medical service to the people of the State by
imparting medical education to students who by reason of their residence in the State would be
likely to settle down and serve the people of the State as doctors has thus been regarded by the Court
as a legitimate ground for laying down residence requirement for admission to medical colleges in
the State.”2 The claim of backwardness of the State was another justifiable reason given in Pradeep
Jain and as it was held:

“…….There may be a case where a region is educationally backward or woefully
deficient in medical services and in such a case there would be serious educational
and health service disparity for that backward region which must be redressed by an
equality and service minded welfare State. The purpose of such a policy would be to
remove the existing inequality and to promote welfare based equality for the
residents of the backward region. If the State in such a case seeks to remove the
absence of opportunity for medical education and to provide competent and adequate
medical services in such backward region by starting a medical college in the heart of
such backward region and reserves a high percentage of seats there to students from
that region, it may not be possible to castigate such reservation or preferential
treatment as discriminatory.”3 Para 15 of D.P. Joshi (supra).

Para 16, Page 681 of Pradeep Jain (supra).

Para 18, Page 684 of Pradeep Jain (supra).

While extensively relying upon D.P. Joshi, this Court in Pradeep Jain held as under:

“……….These decisions which all relate to admission to MBBS course are binding
upon us and it is therefore not possible for us to hold, in the face of these decisions,
that residence requirement in a State for admission to MBBS course is irrational and
irrelevant and cannot be introduced as a condition for admission without violating
the mandate of equality of opportunity contained in Article 14. We must proceed on
the basis that at least so far as admission to MBBS course is concerned, residence
requirement in a State can be introduced as a condition for admission to the MBBS
course.” 4

10. But then we must also remember that in Pradeep Jain as well as in the subsequent such cases
referred above this Court were dealing with medical education in India, and the legality of ‘residence
requirement’ or reservations based on residence, in MBBS as well as Post Graduate Courses in
medical education! The validity of residence requirement was upheld in Pradeep Jain, followed by a
catena of decisions of Supreme Court, which also took into account economic factors as well as
backwardness of the region while allowing reservation for permanent residents of the State, in
medical education. We should not lose sight of this vital fact when we are dealing with the
reservations based on residence in other fields of education, as we are doing presently. Whether the
Para 19, Page 686 of Pradeep Jain (Supra).

4

Veena Vadini Teachers Training ... vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 28 April, 2023

justifiable factors of ‘State interest’ and the claim for backwardness of the State or any other factors
which were relevant factors for residence reservations in medical education, would be equally
relevant in other fields of education or other professional courses is still to be determined.

11. The determination made in Pradeep Jain by this Court also goes 40 years back in history. This
determination was made in 1984, when the social and economic conditions of the country and of the
specific regions in question, weighed heavily in the minds of the learned Judges, which is reflected
in passages after passages in Pradeep Jain. So is also the state of medical education in the country as
it existed at that time. Yet, over the last 40 years, there has been a change in our medical education,
which has seen a growth, at least in the number of such medical colleges which have come up, both
in private and government sector. Similarly, there is a change in our social and economic condition
as well. In any case, the conditions as it exists today is not the same, as was there 40 years earlier,
when a decision in Pradeep Jain was taken.

12. In the case at hand, we are not dealing with medical education, but with the validity of
reservation based on residence requirement in a professional education course i.e. B.Ed. In our
considered opinion, the ratio as laid down by this Court in Pradeep Jain would be applicable in this
case as well but only to an extent, not fully. The reasons as we have already indicated are two: firstly
Pradeep Jain and all the cases which follow Pradeep Jain deal only with medical education, and
secondly the ratio as laid down in Pradeep Jain has also to be seen in the context of the time when it
was delivered. In short, therefore, though we have to follow the principles as laid down in Pradeep
Jain but at the same time we also have to keep in mind the ground realities of the present day. We
also have to keep in mind that we are presently not dealing with medical education but admission in
a professional education course called B.Ed.

13. This Court while upholding such reservations in medical education had considered factors such
as huge investments the State had made in creating the infrastructure, the backwardness of the area,
the presumption that the local residents after gaining the education will serve the people of that
State, etc. All these factors may or may not be equally relevant while we are considering admission
to other courses such as B.Ed in the present case.

14. What is equally important is that it was in Pradeep Jain again that this Court had cautioned
against largescale reservation under this head i.e. residents of the State. It cautioned against such
largescale reservation calling it as “wholesale” reservations. Para 20 of this Judgment would be
relevant:

“20. …We agree wholly with these observations made by the learned Judge and we
unreservedly condemn wholesale reservation made by some of the State
Governments on the basis of “domicile” or residence requirement within the State or
on the basis of institutional preference for students who have passed the qualifying
examination held by the university or the State excluding all students not satisfying
this requirement, regardless of merit. We declare such wholesale reservation to be
unconstitutional and void as being in violation of Article 14 of the Constitution.”

5

Veena Vadini Teachers Training ... vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 28 April, 2023

15. At this juncture, before we advert to the merits of the extent of reservation in the present case, it
would be prudent to examine some observations made by this Court. In the case of Pradeep Jain
(supra.), this Court had expressed its opinion on the permissible extent of reservations based on
residence. It was held that residence based reservation should not exceed 70 percent. The
observations relevant for our consideration are as follows:

“21. …So many variables depending on social and economic facts in the context of
educational opportunities would enter into the determination of the question as to
what in the case of any particular State, should be the limit of reservation based on
residence requirement within the State or on institutional preference. But in our
opinion, such reservation should in no event exceed the outer limit of 70 per cent of
the total number of open seats after taking into account other kinds of reservations
validly made. The Medical Education Review Committee has suggested that the outer
limit should not exceed 75 percent but we are of the view that it would be fair and just
to fix the outer limit at 70 per cent. We are laying down this outer limit of reservation
in an attempt to reconcile the apparently conflicting claims of equality and
excellence. We may make it clear that this outer limit fixed by us will be subject to
any reduction or attenuation which may be made by the Indian Medical Council
which is the statutory body of medical practitioners whose functional obligations
include setting standards for medical education and providing for its regulation and
coordination…” Although, the State Government is within its right to reserve seats in
educational institutions for its permanent residents, yet the only question remains as
to the extent of this reservation.

16. In order to appreciate the facts of this case, we have been shown the data of the last 2 preceding
years i.e., 2021-2022 and 2022-2023, and the appellant has tried to impress upon this court that
almost all the seats which were reserved for the residents of Madhya Pradesh have remained vacant
in the last two years. For instance, in the year 2021-2022, only 4 seats out of 75 reserved seats for
the resident of Madhya Pradesh had been filled and in the year 2022-2023, only 2 seats out of 75
reserved seats had been filled, and thus 71 and 73 seats, respectively remained vacant for the last
two years.

17. Thus, it is apparent that the large percentage of seats reserved for the residents of Madhya
Pradesh which remains unfilled is not serving any purpose. Moreover, a wholesale reservation for
residents of Madhya Pradesh would also be violative of the law laid down in the case of Pradeep
Jain, as we have referred above in this order.

18. Since the academic session for the year 2022-23 has already commenced, we would refrain from
interfering in the matter but we direct the State of Madhya Pradesh to reappreciate this entire
aspect, in the light of what we have said above. Though the State is within its right to reserve seats
for its own residents, but while doing so, it must keep the ground realities in mind. Keeping 75% of
the seats reserved for the residents of Madhya Pradesh is too high a percentage, and as the figures
for the last two years indicate, it is also not serving any purpose. The number of seats from the next
academic year shall, therefore be fixed again for residents and non-residents, keeping the

6

Veena Vadini Teachers Training ... vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 28 April, 2023

observations made by us in this order. We make it clear that though reservation in favour of
residents is permissible, yet reservation to the extent of 75% of the total seats makes it a wholesale
reservation, which has been held in Pradeep Jain to be unconstitutional and violative of Article 14 of
the Constitution of India5.

19. The State Government may examine the data of last few years, in order to come to a realistic
finding as to what should be the extent of these reservations. A wholesale reservation as we have
seen is not serving any purpose rather it frustrates the very purpose of the reservation. This shall be
kept in mind by the authorities while taking a decision in this matter, which shall be done within
two months from today.

20. The appeal is disposed of with the aforesaid directions.

21. All applications including IA Nos. 66056 and 66057 of 2023 also stand disposed of.

..……….………………….J. [DINESH MAHESHWARI] ...………………………….J. [SUDHANSHU DHULIA]
New Delhi.

April 28, 2023.

See Para 20 of Pradeep Jain (supra).

7