Vinod Kumar vs District Magistrate Mau on 7 July, 2023

Vinod Kumar vs District Magistrate Mau on 7 July, 2023

Author: B.R. Gavai

Bench: B.R. Gavai

2023INSC606                                                                REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELALTE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5107 OF 2022

VINOD KUMAR & ORS.                        …Appellant(s)
Versus
DISTRICT MAGISTRATE MAU & ORS. …Respondent(s)

JUDGMENT

J.B. PARDIWALA, J. :

This appeal is at the instance of unsuccessful original writ petitioners and is directed
against the order passed by a Division Bench of the High Court of Judicature at
Allahabad dated 28th February, 2020 in Writ−C No. 7310 of 2020 by which the High
Court rejected the writ application filed by the appellants taking the view that the
District Magistrate is competent to look into the legality and validity of the order
passed by the Special Land Acquisition Officer (for short, ‘SLAO’) under Section
3G(5) of the National Highways Authority Act, 1956 (for short ‘the Act 1956’).

FACTUAL MATRIX

2. The Central Government issued a notification dated 23.01.2015 in exercise of power under
Section 3A(1) of the Act 1956 proposing to acquire few parcels of land situated in the District Mau
for the purpose of four lane widening of the National Highway No. 29. The said notification included
the land bearing Gat Nos. 158, 160 and 161 resply of the village Ahirani Bujurg, District Mau (UP).

3. In the aforesaid context, a further notification dated 21.01.2016 was issued under Section 3D of
the Act 1956 declaring that the land as aforestated would be acquired for the public purpose. Upon
issuance of such notification, the land vested in the Central Government.

4. The competent authority i.e. the Special Land Acquisition Officer vide award dated 28.11.2016
passed under Section 3G of the Act 1956 determined the compensation to be paid to the landowners

1

Vinod Kumar vs District Magistrate Mau on 7 July, 2023

(parties before us) for the acquired land. The relevant portion of the award passed by the competent
authority reads thus:− “By assuming the rate of Rs.4,50,00,000.00 as the stamp rate determined for
the transferable land as basis, compensation of the land measuring 3.269 hec. situated in village
Ahirani Buzurg which is being acquired comes out to Rs.14,71,05,000.00, double amount of which
happens to be Rs.29,42,10,000.00 and compensation of the structure and tree comes at
Rs.8,01,582.00, total double amount of which comes out at Rs.15,29,06,582.00. Amount of 100%
Solatium amount on this amount comes out to Rs.30,00,11,582.00. Additional Compensation of
Rs.3,16,66,953.00 is payable at the rate of 12% from the last publication of Section 3A dated 6th
March, 2015. Thus, total compensation amount comes out to Rs.63,16,90,117.00 (Rupees sixty three
crores sixteen lakhs ninety thousand one hundred and seventeen only), I regard to which I declare
the Award. By recovering land acquisition expenses of Rs.6,31,69,012.00 at the rate of 10% of the
total amount of compensation and 100 times of registered value of less land revenue which comes
out at Rs.7476.00 from the Acquiring Authority, same be got deposited in the prescribed Account
Head. Accordingly, Notice be sent to the concerned Tehsil for proceedings of making entry. While
making one copy of the Award Order to Indian National Highway Authority, Gorakhpur, letter be
sent for making available the entire amount covered by the Award in question.”

5. On 11.12.2019, the respondents herein raised a dispute regarding apportionment of the
compensation between themselves and the appellants herein. With respect to the three parcels of
land, the respondents claimed half share of compensation in Gat No. 158 and 1/3rd share of
compensation in Gat Nos. 160 and 161 respectively, while the appellants herein claimed 5/8 th share
in the compensation in Gat No. 158 and 13/16 th share in Gat Nos. 160 and 161 respectively.

6. In accordance with the legislative scheme i.e. Section 3H(3) of the Act 1956, the competent
authority is required to determine the shares of the landowners in the compensation. In such
circumstances, the competent authority called for a report from the revenue authorities.

The revenue authorities vide its report dated 11.04.2019 reported the share of the appellants and
respondents herein. This report was in favour of the appellants. The relevant portion of the report
reads thus:− “4. That on the basis of copy of Khasra No. 1353, Gata No. 213 is mentioned which is
having present No. 232/ 51 min. and present No. of Gata No. 213 B min./ 519. Similarly present No.
of Gata No. 233 is 214/ 644 acres and type of land is mentioned as "Bagh Digar". Apart from it,
present No. of Gata No. 208 is 227 / 1.440 acres in which "Bagh Digar" is mentioned, which is
correct.

5. That names of Mahadav Shahi, son of Sitaram Shahi and Bholanath, son of Ganga and Saryu, son
of Brijrnohan, Caste Kandu are recorded in Khata No. 46 of Copy of Khatauni for the crop year 1348,
Ahirani Buzurg, in which Gata No. 232 acres is recorded and name of Mahadev, son of Sitaram
Shahi and Bholanath, son of Ganga and Saryu, son of Brijmohan, Caste Kanu is recorded in respect
of Gata No. 128 for the crop year 1348. Gata No. 232/ 0.284 acres is mentioned in it and names of
Mahadev, son of Sitaram Shahi and Bholanath, son of Brij Mohan, Caste Kandu are recorded in
Khata No. 92. Gata No. 232/0.539 and Gata No. 233/0.644 two Gatas admeasuring 1.163 acres are
mentioned in it, which is correct. On the basis of the crop year 1348, which has been mentioned as
Jamman 12. On its basis, ½ equal share in Gata No. 227 / 1.440, equal share of Salum in Gata No.

2

Vinod Kumar vs District Magistrate Mau on 7 July, 2023

232 min./ 0.551, 232/ 0.183, 232/ 0.539 and 233/ 1.624 have been determined, which road is
situated on both sides of Hashiya Doharighat to Gazipur, in which Applicant has got 1/3rd share in
Gata Nos.

232 and 233 and Applicants have got ½ share in Gata No. 227 / 1.440 acres and present Gata No.
158, in regard to which according to the order passed by the Additional Civil Judge, Azamgarh on
31.05.1976, Applicants Suresh and others have got 1/8th share in Gatas No. 232, 233 i.e. in present
Gata No. 158 measuring 0.583 and 1/16 th share in Gatas No. 160 and 161.”

7. The respondents herein objected to the aforesaid report.

Both the parties were given opportunity to file their documents.

An opportunity of hearing was also given to the parties and thereafter the competent authority i.e.
SLAO, Mau proceeded to determine the shares of the various parties in the land in question vide
order dated 11.12.2019. This order was passed under Section 3H(3) of the Act 1956. The SLAO relied
upon the earlier judgment of the Civil Court dated 31.05.1976. It is the case of the appellants that the
SLAO has correctly determined the shares between the parties. The relevant portion of the order
passed by the competent authority/SLAO reads thus:− “Above parties have been heard and
evidences available in the file have been duly perused. Khatauni for the crop year 1348 produced by
the Objector in his support as evidence have been examined. Present Khatauni for the crop year
1423− 1428, C. H. Form−41 and 45 and Form−11, previous Khatauni and order dated 31.05.1976
passed by the Hon'ble Court of Additional Civil Judge, Azamgarh have been perused. Hon'ble Court
of Additional Civil Judge in its very passed order has mentioned the pedigree of the family, which
has been mentioned by Tehsildar, Ghosi while perusing all the documents. This pedigree and share
mentioned in it confirms the submission of the report. The Hon'ble Civil Court has categorically
spoken on the issue of share in the suit while framing issue No.1 "Whether the Plaintiff is co− owner
and in the possession over the trees of list Ka to the extent of the 1/4th and list Kha 1/8th and 1/12th
of the list Ga as alleged in the plaint?" While deciding the above mentioned issue as well as others,
Hon'ble Court of Additional Civil Judge, Azamgarh has clearly mentioned in its order "In view of the
above pedigree and the documents, the share of Ganga, father of Bhola and Sukdeo was 1/4th in the
grove of plot No. 208 (new number 158).

"Further, "In view of what has been discussed above, I arrived at the irresistible
conclusion that Bhola had 1;sth share in Plot No. 208 (Old 227), 1/32nd share into
trees of plot No. 213 and 214 (232 and 233 old) and 1/16 th share in tree of
Doharighat − Ghazipur Road." In the above judicial order, partition of trees with land
and shares finds mention, but balance of convenience is falling in favour of the
Respondent Vinod. In my view, all the people who are present in the joint
tenureship/co− tenureship their share is to be decided on the basis of pedigree.
Therefore, when the pedigree has been decided by a competent Civil Court against
which the Defendants have never appealed, hence judicial estoppel also in the same.
Accordingly, the claim of Mr. suresh Gupta is not justified. Even earlier also, report
was sought from Tehsil Ghosi in the present case in regard to objection on the

3

Vinod Kumar vs District Magistrate Mau on 7 July, 2023

determination of the share, on which while granting sufficient opportunity of hearing
to both the parties, same was furnished by Tehsildar Ghosi while determining the
share. Even by appearing before the Court, both the parties have expressed the
consent in regard to this fact that Suraj, Ganga, Baldev Salik and Radhakrishan were
the children of Shri Brijmohan, in which Baldev died without children and thus, all of
them shall have 1/4 th share in the property of Brijmohan. Ganga had two children
namely Bholanath and Sukt1dev. Applicant Suresh is the heir of Shri Dwarika, son of
Parag, who had bought the property from Bholanath in the auction. Accordingly,
Bholanath can auction out that much only of which he is an owner lawfully. It shall
also be pertinent to mention this fact also that consolidation proceedings have
already been conducted in village Ahirani Buzurg, only after which, present records
CH Form 11, 23, 41 and 45 have been prepared and Khatauni has been formed on
their basis. Applicant Suresh Gupta or any member of his family has neither raised
any objection in this regard before the Court nor has produced any evidence of
initiating any proceedings in the Court, therefore, he is barred by Section 49 of the
Consolidation of Holding Act.

ORDER Thus, in pursuance of the evidence available on the file, present Khatauni,
report of the then Tehsildar, Ghosi and order of Hon'ble Court of Additional Civil
Judge, share produced on the file are satisfactory and correct. Accordingly, by
preparing file for payment of compensation, same be produced. After doing needful,
file be consigned to Record Room.

Sd/− illegible (Atul Vats) Competent Authority/ SLAO Mau 11.12.2019”

8. The respondents, being dissatisfied with the order dated 11.12.2019 passed by the SLAO referred
to above, challenged the same by filing a petition before the District Magistrate, Mau invoking
Section 3G(5) of the Act 1956. It is the case of the appellants herein that the District Magistrate, Mau
without any jurisdiction and further without giving any opportunity of hearing to the appellants
proceeded to pass an order dated 16.01.2020 granting higher shares in favour of the respondents
towards compensation. The operative portion of the order passed by the District Magistrate, Mau
reads thus:− “ORDER On the basis of the above examination, order dated 11.12.2019 of the
competent Officer/Special Land Acquisition Officer, Mau is set aside. File is remanded back to the
competent Officer with this direction that while duly examining the records produced by the above
parties, keeping in view the ownership of the land acquired by the ancestors of the objectors in the
auction and according to the separate pedigrees of Khatedar, share of Khatedars be determined and
also produce the proposal from Tehsil for taking action against the officials/employees who
produced erroneous report.”

9. The appellants herein, being dissatisfied with the order passed by the District Magistrate, Mau
referred to above, challenged the same before the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad by filing
Writ−C No. 7310 of 2020. The said writ application came to be rejected by a Division Bench of the
High Court vide its order dated 28.02.2020. The order passed by the High Court reads thus:− “1.
Heard Sri Yadvendra Pratap Singh, learned counsel for petitioners and learned Standing Counsel for

4

respondents.

Vinod Kumar vs District Magistrate Mau on 7 July, 2023

2. Writ petition is directed against order dated 16.01.2020 passed by District Magistrate, Mau in
purported exercise of power under Section 3(G)(5) of National Highway Act, 1956 (hereinafter
referred to as "Act, 1956") whereby he has set aside order passed by Special Land Acquisition
Officer, Mau passed on 11.12.2019 and remanded the matter for redetermination.

3. Learned counsel for petitioners submitted that determination was already made but could not
dispute that District Magistrate was competent to examine the order passed by Special Land
Acquisition Officer and take appropriate decision in accordance with law and order impugned in
present writ petition is not without jurisdiction. No otherwise error could be shown in the impugned
order.

4. Writ petition lacks merit. Dismissed.”

10. In such circumstances referred to above, the appellants came before this Court by filing the
special leave petition. This Court vide order dated 31.08.2020 issued notice and stayed the
operation of the order passed by the District Magistrate, Mau dated 16.01.2020. Later, leave was
granted and the appeal came to be admitted.

SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANTS

11. Mr. Gaurav Agrawal, the learned counsel appearing for the appellants, vehemently submitted
that the High Court committed a serious error in passing the impugned order. He submitted that the
order which came to be passed by the competent authority dated 11.12.2019 could be said to be
under Section 3H(3) of the Act 1956. If the respondents had any grievance in regard to the order
passed by the competent authority the remedy available in law to them was to approach the
competent authority so that the competent authority could have referred the matter to the Civil
Court. According to the learned counsel, such procedure is laid down under Section 3H(4) of the Act
1956.

12. The learned counsel further submitted that the District Magistrate, Mau who is an arbitrator
appointed by the Central Government does not have any jurisdiction to decide the apportionment of
the compensation. He is empowered only to decide the quantum of compensation under Section
3G(5) of the Act 1956 as an arbitrator.

13. The learned counsel submitted that challenge before the District Magistrate, Mau was to the
order dated 11.12.2019 passed by the competent authority which he could not have entertained. The
order passed by the District Magistrate dated 16.01.2020 could be said to be without jurisdiction.

14. In the last, the learned counsel submitted that even otherwise the impugned order passed by the
District Magistrate, Mau, could be said to be without jurisdiction as no notice or any opportunity of
hearing was given to the appellants.

5

Vinod Kumar vs District Magistrate Mau on 7 July, 2023

15. In such circumstances referred to above, the learned counsel prayed that there being merit in his
appeal, the same may be allowed and the order passed by the District Magistrate, Mau dated
16.01.2020 be quashed and set aside and the writ application filed by the appellants before the High
Court be allowed.

SUMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT NO. 1 – DISTRICT MAGISGRATE, MAU AND
THE RESPONDENT NO. 2 − COMPETENT AUTHORITY/SPECIAL LAND ACQUISITION
OFFICER, MAU

16. Shri V.K. Shukla, the learned senior counsel appearing for the District Magistrate, Mau
(respondent No. 1) and Competent Authority/Special Land Acquisition Officer, Mau (respondent
No. 2), very fairly submitted that the High Court committed an error in rejecting the writ application
filed by the appellants herein. Shri Shukla submitted that the District Magistrate, Mau could not
have entertained any petition filed at the instance of the respondents seeking to challenge the order
passed by the competent authority dated 11.12.2019 under Section 3H(3) of the Act 1956. In such
circumstances referred to above, Shri Shukla submitted that appropriate relief be granted in favour
of the appellants.

SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENT NOS. 4, 6 AND

17. Shri Arvind Kumar Shukla, the learned counsel appearing for the respondent Nos. 4, 6 and 16,
submitted that no error not to speak of any error of law could be said to have been committed by the
High Court in passing the impugned order. He submitted that the dispute, in substance, is not one
of apportionment but is in respect of the share in the subject land. In such circumstances, the
District Magistrate, Mau had the jurisdiction and competence to look into the order passed by the
competent authority by relying upon the order dated 31.05.1976 passed by the Principal Civil Judge,
Azamgarh in Civil Suit No. 63 of 1970. In such circumstances referred to above, the learned counsel
prayed that there being no merit in the present appeal, the same may be dismissed.

ANALYSIS

18. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having gone through the
materials on record, the only question that falls for our consideration is whether the High Court
committed any error in passing the impugned order.

19. Before adverting to the rival submissions canvassed on either side, we must look into few
relevant provisions of the Act 1956.

20. Section 3A reads thus:− “3A. Power to acquire land, etc.—(1) Where the Central Government is
satisfied that for a public purpose any land is required for the building, maintenance, management
or operation of a national highway or part thereof, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
declare its intention to acquire such land.

(2) Every notification under sub−section (1) shall give a brief description of the land.

6

Vinod Kumar vs District Magistrate Mau on 7 July, 2023

(3) The competent authority shall cause the substance of the notification to be published in two local
newspapers, one of which will be in a vernacular language.”

21. Section 3C provides for hearing of objections. Section 3D provides for declaration of acquisition.
Section 3E provides for power to take possession. Section 3G is with respect to determination of
amount payable as compensation. Section 3G reads thus:− “3G. Determination of amount payable
as compensation.—(1) Where any land is acquired under this Act, there shall be paid an amount
which shall be determined by an order of the competent authority.

(2) Where the right of user or any right in the nature of an easement on, any land is acquired under
this Act, there shall be paid an amount to the owner and any other person whose right of enjoyment
in that land has been affected in any manner whatsoever by reason of such acquisition an amount
calculated at ten per cent, of the amount determined under sub−section (1), for that land.

(3) Before proceeding to determine the amount under sub−section (1) or sub−section (2), the
competent authority shall give a public notice published in two local newspapers, one of which will
be in a vernacular language inviting claims from all persons interested in the land to be acquired.

(4) Such notice shall state the particulars of the land and shall require all persons interested in such
land to appear in person or by an agent or by a legal practitioner referred to in sub−section (2) of
section 3C, before the competent authority, at a time and place and to state the nature of their
respective interest in such land.

(5) If the amount determined by the competent authority under sub−section (1) or sub−section (2) is
not acceptable to either of the parties, the amount shall, on an application by either of the parties, be
determined by the arbitrator to be appointed by the Central Government.

(6) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
(26 of 1996) shall apply to every arbitration under this Act.

(7) The competent authority or the arbitrator while determining the amount under sub−section (1)
or sub−section (5), as the case may be, shall take into consideration—

(a) the market value of the land on the date of publication of the notification under section 3A;

(b) the damage, if any, sustained by the person interested at the time of taking possession of the
land, by reason of the severing of such land from other land;

(c) the damage, if any, sustained by the person interested at the time of taking possession of the
land, by reason of the acquisition injuriously affecting his other immovable property in any manner,
or his earnings;

(d) if, in consequences of the acquisition of the land, the person interested is compelled to change
his residence or place of business, the reasonable expenses, if any, incidental to such change.”

7

(Emphasis supplied)

Vinod Kumar vs District Magistrate Mau on 7 July, 2023

22. Section 3H is with respect to deposit and payment of amount. What is relevant for our purpose
is sub−clause (4) of Section 3H. Sub−clause (4) reads thus:− “3H. Deposit and payment of
amount.— (4) If any dispute arises as to the apportionment of the amount or any part thereof or to
any person to whom the same or any part thereof is payable, the competent authority shall refer the
dispute to the decision of the principal civil court of original jurisdiction within the limits of whose
jurisdiction the land is situated.”

23. The scheme of the Act 1956 and the statutory provisions referred to above makes it very clear
that once any land is acquired under the Act 1956, the competent authority is obliged to pay an
amount by way of compensation. There is a procedure which has been prescribed under Section 3G
of the Act 1956. Sub−clause (5) of Section 3G makes it abundantly clear that if the amount
determined by the competent authority under sub−section (1) or sub−section (2) of Section 3G is not
acceptable to either of the parties, the amount will have to be determined by the arbitrator who may
be appointed by the Central Government on the strength of an application by either of the parties.
Section 3H provides that the amount determined towards compensation under Section 3G will have
to be deposited by the Central Government in accordance with the rules. It is only after such amount
is deposited by the competent authority that the possession of the land can be taken. Sub−clause (4)
of Section 3H talks about apportionment of the amount. The language of sub−clause (4) of Section
3H is plain and simple. It provides that if any disputes arises as to the apportionment of the amount
or any part thereof, the competent authority is obliged to refer the dispute to the decision of the
Principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction within the limits of whose jurisdiction the land is
situated.

24. In the case on hand, the High Court seems to have completely misread the provisions of the Act
1956. It fell into error as it failed to apply the well settled principle of law that for construing a legal
provision, the first and foremost rule of construction is the literal construction. All that the Court
has to see at the very outset is what does the provision state. If the provision is unambiguous and
from the provision the legislative intent is clear, the Court need not call into aid the other rules of
construction of statute. The other rules of construction are called into aid only when the legislative
intent is not clear.

25. It may be mentioned in the aforesaid context that the first and foremost principle of
interpretation of a statute in every system of interpretation is the literal rule of interpretation. The
other rules of interpretation, for example, the mischief rule/ purposive construction, etc. can only be
resorted to when the plain words of a statute are ambiguous or lead to no intelligible results or if
read literally would nullify the very object of the statute. Where the words of a statute are absolutely
clear and unambiguous, recourse cannot be had to the principles of interpretation other than the
literal rule. The language employed in a statute is the determinative factor of the legislative intent.
The legislature is presumed to have made no mistakes. The presumption is that it intended to say
what it has said. Assuming there is a defect or an omission in the words used by the legislature, the
Court cannot correct or make up the deficiency.

8

Vinod Kumar vs District Magistrate Mau on 7 July, 2023

26. There is a fine distinction between determining the amount to be paid towards compensation
and the apportionment of the amount. The legislature has thought fit to confer powers upon the
Principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction to determine the dispute arising as to the
apportionment of the amount. There is a reason, why the legislature has thought fit to confer such
power to the Principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction within the limits of whose jurisdiction is
land is situated. We shall try to explain hereinafter.

27. The question of apportionment of compensation is not free from difficulties. In apportioning the
compensation, the Court has to give to each claimant the value of the interest which he has lost by
compulsory acquisition. So stated, the proposition may appear simple, but in its practical
application numerous complicated problems arise in apportioning the compensation awarded. The
difficulty experienced is due to the nature of a variety of interests, rights and claims to land which
have to be valued in terms of money. The compensation awarded for compulsory acquisition is the
value of all the interests which are extinguished and that compensation has to be distributed
equitably amongst persons having interest therein and the Court must proceed to apportion the
compensation so that the aggregate value of all interests is equal to the amount of compensation
awarded. But in the valuation of competing interests, which from its very nature is dependent upon
indefinite factors and uncertain data, considerable difficulty is encountered. Indisputably, in
apportioning compensation the Court cannot proceed upon hypothetical considerations but must
proceed as far as possible to make an accurate determination of the value of the respective interests
which are lost. The Court must, in each case, having regard to the circumstances and the possibility
of a precise determination of the value having regard to the materials available, adopt that method
of valuation which equitably distributes the compensation between the persons entitled thereto.
[See : Dossibai Nanabhoy Jeejeebhoy v. P.M. Bharucha, (1956) 60 Bom LR 1208]

28. Thus, the only general principle one could state is that apportionment under sub−clause (4) of
Section 3H of the Act 1956 is not a revaluation but a distribution of the value already fixed among
the several persons interested in the land acquired in accordance with the nature and quantum of
the respective interests. In ascertainment of those interests, the determination of their relative
importance and the manner in which they can be said to have contributed to the total value fixed are
questions to be decided in the light of the circumstances of each case and the relevant provisions of
law governing the rights of the parties. The actual rule for apportionment has to be formulated in
each case so as to ensure a just and equitable distribution of the total value or compensation among
the persons interested in the land.

29. In the circumstances referred to above, the legislature thought fit to assign such function to none
other than the Principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction.

30. We are not impressed by the submission canvassed on behalf of the respondent Nos. 4, 6 and 16
that the dispute between the parties is not one of apportionment but the same is with regard to
giving effect to the order passed by the Civil Court in Civil Suit No. 63 of 1970 decided on
31.05.1976. What is perhaps sought to be argued is that the shares in the land acquired should be
determined on the basis of some order passed by the Civil Court referred to above. Thus, if the
private respondents want to rely upon the order passed by the Civil Court, they can do so before the

9

Vinod Kumar vs District Magistrate Mau on 7 July, 2023

Court of the Principal Judge of original jurisdiction. We hold that the District Magistrate, Mau has
no power or jurisdiction in regard to the apportionment of the amount.

31. We fail to understand on what basis the High Court in its impugned order has observed that the
District Magistrate is competent to examine the order passed by the Special Land Acquisition
Officer and decide the dispute as to the apportionment of the amount.

32. In the decision in Sharda Devi v. State of Bihar, reported in 2003 MhLJ Online (S.C.) 23 = AIR
2003 SC 942, this Court had an occasion to consider the ambit and scope of Sections 30 and 31
resply of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894. In analyzing and interpreting these provisions, this Court
held as under:− “23. The two provisions contemplating power of the Collector to make reference as
contained in Section 18 and Section 30 of the Act need a comparative study. Under Section 18 the
subject−matter of reference can be a dispute as to any one or more of the following: (i) as to the
measurement of the land, (ii) as to the amount or the quantum of the compensation,

(iii) as to the persons to whom the compensation is payable, (iv) as to the apportionment of the
compensation among the persons interested. Under Section 30 the subject matter of dispute can be:

(i) the apportionment of the amount of compensation or any part thereof, (ii) the
persons to whom the amount of compensation or any part thereof is payable.

Though the expression employed in Section 18 is 'the amount of compensation' while the expression
employed in Section 30 is 'the amount of compensation or any part thereof', this distinction in
legislative drafting is immaterial and insignificant and a dispute as to entitlement or apportionment
of part of the compensation would also be covered by Section 18 of the Act on the principle that the
whole includes a part too. Thus, at the first blush, it seems that Section 30 overlaps Section 18 in
part; but as will be seen shortly hereinafter, it is not so.

24. Dr. G.H. Grant Vs. State of Bihar (supra) is a three−Judge Bench decision of this Court wherein
the scheme of the Act by reference to the power vesting in the Collector to make a reference came up
for the consideration of the Court. The three−Judge Bench by a majority of 2:1 laid down the
following principles :

(i) There are two provisions in the Act under which the Collector can make a
reference to the Court, namely, Section 18 and Section 30. The powers under the two
sections are distinct and may be invoked in contingencies which do not overlap. A
person shown in that part of the award which relates to apportionment of
compensation who is present either personally or through a representative or on
whom notice is issued under Section 12(2), must, if he does not accept the award,
apply to the Collector to refer the matter to the Court under Section 18 within the
time prescribed thereunder. But a person who has not appeared in the acquisition
proceedings before the Collector may, if he is not served with notice of filing, raise a
dispute as to apportionment or as to the persons to whom it is payable and apply to
the Court for a reference under Section 30, for determination of his right to

10

Vinod Kumar vs District Magistrate Mau on 7 July, 2023

compensation which may have existed before the award, or which may have devolved
upon him since the award. For a reference under Section 30, no period of limitation
is prescribed.

(ii) It is not predicated of the exercise of the power to make a reference under Section
30 that the Collector has not apportioned the compensation money by his award.

(iii) The award made by the Collector under Section 11 is not the source of the right to
compensation. An award is strictly speaking only an offer made by the Government
to the person interested in the land notified for acquisition; the person interested is
not bound to accept it and the Government can also withdraw the acquisition u/s 48.
It is only when possession of the land has been taken by the Government u/s 16 that
the right of the owner of the land is extinguished.

Therefore the appellant's contention that title to compensation is derived solely from and on the
date of the award could not be accepted.

(iv) The liability of the Government u/s 31 to pay compensation to the person entitled thereto under
the award does not imply that only the persons to whom compensation is directed to be paid under
the award may raise a dispute u/s 30. The scheme of apportionment by the Collector under Section
11 is conclusive only between the Collector and the persons interested and not among the persons
interested. Payment of compensation u/s 31 to the persons declared in the award to be entitled
thereto discharges the State of its liability to pay compensation leaving it open to the claimant to
compensation to agitate his right in a reference u/s 30 or by a separate suit.

(v) Under the Bihar Land Reforms Act the title of the appellant to the land noticed for acquisition
became vested in the State and therefore the right to compensation for the land acquired devolved
upon the State. A dispute then arose between the State Government and the appellant "as to the
persons to whom" compensation was payable.

The State had no right to the compensation payable for the land under a title existing before the date
of the award of the Collector and no application could be made by it as a person interested within
the meaning of Section 18. But a dispute between the appellant and the State as to their conflicting
claims to the compensation money was clearly a dispute which could be referred u/s 30 of the Act to
the Court. There is nothing in Section 30 which excludes a reference to the Court of a dispute raised
by a person on whom the title of the owner of the land has since the award, devolved.

30. The scheme of the Act reveals that the remedy of reference u/s 18 is intended to be available only
to a 'person interested'. A person present either personally or through representative or on whom a
notice is served u/s 12(2) is obliged, subject to his specifying the test as to locus, to apply to the
Collector within the time prescribed u/s 18(2) to make a reference to the Court. The basis of title on
which the reference would be sought for u/s 18 would obviously be a pre− existing title by reference
to the date of the award. So is Section 29, which speaks of 'persons interested'. Finality to the award
spoken of by Section 12(1) of the Act is between the Collector on one hand and the 'persons

11

Vinod Kumar vs District Magistrate Mau on 7 July, 2023

interested' on the other hand and attaches to the issues relating to (i) the true area, i.e.
measurement of the land, (ii) the value of the land, i.e. the quantum of compensation, and (iii)
apportionment of the compensation among the 'persons interested'. The 'persons interested' would
be bound by the award without regard to the fact whether they have respectively appeared before
the Collector or not. The finality to the award spoken of by Section 29 is as between the 'persons
interested' inter se and is confined to the issue as to the correctness of the apportionment. Section
30 is not confined in its operation only to 'persons interested'. It would, therefore, be available for
being invoked by the 'persons interested' if they were neither present nor represented in
proceedings before the Collector, nor were served with notice u/s 12(2) of the Act or when they
claim on the basis of a title coming into existence post award. The definition of 'person interested'
speaks of 'an interest in compensation to be made'. An interest coming into existence post award
gives rise to a claim in compensation which has already been determined. Such a person can also
have recourse to Section 30. In any case, the dispute for which Section 30 can be invoked shall
remain confined only (i) as to the apportionment of the amount of compensation or any part
thereof, or (ii) as to the persons to whom the amount of compensation (already determined) or any
part thereof is payable. The State claiming on the basis of a pre−existing right would not be a 'person
interested', as already pointed out hereinabove and on account of its right being pre− existing, the
State, in such a case, would not be entitled to invoke either Section 18 or Section 30 seeking
determination of its alleged pre−existing right. A right accrued or devolved post award may be
determined in a reference u/s 30 depending on Collector's discretion to show indulgence, without
any bar as to limitation. Alternatively, such a right may be left open by the Collector to be
adjudicated upon in any independent legal proceedings. This view is just, sound and logical as a title
post award could not have been canvassed upto the date of the award and should also not be left
without remedy by denying access to Section 30. Viewed from this angle, Section 18 and 30 would
not overlap and would have fields to operate independent of each other.

37. The Collector acts as a representative of the State whilst holding proceedings under the Land
Acquisition Act. In fact, he conducts the proceedings on behalf of the State. The award of the
Collector is not the source of the right to compensation; it is the pre− existing right which is
recognized by the Collector and guided by the findings arrived at in determining the objections, if
any, the Collector quantifies the amount of compensation to be placed as an offer of the appropriate
Government to the owner recognized by the State. The offeree may accept or decline the offer. It he
accepts the offer and the Government takes possession over the land, the title of the offeree is
extinguished and vests absolutely in the Government free from all encumbrances. The power to
make an award under Section 11 and to make a reference under Sections 18 or 30 of the Act is a
statutory power. The sweep of jurisdiction of Court to determine the disputes is also statutory and is
controlled by the bounds created by Section 17 or 30 whereunder the reference has been made to the
Court. The power has to be exercised to the extent to which it has been conferred by the Statute and
on availability of pre− existing conditions on the availability of which and which alone the power can
be exercised.

38. Award made by the Collector is final and conclusive as between the Collector and the 'persons
interested', whether they have appeared before the Collector or not, on two issues : (i) as to true
area, i.e. measurement of land acquired, (ii) as to value of the land, i.e. the amount of compensation,

12

Vinod Kumar vs District Magistrate Mau on 7 July, 2023

and (iii) as to the apportionment of the compensation among the 'persons interested' again, between
the Collector and the 'persons interested' and not as amongst the 'persons interested' inter se. In the
event of a reference having been sought for u/s 18, the Collector's award on these issues; if varied by
Civil Court, shall stand superseded to that extent. The scheme of the Act does not attach a similar
finality to the award of the Collector on the issue as to the person to whom compensation is payable;
in spite of the award by Collector and even on failure to seek reference, such issue has been left
available to be adjudicated upon by any competent forum.”

33. We are of the view that when it comes to resolving the dispute relating to apportionment of the
amount determined towards compensation, it is only the Principal Civil Court of original
jurisdiction which can do so. Principal Civil Court means the Court of the District Judge.

34. Our final conclusion is as under:− If any dispute arises as to the apportionment of the amount or
any part thereof or to any person to whom the same or any part thereof is payable, then, the
competent authority shall refer the dispute to the decision of the Principal Civil Court of original
jurisdiction within the limits of whose jurisdiction the land is situated. The competent authority
possesses certain powers of the Civil Court, but in the event of a dispute of the above nature, the
summary power, vesting in the competent authority of rendering an opinion in terms of sub−section
(3) of Section 3H, will not serve the purpose. The dispute being of the nature triable by the Civil
Court that the law steps in to provide for that to be referred to the decision of the Principal Civil
Court of original jurisdiction. The dispute regarding apportionment of the amount or any part
thereof or to any person to whom the same or any part thereof is payable, would then have to be
decided by that Court.

35. In such circumstance referred to above, the order passed by the District Magistrate, Mau dated
16.01.2020 is hereby quashed and set aside. The writ application No. 7310 of 2020 stands allowed.
In view of the dispute between the parties as regards apportionment of the amount of compensation,
the Special Land Acquisition Officer shall now refer the dispute to the Principal Civil Court of
original jurisdiction in accordance with sub−clause (4) of Section 3H of the Act 1956.

36. The appeal is allowed accordingly.

37. There shall be no order as to costs.

38. Pending application, if any, stands disposed of accordingly.

………………………………..J. ( B.R. GAVAI ) ………………………………..J. (J.B. PARDIWALA) NEW
DELHI;

JULY 07, 2023

13