Y.P. Lele vs Maharashtra State Electricity ... on 16 August, 2023

Y.P. Lele vs Maharashtra State Electricity ... on 16 August, 2023

Author: Vikram Nath

Bench: Vikram Nath

2023INSC732

REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NO.        OF 2023
Arising out of SLP (C) NO. 3543 OF 2019

Y.P. LELE                        …APPELLANT(S)

VERSUS

MAHARASHTRA STATE
ELECTRICITY DISTRIBUTION
COMPANY LTD. & Ors. …RESPONDENT(S)

JUDGMENT

VIKRAM NATH, J.

Leave granted.

2. The appellant is the original defendant no. 5, as described in the plaint of the Special Civil Suit
No. 125 of 1988.

3. The present appeal assails the correctness of judgment and order dated 27.06.2018 passed by the
learned Single Judge of the Bombay High Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 1488 of 2015 titled
“Maharashtra State Electricity Board vs. Miraj Electric Supply Co. Ltd. Ors.”, whereby the petition
was allowed, the order dated 30.09.2014 passed by the Trial Court allowing the application under
order IX Rule 13 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 19081 was set aside and the ex parte decree was
maintained.

4. Shorn of unnecessary facts, Maharashtra State Electricity Board2 filed Special Civil Suit No. 125
of 1988 in the Court of Civil Judge, Senior Division at Sangli impleading Miraj Electric Supply Co.
Ltd.3 as defendant no. 1 and its five Directors as defendant nos. 2 to 6 for recovery of Rs.
1,42,85,177.47/- with costs of suit and further praying for interest at the rate of 18% per annum from
the date of presentation In short, “CPC” In short, “MSEB” In short, “MESC” of the suit till
realisation of the aforesaid amount. The defendants appeared and filed their written statements.

1

Y.P. Lele vs Maharashtra State Electricity ... on 16 August, 2023

The plaintiff’s evidence was being led and at that stage the counsel for the defendants Shri. M.B.
Karmarkar withdrew his Vakalatnama vide Ex.

112. He had also not cross-examined the witnesses. The Trial Court, on 04.12.2004, directed for suit
to proceed under Order XVII Rule 2 of CPC against the defendants. Thereafter the Trial Court
proceeded to record the evidence of the plaintiff and, vide judgement and order dated 29.01.2005,
decreed the suit ex parte with costs. The operative portion of the judgment is reproduced hereunder:

“Suit is decreed ex parte with cost, as under:

1. The defendants No. 1 to 6 jointly and severally to pay Rs. 1,42,85,177.47 Ps. (Rs.

One crore, forty two lakhs, eighty five thousands, one hundred seventy seven and forty seven paise
only) to the plaintiff board M.S.E.B.). They shall pay interest at the rate of Rs. 18% p.a. on the
arrears amount of Rs.

1,0490032.36 Ps. (Rs. One crores four lakhs nineteen thousands thirty two and thirty six paise only)
from the date of the suit till its realization.

2. Decree be drawn up accordingly.”

5. The defendants, on coming to know of the ex parte decree, belatedly filed an application under
Order IX Rule 13 CPC accompanied by an application for condonation of delay under Section 5 of
the Limitation Act, 1963 on 21.09.2006. The Trial Court, vide order dated 20.09.2010, allowed the
application under Section 5 of the Limitation Act finding the explanation to be satisfactory for the
delay caused with costs of Rs. 3,000/- on the defendants to be deposited within ten days.

6. Thereafter, the Trial Court vide order dated 30.09.2014, allowed the application under Order IX
Rule 13 CPC, set aside the ex parte decree dated 29.01.2005 while imposing fine of Rs. 1,000/- and
restored the Special Civil Suit No. 125 of 1988 to its original number.

7. The plaintiff-MSEB preferred a Writ Petition before the High Court under Articles 226 and 227 of
the Constitution. The High Court, by the impugned order dated 12.01.2015, allowed the Writ
Petition, set aside the order dated 30.09.2014. As a result, the suit of the respondent-MSEB stood
decreed ex parte. The petition was allowed on the ground that the application under Order IX Rule
13 CPC would not be maintainable in as much as the High Court had applied the explanation under
Order XVII Rule 2 CPC.

8. Aggrieved by the same, the present appeal has been preferred by impleading MSEB as respondent
no.1, the contesting respondent, and also impleading the other four Directors as respondent nos. 3
to 6. It also impleaded MESC as respondent no. 2. At some stage during the pendency before this
Court, the respondent nos. 2 to 6 were directed to be deleted from the array of parties vide order
dated 21.10.2019. However later on, vide order dated 15.09.2021, Respondent Nos. 2 and 6 were
restored as party respondents.

2

Y.P. Lele vs Maharashtra State Electricity ... on 16 August, 2023

9. It would be worthwhile to mention that the appeal has been preferred by one of the Directors, as
noted in the beginning, being defendant no.5 before the Trial Court.

10. We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.

11. The submission of learned counsel for the appellant is that the High Court committed a grave
error in applying the explanation to Order XVII Rule 2 CPC. According to him, the order passed by
the Trial Court decreeing the suit ex parte and the earlier order dated 04.12.2004 was only an order
under Order XVII Rule 2 CPC and not under the explanation as the explanation would not be
applicable. It was also submitted that the Trial Court itself, while decreeing the suit, had recorded
that it was an ex parte decree and under Order IX Rule 13 CPC an ex parte decree could be applied
for being recalled.

12. On the other hand, the submission of learned counsel for the respondent MSEB is to the effect
that out of the five Directors only one of them had approached this Court, whereas the defendant
no.1- company as also the other four Directors defendant nos. 2 to 4 and 6 are not before this Court
challenging the said order. It is further submitted that the High Court was right in allowing the writ
petition by invoking the explanation to Order XVII Rule 2 CPC and the appeal deserves to be
dismissed.

13. It would be worthwhile to mention that this Court, vide order dated 10.12.2018, had directed the
appellant to deposit 50% of the suit claim i.e. half of Rs. 1,42,85,177/- within a period of six weeks
and the matter was directed to be listed after six weeks. On 25.01.2019, this Court being satisfied
that 50% of the suit claim had been deposited before the Trial Court, directed that the Trial Court
would invest the said amount in a Fixed Deposit initially for a period of six months in a Nationalized
Bank with automatic renewal. This Court, further, condoned the delay, issued notices to the
respondents and further stayed the impugned judgment.

14. Before proceeding to consider the submissions, it would be appropriate to reproduce Order XVII
Rule 2 CPC, which reads as follows:

“2. Procedure if parties fail to appear on day fixed. - Where, on any day to which the
hearing of the suit is adjourned, the parties or any of them fail to appear, the Court
may proceed to dispose of the suit in one of the modes directed in that behalf by
Order IX or make such other order as it thinks fit.

Explanation.-Where the evidence or a substantial portion of the evidence of any party
has already been recorded and such party fails to appear on any day to which the
hearing of the suit is adjourned, the Court may, in its discretion, proceed with the
case as if such party were present.”

15. It would also be relevant to reproduce Order IX Rule 13 which reads as follows:

3

Y.P. Lele vs Maharashtra State Electricity ... on 16 August, 2023

“Setting aside decree ex parte against defendant-In any case in which a decree is
passed ex-parte against a defendant, he may apply to the Court by which the decree
was passed for an order to set it aside; and if he satisfies the Court that the summons
was not duly served, or that he was prevented by any sufficient cause from appearing
when the suit was called on for hearing, the Court shall make an order setting aside
the decree as against him upon such terms as to costs, payment into Court or
otherwise as it thinks fit, and shall appoint a day for proceeding with the suit:

Provided that where the decree is of such a nature that it cannot be set aside as
against such defendant only it may be set aside as against all or any of the other
defendants also:

Provided further that no Court shall set aside a decree passed ex parte merely on the
ground that there has been an irregularity in the service of summons, if it is satisfied
that the defendant had notice of the date of hearing and had sufficient time to appear
and answer the plaintiffs claim.

Explanation- Where there has been an appeal against a decree passed ex parte under
this rule, and the appeal has been disposal of on any ground other than the ground
that the appellant has withdrawn the appeal, no application shall lie under this rule of
setting aside the ex parte decree.”

16. A plain reading of Order IX Rule 13 makes it apparent that where in a case, a
decree is passed ex parte against defendant, a party may apply to the Court for setting
aside the same for reasons satisfying the Court regarding non-appearance.

17. Coming to Order XVII Rule 2 CPC, it would be apparent that if the parties or any
one of them failed to appear on a day to which the hearing of the suit is adjourned,
the Court may proceed to dispose of the suit in one of the modes directed in that
behalf by Order IX or make such other order as it deems fit.

18. In the present case, the defendants did not appear on 04.12.2004, nor their
counsel appeared as he had already withdrawn his Vakalatnama by a written request.
The Trial Court directed for the suit to proceed under Order XVII Rule 2 CPC against
the defendants. The effect of the order dated 04.12.2004 was that the Trial Court
could have proceeded to dispose of the suit in one of the modes directed in that
behalf by Order IX CPC. Coming back to Order IX CPC, it is to be noticed that under
Rule 6 thereof where summons are duly served and the defendant does not appear
when the suit is called on for hearing, then the Court may make an order that the suit
be heard ex parte. This is in fact the procedure adopted by the Trial Court in the
present case.

Accordingly, after the evidence of the plaintiff was concluded and the defendant continued to
remain absent, the Trial Court decreed the suit ex parte, vide judgment dated 29.01.2005. The

4

operative portion thereof clearly mentions that the suit is decreed ex parte.

Y.P. Lele vs Maharashtra State Electricity ... on 16 August, 2023

19. Now coming to the explanation, what is stated therein is that where the evidence or a substantial
portion of the evidence of any party has already been recorded and such party fails to appear on any
day to which the hearing of the suit is adjourned, the Court would be at liberty to proceed with the
case as if such party were present. Two phrases are important in the explanation “any party” and
“such party”. “Any party” refers to the party which has led evidence or substantial evidence and
“such party” refers to that very party which has led evidence or substantial evidence. What is
discernible is that under Order XVII Rule 2, the Court would proceed to pass orders with respect to
any of the parties being absent or both the parties being absent. Whereas the explanation is confined
to record the presence of that party and that party alone, which has led evidence or substantial
evidence and has thereafter failed to appear. In the present case, admittedly the suit was at the stage
of plaintiff’s evidence as is apparent from the order dated 04.12.2004. The evidence of the
defendants had not even started and the defendants’ counsel had not even cross-examined the
plaintiff’s evidence.

20. The explanation in the present case could have been invoked only if the plaintiff, after adducing
his evidence or substantial evidence, failed to appear, the Court could have recorded his presence
while disposing of the suit. But once the defendant had not led any evidence at all, the explanation
could not be invoked as against the defendant/appellant. The High Court committed an error in
applying the explanation to Order XVII Rule 2 CPC and based upon it holding that an application
under Order IX Rule 13 CPC would not be maintainable as the presence of the defendant would be
deemed to be recorded at the time of disposal of the suit.

21. As a matter of fact, once the counsel had withdrawn his Vakalatnama, in normal course, the Trial
Court ought to have issued notice to the defendants to engage another counsel, which it did not do
and proceeded ex parte. The Trial Court committed an error in doing so. Further, the Trial Court, in
its wisdom and discretion having allowed the application under Order IX Rule 13 CPC, the High
Court ought to have refrained itself from interfering with an order which advanced the cause of
justice by affording opportunities to both the parties so that the suit could be decided on merits.

22. For all the reasons recorded above, we are unable to uphold the impugned order of the High
Court. The appeal is allowed. The impugned order of the High Court is set aside. The Trial Court will
proceed to decide the Special Civil Suit on its own merits, after giving due opportunities to the
parties and strictly proceed in accordance with law.

23. Once the ex parte decree has been set aside, the amount of 50% deposited by the appellant needs
to be suitably accounted for. It is true that under Order IX Rule 13 CPC, the Court, while allowing
the application, could impose such terms and conditions as it deems fit and this being a money
decree, the Trial Court could have required the appellant to deposit some amount. The appellant is
one of the five Directors of the defendant no.1. Although the relief claimed was for joint and several
liability of each of the Directors, in our view the deposit of 50% at the hands of appellant above
would be too excessive. We accordingly provide that the amount deposited by the appellant under
the order of this Court, which is lying in the Trial Court, may be adjusted as follows:

5

Y.P. Lele vs Maharashtra State Electricity ... on 16 August, 2023

(i). 20% of the suit claim, along with interest accrued thereon, may be retained by the
Trial Court and may continue to deposit the same in the Fixed Deposit initially for a
period of six months, renewable on an automatic basis, till further orders are passed
in that regard, depending upon the outcome of the suit;

(ii). Whereas 30%, along with accrued interest thereon, may be returned to the
appellant within four weeks of the date of filing of this order before the Trial Court
along with an application for return of amount as directed above.

24. No order as to costs.

25. Pending application, if any, stand disposed of.

……………………………………J. (VIKRAM NATH) …………………………………..J. (AHSANUDDIN
AMANULLAH) NEW DELHI AUGUST 16, 2023

6