Yogendra Prasad Singh (Dead) Thr Lrs vs Ram Bachan Devi And Ors. on 31 July, 2023

Yogendra Prasad Singh (Dead) Thr Lrs vs Ram Bachan Devi And
Ors. on 31 July, 2023

Author: Abhay S. Oka

Bench: Rajesh Bindal, Abhay S. Oka

2023 INSC 658

NON−REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NO.10412 of 2013

Yogendra Prasad Singh (Dead)
through LRs                               …..Appellants

Versus

Ram Bachan Devi & Ors.                  …..Respondents

JUDGMENT

Abhay S. Oka, J.

FACTUAL BACKGROUND

1. The appellants are the legal representatives of the original plaintiff. For the sake of convenience,
parties are hereinafter referred to with reference to their status before the Trial Court. The Trial
Court decreed the Suit which has been reversed in appeal.

2. The plaintiff is the son−in−law of the first defendant. The first defendant has four daughters. One
of the daughters, Sachita Devi has been married to of the first defendant who is married to one
Komal Singh.

3. The first defendant was heavily indebted. He had borrowed money from various persons by
executing mortgage deeds, hand notes, etc. As the first defendant was unable to pay debts, he
decided to sell the suit property. Accordingly, he executed a registered Sale Deed on 04th February
1963 in favour of the plaintiff for consideration of Rs.10,000/−. According to the case of the
plaintiff, he was placed in possession of the suit property and started cultivating the same. His

1

Yogendra Prasad Singh (Dead) Thr Lrs vs Ram Bachan Devi And Ors. on 31 July, 2023

contention was that there was an absolute sale under the Sale Deed dated 04th February 1963 (for
short, ‘the Sale Deed’).

4. Even according to the case of the plaintiff, a part of the consideration was to be paid by him to the
creditors of the first defendant. In the plaint, the plaintiff has described the steps taken by him to
clear the loans repayable by the first defendant and money paid by him from time to time to various
persons in that behalf. His contention is that he paid off the debt as mentioned in the Sale Deed. The
plaintiff has contended that the first defendant being his father−in− law, collected the registered
Sale Deed from the office of the Sub−Registrar and has kept the same in his custody.

5. The first defendant executed a registered Deed of Cancellation dated 15th June 1967 in respect of
the cancellation of the Sale Deed. The plaintiff was admittedly not a signatory to the said Deed of
Cancellation. Thereafter, the first defendant purported to execute a Gift Deed dated 12th January
1968 (for short ‘the Gift Deed’) in respect of the suit property in favour of the second defendant. The
case of the plaintiff is that though he was all along in possession, on the basis of the order passed in
proceedings under Section 145 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 he was illegally dispossessed
from the suit property. Therefore, the plaintiff filed a Suit for declaration of title. The plaintiff also
claimed a declaration that the Gift Deed is forged. The plaintiff prayed for a decree for possession of
the suit property.

6. The basic contention of the first defendant in his written statement was that by the Sale Deed,
absolute sale was not effected. It is contended that out of the consideration of Rs.10,000/−, the
plaintiff had agreed to pay a sum of Rs.6,875/− for redeeming the 10 mortgages made by the first
defendant. The balance amount of Rs.3,125/− was to be paid on the exchange of equivalents (ta
khubzul badlain). The contention of the first defendant is that in fact the mortgages were redeemed
by him and therefore, he was in possession of the mortgage deeds. His contention is that as no
consideration was passed under the Sale Deed, the plaintiff has not acquired any right, title or
interest in the suit property.

7. The Trial Court after in−depth consideration of the evidence on record, concluded that the
plaintiff had acquired ownership in respect of the suit property on the basis of the Sale Deed. It was
held that the Deed of Cancellation dated 15th June 1967 being a unilateral document was not valid.
The Trial Court held that the remedy of the first defendant was to invoke Section 31 of the Specific
Relief Act, 1963 and seek cancellation of the Sale Deed. The Trial Court also held that the second
defendant did not acquire any right, title or interest on the basis of the Gift Deed executed by the
first defendant. The Trial Court accepted the case made out by the appellant that the liabilities of the
first defendant were discharged by him.

8. In the appeal against the decree of the Trial Court preferred by the original defendants, the High
Court interfered with the impugned judgment and held that as consideration was not paid under the
Sale Deed, the plaintiff did not acquire any right, title or interest in respect of the suit property. The
High Court did not accept the plaintiff's case that he had discharged the loan liability of the first
defendant. The Trial Court had accepted that the plaintiff had paid a cash amount of Rs.3,125/− to
the first defendant at the time of the exchange of equivalents. The said case was disbelieved by the

2

Yogendra Prasad Singh (Dead) Thr Lrs vs Ram Bachan Devi And Ors. on 31 July, 2023

High Court. Therefore, the High Court proceeded to set aside the decree of the Trial Court and
dismissed the Suit.

SUBMISSIONS

9. The learned counsel appearing for the legal representatives of the plaintiff submitted that on the
execution of the Sale Deed, right, title and interest of the first defendant in the suit property were
passed on to the plaintiff. He submitted that there was substantial evidence on record to show the
discharge of liabilities of the first defendant by the plaintiff. Inviting our attention to the recitals in
the Sale Deed, he submitted that it is clearly recorded that the title and possession passed on to the
plaintiff. He submitted that the first defendant being the father−in−law of the plaintiff had retained
the Sale Deed. Considering the relationship between the plaintiff and the first defendant, it is not
unnatural that the plaintiff did not object to the custody of the Sale Deed by the first defendant. He
submitted that the findings of fact recorded by the High Court regarding the payment of liabilities of
the first defendant by the plaintiff are completely erroneous. He submitted that there is nothing
abnormal about the possession by the first defendant of the mortgage deeds. Though the mortgage
money was paid by the plaintiff, the mortgage deeds were handed over to the first respondent as he
was the mortgagor.

10. The learned counsel appearing for the first and second defendants heavily relied upon a decision
of this Court in the case of Janak Dulari & Anr. v. Kapildeo Rai & Anr.1. He submitted that this
Court in the said decision has taken note that the practice of ta khubzul badlain (of title passing on
the exchange of equivalents) is prevalent only in Bihar. He submitted that this Court held that the
practice of ta khubzul badlain in Bihar recognizes that a duly executed Sale Deed will not operate as
a transfer in praesenti but postpones the actual transfer of title from the time of execution and
registration of the deed to the time of exchange of equivalents. In such a case, the title on the basis
of the Sale Deed will pass to the purchaser only after the entire amount is paid by the purchaser.
Inviting our attention to the recitals in the Sale Deed, he submitted that it was a transaction to
which the practice of ta khubzul badlain was applicable. He submitted that as the title in the Suit
property never passed on to the plaintiff, the first defendant rightly executed a Deed of Cancellation
of the Sale Deed. He submitted that there is no reason to find fault with the reasoning adopted by
the High Court.

11. The learned counsel appearing for the legal 1 (2011) 6 SCC 555 representatives of the plaintiff
submitted that in very difficult times faced by the first defendant, the plaintiff, his son−in−law, took
the risk of taking the suit property, which was the subject matter of encumbrances.

OUR VIEW

12. A sale deed of an immovable property is executed in accordance with Section 54 of the Transfer
of Property Act, 1882 (for short, ‘the 1882 Act’). There cannot be any dispute that normally, on the
execution of a registered Sale Deed by the owner of the property, the title in the property subject
matter of the Sale Deed stands transferred to the purchaser. Considering the principles laid down in
sub−section (4)(b) of Section 55 of the 1882 Act, the seller will have a charge over the property

3

Yogendra Prasad Singh (Dead) Thr Lrs vs Ram Bachan Devi And Ors. on 31 July, 2023

subject matter of the sale for unpaid consideration and he can enforce the charge by filing a suit.

13. The entire case of the defendants is based on the decision of this Court in the case of Janak
Dulari Devi1. In paragraph 20 of the said decision this Court held thus :

“20. We have referred to several decisions of the Patna High Court in detail to
demonstrate the existence of the established practice of exchanging equivalents (ta
khubzul badlain). The effect of such transactions in Bihar is that even though the duly
executed and registered sale deed may recite that the sale consideration has been
paid, title has been transferred and possession has been delivered to the purchaser,
the actual transfer of title and delivery of possession is postponed from the time of
execution of the sale deed to the time of exchange of the registration receipt for the
consideration, that is, ta khubzul badlain.” (emphasis added) Paragraph 24 of the
decision reads thus :

“24. We hasten to add that the practice of ta khubzul badlain (of title passing on
exchange of equivalents) is prevalent only in Bihar. Normally, the recitals in a sale
deed about transfer of title, receipt of consideration and delivery of possession will be
evidence of such acts and events; and on the execution and registration of the sale
deed, the sale would be complete even if the sale price was not paid, and it will not be
possible to cancel the sale deed unilaterally. The exception to this rule is stated in
Kaliaperumal [(2009) 4 SCC 193 : (2009) 2 SCC (Civ) 101] . The practice of ta
khubzul badlain in Bihar recognises that a duly executed sale deed will not operate as
a transfer in praesenti but postpones the actual transfer of title, from the time of
execution and registration of the deed, to the time of exchange of equivalents, that is,
registration receipt and the sale consideration, if the intention of the parties was that
title would pass only on payment of entire sale consideration. As a result, until and
unless the duly executed and registered sale deed comes into the possession of the
purchaser, or until the right to receive the original sale deed is secured by the
purchaser by obtaining the registration receipt, the deed of sale remains merely an
agreement to be performed and will not be a completed sale. But in States where such
a practice is not prevalent, possession of registration receipt by the vendor, may not,
in the absence of other clear evidence, lead to an inference that consideration has not
been paid or that title has not passed to the purchaser as recited in the duly executed
deed of conveyance. Where the purchaser is from an outstation, the vendor being
entrusted with the registration receipt, to collect the original sale deed and deliver it
to the purchaser, is common. Be that as it may.” (emphasis added) Thus, this Court
held that normally, on the execution and registration of a sale deed containing
recitals regarding the payment of consideration and delivery of possession, the sale is
complete even if the sale price is not paid and, therefore, it will not be possible to
cancel the sale deed in its entirety. However, the exception to the said rule is the
practice of ta khubzul badlain. The use of the expression ta khubzul badlain in a sale
deed by itself will not be determinative of the true nature of the transaction. It cannot
be read in isolation. All the terms and conditions and recitals in the document will

4

Yogendra Prasad Singh (Dead) Thr Lrs vs Ram Bachan Devi And Ors. on 31 July, 2023

have to be considered to decide the real nature of the transaction.

14. We have, therefore, examined the recitals in the Sale Deed from the translated English version of
the same produced by the appellants. The English translation shows that –

(a) There is a specific recital that the first defendant has transferred the possession of the suit
property to the plaintiff in the capacity of the owner and that the plaintiff will become the owner of
the property;

(b) It also mentions that from the date of Sale Deed, the first defendant has no claim or title in
respect of the suit property or regarding its price;

(c) Nothing was due and payable by the plaintiff to the first defendant as the first defendant had
received consideration; and

(d) The plaintiff who was the son−in−law of the first defendant took the suit property with
encumbrances when the first defendant was in trouble due to liabilities.

15. Therefore, the use of the words “khubzul badlain”, in the facts of the case, cannot be conclusive.
It is true that the Sale Deed refers to various mortgages executed by the first defendant for getting
money and the recitals indicate that the plaintiff had agreed to discharge the said loan liabilities.
But, there is a specific recital in the Sale Deed that the title and possession in the property has been
passed to the plaintiff. These recitals regarding the transfer of title and possession are very crucial
which cannot be brushed aside.

16. On overall reading of the Sale Deed, it is apparent that under the Sale Deed, the entire right, title
and interest of the first defendant in the suit property has been transferred to the plaintiff by the
said sale deed. At the highest, as per sub−section (4)(b) of Section 55 of the 1882 Act, the first
defendant was entitled to have a charge on the suit property for the amount of consideration which
was not paid by the plaintiff. Even this provision may not help the first defendant. The reason is that
the plaintiff has taken over the suit property with liabilities as set out in the Sale Deed. The creditors
of the first defendant can, therefore, proceed against the suit property. Once we hold that the title
and ownership passed on to the plaintiff on the date of Sale Deed, it is not necessary to go into the
question whether the appellant has discharged liabilities of the loan especially when the first or
second defendants did not file a counter−claim for payment of the consideration payable under the
Sale Deed.

17. There is one more aspect of the case. If it was the case of the first defendant that there was no
transfer of title under the said Sale Deed, there was no reason for him to unilaterally execute a
document of cancellation of the sale deed. In any case, such a unilateral cancellation deed was not
binding on the plaintiff as he was not a consenting party. The second defendant will not get any right
by virtue of the gift deed as the first defendant had no transferable title. As the ownership of the
plaintiff is proved, the decree for possession must follow. There was no counter−claim made by the
first or second defendant for claiming alleged unpaid consideration.

5

Yogendra Prasad Singh (Dead) Thr Lrs vs Ram Bachan Devi And Ors. on 31 July, 2023

18. Therefore, the appeal succeeds. The impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court of
Patna in First Appeal No.334 of 1988 is quashed and set aside and the decree passed by the Trial
Court in Title Suit No.142 of 1977 is restored.

19. The appeal is allowed on the above terms with no order as to costs.

……..………………..J. [ABHAY S. OKA] ..……………………..J. [RAJESH BINDAL] New Delhi Dated : July
31, 2023.

6