Jitender @ Kalla vs State (Govt.) Of Nct Of Delhi on 20 February, 2025

Jitender @ Kalla vs State (Govt.) Of Nct Of Delhi on 20 February,
2025

Author: Abhay S Oka

Bench: Abhay S. Oka

2025 INSC 249

                                                                              REPORTABLE
                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.                OF 2025
                            (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRL.) NO.4299 OF 2024)

                            JITENDER @ KALLA                                 … APPELLANT

                                                         versus

                            STATE (GOVT. OF NCT OF DELHI) & ORS. …RESPONDENT

                                                          with
                                         Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 418 of 2024

                                                       ORDER

ABHAY S OKA, J.

CRIMINAL APPEAL @ S.L.P. (Crl) No.4299 of 2024

1. Leave granted.

2. Very important issues arise in the appeal. The first issue is about the conduct of the
advocate-on-record who filed the Special Leave Petition (for short, ‘SLP’) out of which the present
appeal arises. The second issue concerns the conduct of the designated as a senior advocate. Two
consequential issues KAVITA PAHUJA Date: 2025.02.20 16:50:50 IST Reason:

arise. The first consequential issue is about the need to formulate a code of conduct

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161206620/

1

Jitender @ Kalla vs State (Govt.) Of Nct Of Delhi on 20 February, 2025

for the advocates-on-record. The second one is whether the decisions of this Court in
the case of Indira Jaising v Supreme Court of India1 (hereafter referred to as ‘Indira
Jaising-I’) and Indira Singh v Supreme Court of India2 (hereafter referred as ‘Indira
Jaising-II’) need reconsideration. The question of taking action against the appellant
for making false statements will be considered in a separate IA on which a notice has
been issued.

FACTUAL ASPECTS

3. First, we are setting out a few factual aspects. The trial court convicted the appellant for the
offences punishable under Sections 302 and 307 of the Indian Penal Code (for short, ‘the IPC’) by
the judgment dated 1st July 2013. He was sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for life with
a direction that his case for a grant of remission shall not be considered until he undergoes a
sentence of thirty years. The appellant preferred an appeal before the High Court. While confirming
the conviction, the High Court was of the view that the punishment imposed on the appellant was
excessive and modified the same by removing the cap of thirty years. The appellant was let off on a
sentence of 16 years, 10 months already undergone. By the judgment dated 25th October 2018, in
Jitendra @ Kalla v. State of Govt. of NCT of Delhi3, this Court interfered with the view taken by the
High Court and restored the order of sentence of the trial court. This Court held 1 (2017) 9 SCC 766
2 (2023) 8 SCC 1 3 (2019) 13 SCC 691 that the appellant's sentence shall be thirty years of rigorous
imprisonment and that the appellant shall have no right to seek remission till he completes the full
sentence of thirty years.

4. The present appeal was filed to challenge the judgment dated 8th January 2024 passed by the
Delhi High Court in a petition filed by one Rani, who was sentenced to undergo life imprisonment in
an unconnected case. The petitioner therein applied for premature release. As the application was
not considered, a prayer was made in the Writ Petition before the High Court seeking a writ of
mandamus, directing the 1st respondent – State Government, to consider her case for premature
release under the Government Policy dated 16th July 2004. A copy of the order dated 30th June
2023 was placed on record by which the prayer of the petitioner in the said writ petition before the
High Court was rejected by the State Government. The High Court, while setting aside the order
dated 30th June 2023, directed reconsideration of the petitioner–Rani's case and granted her time
of two months to surrender.

5. Though the present appellant was not a party to the petition in which the impugned order was
passed, strangely, he challenged the said order. It is an admitted position that while filing the SLP,
which is the subject matter of this criminal appeal, the appellant did not disclose that he was
directed to undergo imprisonment for thirty years without remission. Therefore, this Court
proceeded on the footing that it was a case of a simple life sentence.

6. On 19th March 2024, Shri Rishi Malhotra, advocate, and Shri Jaydip Pati, advocate-on-record,
appeared. Along with the present appeal, other SLPs were listed. Therefore, there was a common
order passed directing notice to be issued returnable on 19th April 2024. In the meanwhile, since
the present appellant was on furlough, an exemption was granted to the present appellant from

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161206620/

2

surrendering. The order dated 19th March 2024 reads thus:

Jitender @ Kalla vs State (Govt.) Of Nct Of Delhi on 20 February, 2025

“Applications seeking exemption from filing a certified copy of the impugned order
are allowed. Applications seeking permission to file the Special Leave Petitions are
allowed.

Issue notice, returnable on 19th April, 2024.

Liberty is granted to serve the Standing Counsel for the respondent-State, in
addition.

To be heard along with SLP (Crl.) No.3497/2024 (@ Diary No.9321/2024).

In the meantime, as the petitioners are on furlough, we grant exemption to them
from surrendering.”

7. We may note here that on 29th April 2024, IA No.105306 of 2024 and IA No.104520 of 2024
were filed for intervention and recall of the order dated 19th March 2024, respectively. The
applications were made by the 1st informant in the case. In the application, it was pointed out that
there was suppression of material facts about the fixed-term sentence of thirty years imposed on the
appellant. Another fact pointed out was that the appellant had not approached the High Court and
he had directly approached the Supreme Court by purportedly challenging the order passed in a writ
petition filed by some other accused. After the said applications were served on the appellant, on 9th
May 2024, the advocate-on-record for the appellant mentioned the case at 10.30 a.m. and prayed
for permission to withdraw the SLP. He had not intimated the advocate for the applicant that the
matter would be mentioned for withdrawal. Therefore, while disposing of all the interim
applications, this Court permitted the withdrawal of the SLP with liberty to the appellant to file
appropriate proceedings before the High Court. Order dated 9th May 2024 reads thus:

Taken on Board. Heard learned counsel appearing for the petitioner.

The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner is not aware whether the application
made by the petitioner for grant of permanent remission has been rejected. The
remedy of the petitioner is to file appropriate proceedings before the High Court.
Hence, we dispose of this Special Leave Petition by granting liberty to the petitioner
to file appropriate proceedings before the High Court.

If the petitioner is already released on furlough and he has not yet surrendered, we
grant time of three weeks to the petitioner to surrender, which will enable him to file
appropriate proceedings before the High Court.

Applications for impleadment as well as for intervention are disposed of.

Pending applications stand disposed of accordingly.”

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161206620/

3

Jitender @ Kalla vs State (Govt.) Of Nct Of Delhi on 20 February, 2025

8. The fact that the application for intervention was pending was not brought to the notice of this
Court. Therefore, the advocate for the applicant mentioned the matter on 17th May 2024 and
pointed out that without notice to him or his client, Miscellaneous Application No. 986 of 2024 was
mentioned in the morning session and that this Court permitted the petitioner to withdraw the SLP
out of which the appeal arises. Therefore, notice was issued on the said application to the appellant.
By order dated 17th May 2024, the order permitting withdrawal of SLP was stayed.

9. On 11th July 2024, though this SLP was called out on two occasions, none appeared for the
petitioner. This Court passed an order directing that the Registry shall issue an intimation to the
advocate-on-record, calling upon the advocate-on-record to remain present on the next date. On
14th August 2024, Miscellaneous Application No.986 of 2024 seeking impleadment of the
complainant as a party respondent was allowed. This Court allowed IA No.104520 of 2024 seeking
recall of the order dated 19th March 2024 to the extent of prayer in clause (a). This Court noted that
the petitioner in the writ petition had already surrendered. Thereafter, an order was passed on 2nd
September 2024, which reads thus:

“We have perused the Special Leave Petition and the annexures to the Application for
Intervention.

The Trial Court convicted the petitioner and sentenced him to undergo actual
sentence of 30 years. The High Court interfered with the said order. Thereafter, this
Court by a decision in Jitendra Alias Kalla vs. State (Government of NCT of Delhi)1
restored the judgment of the Trial Court by specifically observing that the petitioner
will undergo life sentence for 30 years without remission. These facts were
suppressed while filing this Special Leave Petition. Moreover, the petitioner was not a
party to the petition before the Delhi High Court on which the impugned order was
passed. In the synopsis, there is a specific reference to an order of conviction.

However, it is not disclosed that the order of sentence was for a fixed term of 30 years. Therefore,
this is a very serious and gross case of material misrepresentation made while filing the Special
Leave Petition. The Advocate-on-Record for the petitioner, who filed this Special Leave Petition,
owes an explanation to this Court. Therefore, the Registry to issue notice to Shri Jaydip Pati,
Advocate-on-Record, which is made returnable on 30th September, 2024.

A copy of this order shall accompany the notice.

Shri Jaydip Pati, Advocate-on-Record, will explain his conduct by filing an affidavit.” (emphasis
added)

10. Pursuant to the order, Shri Jaydip Pati, advocate-on- record, filed an affidavit dated 9th
September 2024. After considering the said affidavit on 30th September 2024, this Court passed the
following order:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161206620/

4

Jitender @ Kalla vs State (Govt.) Of Nct Of Delhi on 20 February, 2025

“Mr. Jaydip Pati, Advocate-on-Record has filed an affidavit pursuant to order passed
by this Court. To say the least, the contents are shocking. We will elaborately deal
with the stand taken by him at an appropriate stage. In view of what is stated in the
affidavit, we issue notice to Shri Rishi Malhotra, learned Senior Advocate to appear
before this Court for explaining what is stated in the affidavit filed by Mr. Jaydip Pati,
Advocate-on-Record.

Registry to forward copies of all orders passed in the SLP/M.A. along with a copy of
affidavit filed by Mr. Jaydip Pati, Advocate-on-Record to Mr. Rishi Malhotra, learned
Senior Advocate. Notice made returnable on 21st October, 2024.

Considering what is stated in the affidavit by Mr. Jaydip Pati, Advocate-on-Record
and considering the fact that in recent past, this Court has noticed that at least in half
a dozen cases blatant false statements were being made in the writ petitions and
Special Leave Petitions filed seeking relief of premature release, we will require
assistance of the President of the Supreme Court Advocates-on-

Record Association (SCAORA). We request the President, SCAORA to appear and
assist the Court on the next date of hearing. Copies of all the orders passed by this
Court and a copy of affidavit of Mr. Jaydip Pati, Advocate-on- Record be forwarded to
the President of SCAORA.”

11. In terms of the said order, Shri Rishi Malhotra, advocate (who was designated as a senior
advocate on 14th August 2024), filed an affidavit dated 18th October 2024. The order dated 21st
October 2024 reads thus:

“We have perused the affidavit of Mr. Rishi Malhotra, the learned senior counsel. Ms.
Meenakshi Arora, the learned senior counsel representing him states that a better
affidavit will be filed.

We permit Mr. Rishi Malhotra, the learned senior counsel to withdraw his affidavit
and to file a better affidavit.

This case raises issues of great concern, insofar as the responsibility of Advocates-on
Record of this Court is concerned. Apart from the dispute between a senior and his
junior, as is reflected from the affidavits filed on record, the issue of concern is of the
conduct of the Advocate-on-Record, especially in the light of explanation (a) to Rule
10 of Order IV of the Supreme Court Rules, 2013. A very important role has been
assigned to Advocates-on- Record, as no litigant can seek redressal of his grievance
before this Court without engaging an Advocate-on-Record. It is, therefore, necessary
to consider of framing guidelines for the conduct of the Advocates-on-Record.

The learned President of the Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Association and
the other Office Bearers are present and they have agreed to assist the Court on this

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161206620/

5

Jitender @ Kalla vs State (Govt.) Of Nct Of Delhi on 20 February, 2025

aspect.

For assisting the Court for framing the guidelines, we appoint Dr. S. Murlidhar,
senior advocate as Amicus Curiae. It will be open for him to appoint an Advocate-on-
Record of his choice to assist him.

Copies of the entire proceedings including the affidavits on record shall be forwarded
to the learned Amicus Curiae. It will be appropriate if the Office Bearers of the
Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Association interact with the learned Amicus
Curiae so that they will be able to come out with agreed guidelines.

List on 11th November, 2024.” Thereafter, another affidavit dated 30th November
2024 was filed by Shri Rishi Malhotra tendering an unconditional apology.

12. Orders passed from time to time by this Court will show that the following aspects need
consideration:

a) The role played by Shri Jaydip Pati, advocate-on- record;

b) The role played by Shri Rishi Malhotra, senior advocate; and,

c) The role of the appellant.

As far as the role of the appellant is concerned, we may note here that IA No.259649 of 2024 has
been filed by an intervener for initiating proceedings under Section 340 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (for short, ‘CrPC’) on which notice has been issued on 20th January 2025 and the
said application has been de-tagged. Therefore, the issue of the conduct of the appellant will be
examined when we consider the said application.

13. The conduct of the advocate-on-record gives rise to the issue regarding the duties and
obligations of advocates-on- record and guidelines for their conduct. On this aspect, we have heard
Dr S Murlidhar, learned senior counsel appearing as amicus curiae, Shri Vipin Nair, President of the
Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Association (for short, ‘SCAORA’) and Vice-President and
Secretary Shri Amit Sharma and Shri Nikhil Jain respectively. We have also heard Shri Tushar
Mehta, learned Solicitor General of India and lastly, Shri Vinay Navare, senior advocate
representing Shri Rishi Malhotra, senior advocate.

14. The second aspect about the conduct of Shri Rishi Malhotra, senior advocate, gives rise to a
contention raised by Shri Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor General of India, appearing for Union of
India, for reconsideration of earlier decisions of this Court in Indira Jaising-I1 and Indira
Jaisingh-II2 and another decision in the case of Amar Vivek Aggarwal v. High Court of Punjab &
Haryana and Ors. 4 On these issues raised by the learned Solicitor General of India, we have also
heard Ms. Indira Jaising, a senior advocate who has intervened.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161206620/

6

CONDUCT OF THE ADVOCATE ON RECORD AND HIS SENIOR

Jitender @ Kalla vs State (Govt.) Of Nct Of Delhi on 20 February, 2025

15. Firstly, we will deal with the issue of the conduct of the advocate-on-record for the appellant and
the consequential question of issuing guidelines on the conduct of advocates-on- record. Before we
do that, we must consider the stand taken by Shri Jaydip Pati, advocate-on-record, in his affidavit
dated 9th September 2024, filed in compliance with the order of this Court dated 2nd September
2024. The stand taken in the affidavit by Shri Jaydip Pati can be summarised as follows:

a) Shri Rishi Malhotra, the then advocate-on-record drafted eight SLPs including the
present SLP, and he asked Shri Jaydip Pati to sign on those petitions as an
advocate-on-record;

b) Shri Jaydip Pati never doubted the bona fides of Shri Rishi Malhotra. As he was
working with Shri Rishi Malhotra as his junior, he could not refuse to sign the
petitions and vakalatnama as an advocate-

on-record;

4 (2022) 7 SCC 439

c) Only after this Court issued a notice he learnt that the chamber of Shri Rishi Malhotra, while
drafting the present petition, concealed the fact that this Court, in the case of Jitendra @ Kalla3, had
restored the fixed-term sentence of the appellant herein, for thirty years; and,

d) He never imagined that Shri Rishi Malhotra, in his capacity as a chamber senior, would exploit
the situation by filing cases through him while concealing material facts.

Thus, Shri Jaydip Pati stated that he filed the SLP drafted by Shri Rishi Malhotra as an
advocate-on-record without even bothering to read the same.

16. Shri Rishi Malhotra filed an affidavit dated 18th October 2024, raising the following contentions:

a) This Court appointed him as an amicus curiae in two cases in which the issue of
permanent remission of convicts was involved;

b) He must have filed cases on behalf of more than two hundred convicts seeking
their premature release;

c) Due to increased workload and paucity of time, he shared his workload with
different chamber juniors, including Shri Jaydip Pati and Shri Utkarsh Singh;

d) He gave certain cases to Shri Jaydip Pati to file for the purpose of giving him
financial benefit, and accordingly, he must have drafted at least nine cases which
were filed before this Court;

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161206620/

7

Jitender @ Kalla vs State (Govt.) Of Nct Of Delhi on 20 February, 2025

e) There is no complaint made by Shri Jaydip Pati regarding other cases which were
given to him and he has not stated that he signed those petitions without checking
the contents;

f) Shri Jaydip Pati filed the cases given to him as per client’s instructions, and the
drafts of the SLPs made by Shri Pati were neither shown to him, nor discussed with
him;

g) Coming to know about other cases filed by him where convicts had not fulfilled the
eligibility criteria for premature release, he himself filed applications seeking
withdrawal of such applications with an unconditional apology as an assurance that
he would be extra careful in future matters; and,

h) The recent turn of events has affected his mental health and has brought a lot of
humiliation and embarrassment to him; therefore, he has stopped taking any new
remission cases.

17. Shri Rishi Malhotra then filed an application, which was affirmed on 30th November 2024,
seeking permission to withdraw his earlier affidavit dated 14th November 2024. In this application,
he has made a turnaround and has entirely changed his earlier stand. After he was permitted to
withdraw the affidavit dated 14th November 2024, Shri Rishi Malhotra filed a fresh affidavit dated
30th November 2024. In the said affidavit, Shri Rishi Malhotra has claimed that he is a fourth-
generation lawyer. What he stated in the affidavit can be summarised as follows:

a) He tendered an unconditional apology to this Court by accepting that he should
have verified the SLP drafted by his chamber colleague to ensure that there were no
incorrect statements. It was his moral and professional duty to oversee the work of
his chamber juniors, and he was negligent in that behalf;

b) Wherever he had made wrong statements regarding the eligibility of the convicts
to get a premature release, he has withdrawn all those petitions by tendering an
apology;

c) He claimed that such misrepresentation by some of the Delhi convicts has occurred
for the first time in his entire legal career for which he expressed regret and tendered
an apology; and,

d) He stated that he had tendered an unconditional apology for stating incorrect facts
in the petitions.

He assured the Court that such incidents would not be repeated in the future.

18. Shri Rishi Malhotra has accepted that he should have verified the facts stated in the SLP filed by
Shri Jaydip Pati. He has accepted that he was not diligent and has tendered an apology. He admitted

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161206620/

8

Jitender @ Kalla vs State (Govt.) Of Nct Of Delhi on 20 February, 2025

that he has made factually incorrect statements in the petitions filed by him concerning the grant of
remission, and after realising it, he has withdrawn the petitions.

DUTY OF AN ADVOCATE-ON-RECORD

19. It is necessary to examine the legal provisions. Firstly, we will deal with the provisions of the
Advocates Act, 1961 (for short, ‘the 1961 Act’). Under Section 16, there are two classes of advocates,
namely, senior advocates and other advocates. Sections 29 and 30 are also important, which read
thus:

“29. Advocates to be the only recognised class of persons entitled to practise law.—
Subject to the provisions of this Act and any rules made thereunder, there shall, as
from the appointed day, be only one class of persons entitled to practise the
profession of law, namely, advocates.

30. Right of advocates to practise.— Subject to the provisions of this Act, every
advocate whose name is entered in the [State roll] shall be entitled as of right to
practise throughout the territories to which this Act extends,—

(i) in all courts including the Supreme Court;

(ii) before any tribunal or person legally authorised to take evidence; and

(iii) before any other authority or person before whom such advocate is by or under any law for the
time being in force entitled to practise.” Thus, every advocate within the meaning of the 1961 Act is
entitled to practice in all courts throughout the territories to which the 1961 Act extends, including
this Court. An exception has been carved out to Section 30 under the Supreme Court Rules, 2013
(for short, ‘the 2013 Rules’), framed by this Court in the exercise of powers under Article 145 of the
Constitution of India, with the approval of the President of India. Order IV thereof deals with
advocates. Rule 1 of Order IV carves out an exception. Rule 1 reads thus:

“1. (a) Subject to the provisions of these rules an advocate whose name is entered on
the roll of any State Bar Council maintained under the Advocates Act, 1961 (25 of
1961) as amended shall be entitled to appear before the Court:

Provided that an advocate whose name is entered on the roll of any State Bar Council
maintained under the Advocates Act, 1961 (25 of 1961), for less than one year, shall
be entitled to mention matters in Court for the limited purpose of asking for time,
date, adjournment and similar such orders, but shall not be entitled to address the
Court for the purpose of any effective hearing:

Provided further that the Court may, if it thinks desirable to do so for any reason,
permit any person to appear and address the Court in a particular case.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161206620/

9

Jitender @ Kalla vs State (Govt.) Of Nct Of Delhi on 20 February, 2025

(b) No advocate other than the Advocate-

on-record for a party shall appear, plead and address the Court in a matter unless he is instructed by
the advocate-on-record or permitted by the Court.

(c) In petitions/appeals received from jail or a matter filed by a party-in-person or where a
party-in-person as respondent is not represented by an Advocate-on-Record, the Secretary
General/Registrar may require the Supreme Court Legal Services Committee to assign an Advocate,
who may assist the Court on behalf of such person:

Provided that whenever a party wants to appear and argue the case in person, he/she
shall first file an application along with the petition seeking permission to appear and
argue in person. The application shall indicate reasons as to why he/she cannot
engage an Advocate and wants to appear and argue in person, and if he is willing to
accept an Advocate, who can be appointed for him by the Court. Such application
shall, in the first instance, be placed before the concerned Registrar to interact with
the party-in-person and give opinion by way of office report whether the
party-in-person will be able to give necessary assistance to the Court for proper
disposal of the matter or an Advocate may be appointed as Amicus Curiae:

Provided further that whenever an advocate whose name is entered on the rolls of
any State Bar Council maintained under the Advocates Act, 1961 (25 of 1961) wants to
appear and argue the case in person, he shall be exempted from the requirement of
interaction by the concerned Registrar.

If the application is allowed by the Court then only the party-in-person will be
permitted to appear and argue the case in person.” (emphasis added) Therefore, as
far as this Court is concerned, an advocate other than an advocate-on-record for a
party is entitled to appear, plead or address a case only if he is instructed by an
advocate- on-record. Rule 5 of Order IV lays down the qualifications of an advocate to
be registered as an advocate-on-record. Rules 7 and 10 of Order IV are again relevant,
which read thus:

“7. (a) An advocate-on-record shall, on his filing a memorandum of appearance on
behalf of a party accompanied by a vakalatnama duly executed by the party, be
entitled—

(i) to act as well as to plead for the party in the matter and to conduct and prosecute
before the Court all proceedings that may be taken in respect of the said matter or
any application connected with the same or any decree or order passed therein
including proceedings in taxation and applications for review; and

(ii) to deposit and receive money on behalf of the said party.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161206620/

10

Jitender @ Kalla vs State (Govt.) Of Nct Of Delhi on 20 February, 2025

(b)(i) Where the vakalatnama is executed in the presence of the Advocate-on-Record,
he shall certify that it was executed in his presence.

(ii) Where the Advocate-on-Record merely accepts the vakalatnama which is already
duly executed in the presence of a Notary or an advocate, he shall make an
endorsement thereon that he has satisfied himself about the due execution of the
vakalatnama.

(c) No advocate other than an advocate-on-

record shall be entitled to file an appearance or act for a party in the Court.

(d) Every advocate-on-record shall keep such books of account as may be necessary to show and
distinguish in connection with his practice as an advocate-on-record—

(i) moneys received from or on account of and the moneys paid to or on account of each of his
clients; and

(ii) the moneys received and the moneys paid on his own account.

(e) Every advocate-on-record shall, before taxation of the Bill of Costs, file with the Taxing Officer a
certificate showing the amount of fee paid to him or agreed to be paid to him by his client.

10. When, on the complaint of any person or otherwise, the Court is of the opinion that an
a d v o c a t e - o n - r e c o r d   h a s   b e e n   g u i l t y   o f   m i s c o n d u c t   o r   o f   c o n d u c t   u n b e c o m i n g   o f   a n
advocate-on-record, the Court may make an order removing his name from the register of advocates
on record either permanently or for such period as the Court may think fit and the Registrar shall
thereupon report the said fact to the Bar Council of India and to State Bar Council concerned:

Provided that the Court shall, before making such order, issue to such advocate-
on-record a summons returnable before the Court or before a Special Bench to be
constituted by the Chief Justice, requiring the advocate-on-record to show cause
against the matters alleged in the summons, and the summons shall, if practicable, be
served personally upon him with copies of any affidavit or statement before the Court
at the time of the issue of the summons.

Explanation.—For the purpose of these rules, misconduct or conduct unbecoming of
an advocate-on-record shall include—

(a) mere name lending by an advocate-

on-record without any further participation in the proceedings of the case;

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161206620/

11

Jitender @ Kalla vs State (Govt.) Of Nct Of Delhi on 20 February, 2025

(b) absence of the advocate-on-record from the Court without any justifiable cause
when the case is taken up for hearing; and

(c) failure to submit appearance slip duly signed by the advocate-on-record of actual
appearances in the Court.” (emphasis added)

20. An occasion for an advocate-on-record to file a memorandum of appearance
accompanied by a vakalatnama, arises when he files a case in this Court or when he
appears for a respondent or opponent in any case. If a vakalatnama is not duly
executed before the advocate-on-record but executed in the presence of a notary or
another advocate, the advocate-

on-record must, before filing the vakalatnama, make an endorsement thereon that he has satisfied
himself about the due execution of the vakalatnama. Therefore, if someone else hands over the
vakalatnama to an advocate-on-record, the requirement of making an endorsement, as provided in
clause

(a)(ii) of Rule 7, is mandatory. This endorsement cannot be made blindly but must be based on due
verification and confirmation. This responsibility is put on the advocates-on- record to uphold the
integrity of the process.

21. Clauses (b) and (c) of the Explanation to Rule 10 have not been brought into force as yet, but
clause (a) of the Explanation has been brought into force. It clearly prohibits advocates-on- record
from merely lending their name without any further participation in the proceedings of the case.
Thus, if an advocate-on-record indulges in name lending, it amounts to misconduct or conduct
unbecoming of an advocate-on-record. The prohibition on name lending is not confined to the
period after the filing of a case or the post-filing of an appearance for a party; it is applicable even
before the case is actually filed. We have elaborated upon it in the subsequent part of this judgment.

22. This Court is the final Court in our country. For the purposes of maintaining the sanctity of this
Court and for ensuring that cases are properly conducted, only advocates-

on-record are entitled to file a case or a vakalatnama for a party. As provided in Rule 5 of Order IV,
an advocate qualifies to register himself as an advocate-on-record, provided firstly, that his name
appears in the role of any State Bar Council for a minimum of four years. Secondly, he has to
undergo training for one year with an advocate-on-record approved by this Court. Thirdly, he has to
pass an examination conducted by this Court. Considering the unique position of advocates-on-
record and what is provided in Rule 10, an advocate-on-record of this Court is bound to maintain a
much higher standard of professional conduct than any other advocate. It is only through an
advocate-on-record that a litigant can seek justice from this Court unless he wants to appear in
person. Therefore, the role of an advocate-on-record is very crucial. Unless he maintains a high
standard of conduct, he will be of no assistance to this Court.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161206620/

12

Jitender @ Kalla vs State (Govt.) Of Nct Of Delhi on 20 February, 2025

23. As highlighted by Dr S Muralidhar, the learned senior advocate, it is true that in day-to-day
practice, advocates-on- record get petitions/appeals/counter-affidavits drafted by some other
advocates appearing in the cases either before the Trial Court or High Court. Sometimes, they
receive case papers and a vakalatnama for filing petitions/appeals/counter- affidavits through an
advocate practising at a trial court or High Court or from a litigant. Therefore, in such cases, the
a d v o c a t e - o n - r e c o r d   m a y   n o t   n e c e s s a r i l y   m e e t   h i s   c l i e n t .   E v e n   w h e n   a
petition/appeal/counter-affidavit is not drafted by the advocate-on-record, the advocate-on-record
who files it is entirely and wholly responsible to this Court. Therefore, when an advocate-on-record
receives a draft of a petition/appeal/counter-affidavits from any other advocate, it is his duty to go
t h r o u g h   t h e   c a s e   p a p e r s   a n d ,   t h e r e a f t e r ,   t o   c a r e f u l l y   g o   t h r o u g h   t h e
petition/appeal/counter-affidavits to ascertain whether correct facts have been stated in the draft
and whether all relevant documents are annexed to the petition/appeal/counter-affidavits. After
reading the case papers, if he has any doubt, he must get the doubt clarified either by contacting the
client or his local advocate. He is responsible for ensuring that he gets correct factual instructions so
that there is no suppression of facts while filing petitions/appeals/counter-affidavits. An
advocate-on-record is answerable to this Court since he has a unique position under the 2013 Rules.
Therefore, when incorrect facts are stated in the petition/appeal/counter-affidavits or when
material facts or documents are suppressed, the advocate-on-record cannot shift the entire blame on
either the client or his instructing advocates. Therefore, it is his duty to be cautious and careful. His
duty is to file proper petitions/appeals and affidavits before this Court to assist the court in
dispensing justice. He must always be fair to the Court and effectively assist the Court in deciding
cases. The duty of the advocate-on-record does not end after filing a case or a counter. Even if the
counsel appointed by him is not present, he must be ready with the case on law and facts and
effectively assist the Court.

24. If advocates-on-record start merely lending their names to petitions/appeals/counter-affidavits
drafted by somebody else, the very purpose of setting up the institution of advocates- on-record will
be frustrated. An advocate-on-record has an onerous burden to discharge, as seen from Order IV of
the 2013 Rules. Under Rule 17 of Order IV, no advocate-on-record can withdraw from the conduct of
a case by reason of only non- payment of professional fees by his client, unless this Court grants
leave. As per Rule 21, he is liable to this Court for the due payment of all fees and charges payable to
this Court. Therefore, as we have held earlier, the standard of conduct of an advocate-on-record
always ought to be higher than the conduct of any other advocate who is not an advocate-on- record.
Every advocate-on-record must render effective service so that a common man can access remedies
before this Court.

25. We may note here that if advocates-on-record start behaving irresponsibly and start merely
lending their names while filing petitions/appeals/counter-affidavits, it may have a direct impact on
the quality of justice rendered by this Court. Therefore, in case any advocate-on-record commits
misconduct or is guilty of conduct unbecoming of an advocate-on-record, strict action is
contemplated against him as per Rule 10 of Order IV. In the present case, Shri Jaydip Pati's conduct
may attract Rule 10 of Order IV. However, in the peculiar facts and circumstances before us, we are
not invoking Rule 10 for the following reasons. Firstly, he has tendered an unconditional apology.
Secondly, now he has learnt a lesson. Thirdly, the responsibility of suppressing facts and making

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161206620/

13

false statements has been accepted by Shri Rishi Malhotra, senior advocate.

Jitender @ Kalla vs State (Govt.) Of Nct Of Delhi on 20 February, 2025

CONDUCT OF THE SENIOR ADVOCATE

26. Now, we come to the issue of the conduct of Shri Rishi Malhotra, senior advocate. In this very
appeal, we have noted that through a reported judgment of this Court, the sentence of the appellant
for a fixed term of thirty years without remission was restored. It was neither disclosed in the SLP
nor disclosed by the learned senior advocate at the time of issuing notice and grant of interim relief
that, in view of the decision of this Court, the grant of remission to the appellant was out of question.

27. In the order dated 1st October 2024 passed by this Court in Writ Petition (Crl.) No.631 of 2023
filed by the said senior advocate as an advocate-on-record, a blatantly false statement was made in
the synopsis as well as in the body of the petition that petitioner nos. 4 and 6 were convicted for the
offence punishable under Section 302 of the IPC. The order records that the advocate tendered an
apology. By accepting the apology, the petition as regards the said two petitioners was dismissed as
withdrawn. The same order indicates that in SLP (C) @ D.No.4464 of 2024 filed by the same
advocate, incorrect statements were made, and therefore, the unconditional apology tendered by
him was accepted by this Court. The order also records that in SLP (Crl.) No.1775 of 2024, while
passing an interim order dated 9th February 2024, a factual aspect was suppressed by the same
advocate. The same order further records that in Writ Petition (Crl.) No.195 of 2024 filed by that
very advocate, there were incorrect statements made on facts and therefore, the petition was
permitted to be withdrawn.

28. The same advocate appeared in Writ Petition (Crl.) No.418 of 2024 (Meera Devi v. State (Govt.
of NCT of Delhi)). The order dated 29th November 2024 passed in the said petition records that
when this Court passed the order on 21st October 2024, issuing notice and granted time to the
petitioner therein to surrender, it was not brought to the notice of this Court that on 16th October
2024 in a petition filed by the same petitioner, the High Court had granted time of two weeks to her
to surrender, without any interim relief.

29. In the order dated 18th November 2024 passed by this Court in SLP (Crl.) Nos.1484-1496 of
2024, it is observed that in the petition originally filed by the same advocate, another advocate
appeared for petitioner no.13 and stated that the signature of petitioner no.13 was obtained on the
SLP without even informing him about the contents of the petition. Further, an order dated 3rd
January 2025 passed in the said petition records that petitioner no.13 therein filed an affidavit
stating that he was misled and was not informed about the exact challenge made in the petition.

30. We make it clear that we are not recording any final finding against Shri Rishi Malhotra, senior
advocate, on the question whether his designation can be withdrawn. We leave it to the Hon’ble
Chief Justice of India to take a call on this issue. What we have reproduced above is borne out from
the record. Shri Rishi Malhotra was designated as a senior advocate on 14th August 2024. The
conduct of the advocate reflected from the orders of this Court passed in this very appeal, and other
cases where the advocate appeared raises an important question of whether the decisions of this
Court in the case of Indira Jaising-I1 and Indira Jaising-II2, which lay down the guidelines for

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161206620/

14

Jitender @ Kalla vs State (Govt.) Of Nct Of Delhi on 20 February, 2025

designation of senior advocates by this Court and High Courts across the country under the 1961
Act, need reconsideration. A question also arises as to whether the system set up under the said
decisions has really worked effectively. A serious introspection is required to answer the question of
whether the Rules framed in terms of the said decisions have ensured that only deserving advocates
are being designated.

Guidelines for designation of advocates as senior advocates in accordance with the Advocates Act,
1961

31. Section 16 of the 1961 Act reads thus:

“16. Senior and other advocates.―(1) There shall be two classes of advocates, namely,
senior advocates and other advocates.

(2) An advocate may, with his consent, be designated as senior advocate if the
Supreme Court or a High Court is of opinion that by virtue of his ability, [standing at
the Bar or special knowledge or experience in law] he is deserving of such distinction.

(3) Senior advocates shall, in the matter of their practice, be subject to such
restrictions as the Bar Council of India may, in the interests of the legal profession,
prescribe.

(4) An advocate of the Supreme Court who was a senior advocate of that Court
immediately before the appointed day shall, for the purposes of this section, be
deemed to be a senior advocate:

Provided that where any such senior advocate makes an application before the 31st
December 1965 to the Bar Council maintaining the roll in which his name has been
entered that he does not desire to continue as a senior advocate, the Bar Council may
grant the application and the roll shall be altered accordingly.” In sub-section (2) of
Section 16, the words “standing at the Bar or special knowledge or experience in law”
were incorporated by way of an amendment with effect from 31st January 1974 in
place of the words “experience and standing at the Bar”. Therefore, as Section 16
stands today, an advocate can be designated as a senior advocate if:-

a) He consents to such designation; and

b) The Supreme Court or a High Court is of the opinion that by virtue of his ability,
standing at the Bar, or special knowledge or experience in law, he is deserving of such
distinction.

Prior to 31st January 1974, an advocate could be designated as a senior advocate if, in the opinion of
the Supreme Court or the High Court, by virtue of his ability, experience and standing at the Bar, he
deserved such designation. Thus, before the amendment, the criteria was of an advocate having

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161206620/

15

Jitender @ Kalla vs State (Govt.) Of Nct Of Delhi on 20 February, 2025

ability, experience and standing at the Bar. Earlier, experience was also an essential criterion. It was
done away with by an amendment with effect from 31st January 1974.

32. It is pertinent to note that sub-section (2) of Section 16 does not contemplate any application
being made by any advocate for seeking designation as a senior advocate. From the scheme of
sub-section (2) of Section 16, it is apparent that the designation as a senior advocate is to be
conferred by the Supreme Court or a High Court on an advocate with his consent. The question is
whether a person can seek something which has to be conferred.

33. In Indira Jaising-I1, this Court dealt with the challenge in a petition under Article 32 of the
Constitution of India, inter alia, to the system of designation of senior advocates followed by various
High Courts, including the method of secret ballot. This Court considered the practices followed in
various other nations and various High Courts in India. Thereafter, this Court proceeded to lay
down mandatory guidelines which would cover the exercise of designation of senior advocates by
this Court and all the High Courts. A direction was given to modify the norms/guidelines in
existence so as to be in accord with the directions. Paragraphs 73 and 74 of the said decision read
thus:

“73. It is in the above backdrop that we proceed to venture into the exercise and lay
down the following norms/guidelines which henceforth would govern the exercise of
designation of Senior Advocates by the Supreme Court and all High Courts in the
country. The norms/guidelines, in existence, shall be suitably modified so as to be in
accord with the present.

73.1. All matters relating to designation of Senior Advocates in the Supreme Court of
India and in all the High Courts of the country shall be dealt with by a Permanent
Committee to be known as “Committee for Designation of Senior Advocates”;

73.2. The Permanent Committee will be headed by the Hon'ble the Chief Justice of
India and consist of two seniormost Judges of the Supreme Court of India [or High
Court(s), as may be]; the learned Attorney General for India (Advocate General of the
State in case of a High Court) will be a Member of the Permanent Committee. The
above four Members of the Permanent Committee will nominate another Member of
the Bar to be the fifth Member of the Permanent Committee;

73.3. The said Committee shall have a permanent Secretariat, the composition of which will be
decided by the Chief Justice of India or the Chief Justices of the High Courts, as may be, in
consultation with the other Members of the Permanent Committee;

73.4. All applications including written proposals by the Hon'ble Judges will be submitted to the
Secretariat. On receipt of such applications or proposals from Hon'ble Judges, the Secretariat will
compile the relevant data and information with regard to the reputation, conduct, integrity of the
advocate(s) concerned including his/her participation in pro bono work; reported judgments in
which the advocate(s) concerned had appeared; the number of such judgments for the last five

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161206620/

16

Jitender @ Kalla vs State (Govt.) Of Nct Of Delhi on 20 February, 2025

years. The source(s) from which information/data will be sought and collected by the Secretariat
will be as decided by the Permanent Committee;

73.5. The Secretariat will publish the proposal of designation of a particular advocate in the official
website of the Court concerned inviting the suggestions/views of other stakeholders in the proposed
designation;

73.6. After the database in terms of the above is compiled and all such information as may be
specifically directed by the Permanent Committee to be obtained in respect of any particular
candidate is collected, the Secretariat shall put up the case before the Permanent Committee for
scrutiny;

73.7. The Permanent Committee will examine each case in the light of the data provided by the
Secretariat of the Permanent Committee; interview the advocate concerned; and make its overall
assessment on the basis of a point-based format indicated below:

(cid:12)                    Sl. Matter                           Points
                    No.
                    1. Number of years of practise       20
                        of the applicant advocate        points
                        from the date of enrolment.
                        [10 points for 10-20 years of
                        practise; 20 points for
                        practise beyond 20 years]

                        unreported) which indicate       points
                        the     legal   formulations     (later on
                        advanced by the advocate         50
                        concerned in the course of       points)
                        the proceedings of the case;
                        pro bono work done by the
                        advocate concerned; domain
                        expertise of the applicant
                        advocate in various branches
                        of      law,     such       as
                        Constitutional law, Inter-
                        State     Water     Disputes,
                        Criminal law, Arbitration
                        law, Corporate law, Family
                        law, Human Rights, Public
                        Interest           Litigation,
                        International     law,     law
                        relating to women, etc.

3. Publications by the applicant 15 points advocate (later on 5 points)

4. Test of personality and 25 points suitability on the basis of interview/interaction 73.8. All the
names that are listed before the Permanent Committee/cleared by the Permanent Committee will go
to the Full Court.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161206620/

17

Jitender @ Kalla vs State (Govt.) Of Nct Of Delhi on 20 February, 2025

73.9. Voting by secret ballot will not normally be resorted to by the Full Court except when
unavoidable. In the event of resort to secret ballot, decisions will be carried by a majority of the
Judges who have chosen to exercise their preference/choice.

7 3 . 1 0 .   A l l   c a s e s   t h a t   h a v e   n o t   b e e n   f a v o u r a b l y   c o n s i d e r e d   b y   t h e   F u l l   C o u r t   m a y   b e
reviewed/reconsidered after expiry of a period of two years following the manner indicated above as
if the proposal is being considered afresh; 73.11. In the event a Senior Advocate is guilty of conduct
which according to the Full Court disentitles the Senior Advocate concerned to continue to be
worthy of the designation, the Full Court may review its decision to designate the person concerned
and recall the same.

74. We are not oblivious of the fact that the guidelines enumerated above may not be exhaustive of
the matter and may require reconsideration by suitable additions/ deletions in the light of the
experience to be gained over a period of time. This is a course of action that we leave open for
consideration by this Court at such point of time that the same becomes necessary.” (emphasis
added)

34. In Indira Jaising-II2, this Court reconsidered some of the directions issued in Indira Jaising-I1.
This Court considered the issues of voting by secret ballot, cut-off marks, and points assigned for
publication. (Criteria under Sr. No.3 of the tabular format incorporated in paragraph 73.7 of Indira
Jaising-I1). This Court also considered the aspect of personal interview and other general aspects.
This Court modified Sr. No.3 in paragraph no. 73.7 by reducing the marks for publication from 15 to
5.

35. A conjoint reading of paragraph nos. 73.7 and 73.8 in the case of Indira Jaising-I1 will show that
the job of the Permanent Committee is to make an overall assessment on the basis of a points-based
format. It is not open for the Permanent Committee to make assessments in any other manner. The
guidelines incorporated in paragraph 73 do not confer power on the Permanent Committee to make
recommendations. The job of the Permanent Committee ends by making an overall assessment by
assigning points to each candidate. However, the Permanent Committee is mandated to consider the
case of each and every eligible applicant who has filed a valid application. Paragraph 73.8 indicates
that all names placed before the Permanent Committee should be placed before the Full Court. It
follows that the overall assessment made on the basis of a points-based format must be placed
before the Full Court, and it is ultimately the prerogative of the Full Court to take a final decision on
the designation. It is evident that as the decision to designate or not to designate vests in the Full
Court of this Court and the High Courts, the Full Court is not bound by the assessment made by the
Permanent Committee. However, considering the status of the Permanent Committee, the Full
Court is obviously bound to take into consideration the overall assessment made of every candidate
by the Permanent Committee on the basis of a points based format.

36. The mandatory guidelines have been laid down by this Court in the case of Indira Jaising-I1 in
the exercise of powers under Article 142 of the Constitution of India. However, paragraph 74 of the
decision indicates that this Court was of the view that the guidelines may require reconsideration in
the light of the experience to be gained over a period of time. Even the decision in the case of Indira

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161206620/

18

Jitender @ Kalla vs State (Govt.) Of Nct Of Delhi on 20 February, 2025

Jaising-II2 in paragraph 51 records that the process of improvement of the guidelines is a
continuous one, as we learn from every experience. We are conscious of the fact that both the
decisions in the case of Indira Jaising are by a Bench of three Hon’ble Judges and we are respectfully
bound by the said decisions.

37. A Constitution Bench in the case of Central Board of Dawoodi Bohra Community and Anr. v.
State of Maharashtra and Anr.5 in paragraph no.12 held thus:

“12. Having carefully considered the submissions made by the learned Senior Counsel
for the parties and having examined the law laid down by the Constitution Benches in
the abovesaid decisions, we would like to sum up the legal position in the following
terms:

(1) The law laid down by this Court in a decision delivered by a Bench of larger
strength is binding on any subsequent Bench of lesser or coequal strength.

(2005) 2 SCC 673 (2) Para 12(2) corrected vide Official Corrigendum No.
F.3/Ed.B.J./21/2005 dated 3-3-2005.] A Bench of lesser quorum cannot disagree or
dissent from the view of the law taken by a Bench of larger quorum. In case of doubt
all that the Bench of lesser quorum can do is to invite the attention of the Chief
Justice and request for the matter being placed for hearing before a Bench of larger
quorum than the Bench whose decision has come up for consideration. It will be open
only for a Bench of coequal strength to express an opinion doubting the correctness
of the view taken by the earlier Bench of coequal strength, whereupon the matter may
be placed for hearing before a Bench consisting of a quorum larger than the one
which pronounced the decision laying down the law the correctness of which is
doubted.

(3) Para 12(3) corrected vide Official Corrigendum No. F.3/Ed.B.J./7/2005 dated
17-1-2005.] The above rules are subject to two exceptions: (i) the abovesaid rules do
not bind the discretion of the Chief Justice in whom vests the power of framing the
roster and who can direct any particular matter to be placed for hearing before any
particular Bench of any strength; and (ii) in spite of the rules laid down hereinabove,
if the matter has already come up for hearing before a Bench of larger quorum and
that Bench itself feels that the view of the law taken by a Bench of lesser quorum,
which view is in doubt, needs correction or reconsideration then by way of exception
(and not as a rule) and for reasons given by it, it may proceed to hear the case and
examine the correctness of the previous decision in question dispensing with the
need of a specific reference or the order of the Chief Justice constituting the Bench
and such listing. Such was the situation in Raghubir Singh [(1989) 2 SCC 754] and
Hansoli Devi [(2002) 7 SCC 273].” This judgment has been recently affirmed by a
Bench of seven Hon’ble Judges of this Court in the case of Aligarh Muslim University
v. Naresh Agarwal & Ors.6

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161206620/

19

Jitender @ Kalla vs State (Govt.) Of Nct Of Delhi on 20 February, 2025

38. The learned Solicitor General of India made a fervent plea that the decisions in the case of Indira
Jaising need reconsideration on several grounds stated by him. The other learned advocates,
including Dr. S. Murlidhar, a senior advocate appointed as amicus curiae, have echoed the
submissions of the learned Solicitor General. Ms Indira Jaising, learned senior advocate, however,
expresses strong reservations at the prayer made by the learned Solicitor General. Her submission is
that this Bench cannot go into the correctness of the earlier decisions as this Court is bound by the
said decisions. Moreover, she urged that the learned Solicitor General has no locus to make
submissions.

39. SCAORA also submitted its suggestions on all aspects. SCAORA expressed a view that both the
decisions in the case of Indira Jaising have democratised and streamlined the process of senior
designation. Their contention is that the system created by the judgments is successful, but some
tweaking in the working and mechanism may be required. They have suggested that the Permanent
Committee for the Supreme Court should have representation from both the SCAORA and Supreme
Court Bar Association. Moreover, there 2024 INSC 856 should be a system to communicate the
marks/points assigned by the Permanent Committee to the candidates.

NEED TO RECONSIDER BOTH THE DECISIONS IN INDIRA JAISINGH’S CASE

40. Neither can we disagree with the two binding decisions nor can we take a contrary view.
However, all that we are doing is expressing a few serious doubts and concerns. We propose to
direct that this issue be placed before the Hon’ble Chief Justice of India to consider whether the
issue needs to be reconsidered by a Bench of appropriate strength. This exercise will be within the
four corners of what is held by the Constitution Bench in the case of the Central Board of Dawoodi
Bohra Community and Anr.5 There is one more reason why we are undertaking this exercise. Both
the decisions lay down that making such modifications and improvements will be a continuous
exercise. For the reasons we have recorded hereafter, our views need to be placed before the Hon’ble
Chief Justice of India to enable him to consider whether the issues decided in the two decisions in
the case of Indira Jaising need reconsideration by a larger Bench.

41. We need not go into the issue of the locus of the learned Solicitor General as we cannot decide
whether the earlier decisions are right or wrong. Looking at the case of an advocate who has been
designated recently, which we have discussed in detail, there is nothing wrong if, as an officer of this
Court, the learned Solicitor General raises a few questions.

42. The role of a designated senior advocate in our legal system is of considerable importance. Those
who are designated senior advocates have a different status and high standing in the legal system.
Therefore, it is imperative that only those advocates who deserve the designation in terms of
sub-section (2) of Section 16 should be conferred designation. If undeserving candidates are
designated as senior advocates, it affects the prestige and dignity of the institution of the judiciary,
as it is the privilege of the High Courts and this Court to grant such designation. Therefore, it is
imperative that the best possible system should be devised for the process to be undertaken in terms
of sub-section (2) of Section 16. Ultimately, the endeavour of all stakeholders must be that we
should have a system in which only deserving advocates get the designation.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161206620/

20

Jitender @ Kalla vs State (Govt.) Of Nct Of Delhi on 20 February, 2025

43. We are recording our concerns based on submissions made across the Bar. We again reiterate
that we mean no disrespect to the two binding decisions, and we are recording our concerns only to
enable the Hon’ble Chief Justice of India, to decide whether the doubts expressed by us need
consideration by an appropriate larger Bench. We flag our concerns as follows:

a) As can be seen from sub-section (2) of Section 16, prima facie, the scheme of the
provision is that no advocate can seek designation, but the privilege of designation
has to be conferred by this Court or High Courts with his consent. In paragraph 2 of
Indira Jaising-II2, this Court held that designation as a senior advocate in India is a
privilege awarded as a mark of excellence to advocates who have distinguished
themselves and have made a significant contribution to the development of the legal
profession. Therefore, the question that needs serious consideration is whether the
Court should permit applications to be made for grant of designation, though the
statute does not contemplate that. If the legislature intended to allow advocates to
make applications for designation, sub-section (2) of Section 16 would not have
provided for this Court or High Courts to take the consent of advocates before
designation.

b) Paragraph 73.7 provides for an advocate who has applied for designation to appear before the
Permanent Committee for an interview/interaction to test his personality and suitability. If an
advocate, by virtue of his standing at the Bar, his ability or special knowledge, deserves designation
as a senior advocate, the question which arises is, by making such an advocate appear for an
interview, are we not compromising on the dignity of the advocate? Are we not converting the
process of designation into a selection process?

c) It is doubtful whether by interviewing a candidate for a few minutes, his personality or suitability
can be really tested. 25 points out of 100 are assigned for interview/interaction, constituting 1/4th of
the total points.

d) As recorded in paragraph 73.7, the duty of the Permanent Committee is to make its overall
assessment of the advocate concerned based on a points-based formula. No other method of making
an overall assessment has been provided. No one can dispute that an advocate who lacks integrity or
does not possess a quality of fairness is disentitled to designation. The reason is simple as such an
advocate cannot be held to have any standing at the Bar. Moreover, there may be complaints
pending against an advocate with the disciplinary committee of the Bar Councils. The question is
how the cases of such advocates can be considered by the Permanent Committee. Even if members
of the Permanent Committee know that the applicant advocate lacks integrity, is not fair, does not
act as an officer of the Court, or against whom complaints are pending for professional misconduct,
there is no scope to reduce the points on that count. If such an advocate excels at the time of the
interview or otherwise renders excellent performance, he cannot be given lesser marks because the
candidate lacks integrity, character or fairness. The reason is that 25 marks are to be assigned not
based on his performance before the Court or his general reputation but on his performance during
the interview/interaction.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161206620/

21

Jitender @ Kalla vs State (Govt.) Of Nct Of Delhi on 20 February, 2025

e) As noted earlier, prior to 31st January 1974, the criteria in sub-section (2) of Section 16 was based
on ability, experience and standing at the Bar. That was substituted with effect from 31st January
1974. After the amendment, mere experience in terms of the number of years of practice cannot be
relevant. However, “experience in law” needs consideration. Thus, mere experience in terms of
number of years of practice is not sufficient. Our concern is whether 10 or 20 points should be
mechanically assigned only based on experience or the number of years of practice. It is worth
considering whether only the number of years put in practice has any nexus with ‘standing’ within
the meaning of Section 16(2). Further, it is pertinent to note that Sr. No.1 in paragraph 73.7 merely
discusses the number of years of practice. The criteria adopted is not of actual years of active
practice. Therefore, an advocate who has not been in active practice for 20 years or more will still
get 20 marks because his registration as an advocate has been for more than 20 years.

f) It is a usual experience that applicants submit many judgments in which they have appeared and
submit copies of books and many articles written by them. The five members of the Permanent
Committee are expected to go through every judgment submitted by the candidate to assign 50
marks. To assign marks for publications, they are expected to go through many articles and books.
Whether three senior judges, including the Chief Justice and two senior advocates, should spend
hours together for one candidate is a question that needs serious consideration.

g) It is true that the overall assessment made by the Permanent Committee in terms of points is
placed before the Full Court. The decision of the Full Court may not necessarily be based on the
points assigned by the Permanent Committee. Still, the Full Court cannot altogether ignore the
assessment made by the Permanent Committee. When the points-based assessment is not free from
defects, the question is whether it can form the basis of assessment of an advocate.

h) Another issue is about the prohibition of secret ballot. The Judges consider the applications in
Full Court. The question arises as to whether the Judges should openly discuss the merits and
demerits of those who appear before them on the judicial side. Therefore, the issue of permitting
voting by secret ballot needs serious reconsideration.

i) There is one more serious area of concern. Whether the guidelines give sufficient opportunity to
the advocates practising in our Trial Courts to get designated. There cannot be any dispute that we
have very eminent lawyers practising exclusively before our Trial Courts who have the ability,
standing and experience in law. They are outstanding public prosecutors and defence lawyers. In
most cases, their arguments may not always have legal formulations, as reflected in the judgments
in cases wherein they appear. The submissions will necessarily be based on facts. They will not have
reported judgments to their credit. Such advocates do not stand to gain sufficient points against Sr.
No. 2 in paragraph 73.7. We are of the view that designation under sub-section (2) of Section 16
cannot be the monopoly of the advocates practising in higher Constitutional Courts like this Court
and the High Courts. Chapter 6, in part VI of the Constitution of India, in a sense, gives the status of
Constitutional Courts to our trial and district courts.

CONCLUSIONS

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161206620/

22

44. We, therefore, hold as under:

Jitender @ Kalla vs State (Govt.) Of Nct Of Delhi on 20 February, 2025

(i) When a petition/appeal is not drafted by the advocate-

on-record, the advocate-on-record who files it is entirely and wholly responsible to this Court.
Therefore, when an advocate-on-record receives a draft of a petition appeal/counter-affidavit from
any other advocate, it is his duty to go through the case papers and, thereafter, to carefully go
through the petition/appeal/counter-affidavit to ascertain whether correct facts have been stated in
the draft and whether all relevant documents are annexed to the petition/appeal/counter-affidavit.
After reading the case papers, if he has any doubt, he must get the doubt clarified either by
contacting the client or his local advocate. He is responsible for ensuring that he gets correct factual
instructions so that there is no suppression of facts while filing petitions/appeals/counter-affidavits.
An advocate-on- record is answerable to this Court since he has a unique position under the 2013
Rules. Therefore, when incorrect facts are stated in the petition/appeal/counter-affidavit or when
material facts or documents are suppressed, the advocate-on- record cannot shift the entire blame
on either the client or his instructing advocates. Therefore, it is his duty to be cautious and careful.
His duty is to file proper proceedings and affidavits before this Court to assist the court in
dispensing justice. He must always be fair to the Court and effectively assist the Court in deciding
cases. The duty of the advocate-on-record does not end after filing a case or a counter. Even if the
counsel appointed by him is not present, he must be ready with the case on law and facts and
effectively assist the Court;

(ii) It is the obligation of the advocates on record not to merely lend their names to
petitions/appeals drafted by somebody else. If they do that, the very purpose of making a provision
for setting up the institution of advocates-on-record will be frustrated.

(iii) If advocates-on-record start behaving irresponsibly and start merely lending their names while
filing petitions/appeals/counter-affidavits, it may directly impact the quality of justice rendered by
this Court. Therefore, if any advocate-on-record commits misconduct or is guilty of conduct
unbecoming of an advocate-on-record, an action against him as per Rule 10 of Order IV is
warranted.

(iv) Regarding the designation of Shri Rishi Malhotra, we leave it to the Hon’ble Chief Justice of
India to take a call.

45. Considering what we have observed in paragraph no. 43 above, we direct the Registrar (Judicial)
to place a copy of this judgment before Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India. It is for the Hon’ble Chief
Justice of India, to consider whether the issues flagged by us deserve to be considered by a Bench of
appropriate strength.

46. We record our appreciation for the assistance rendered by Dr. S. Murlidhar, senior advocate, the
learned Solicitor General of India, Ms. Indira Jaising, senior advocate and the office bearers of
SCAORA.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161206620/

23

Jitender @ Kalla vs State (Govt.) Of Nct Of Delhi on 20 February, 2025

47. The office bearers of SCAORA have come forward with various suggestions. The suggestions are
regarding the conduct of the examination for advocates-on-record. There are suggestions made for
adopting a consistent approach regarding notifying the deficiencies and objections in the cases filed.
They want bottlenecks to be cleared in filing the registration and verification of cases which may
result in early listing of cases. Their contentions are that there is no written handbook available
containing instructions regarding the process of checking and verifying newly filed cases. The norms
and criteria keep on changing at the whims and fancies of the Registry officials. Therefore, the
suggestion of the Association is that the Secretary-General or Registrars should regularly organise
Open Houses in which healthy discussions can take place on the processes adopted by the Registry.
Perhaps this suggestion is welcome as there can be a constructive dialogue between the Association
and the Registry for the purposes of clearing bottlenecks and ensuring early listing of all cases. We
direct the Registrar (Judicial) to forward a copy of this judgment to the Secretary General of the
Court with a direction to forward the written submissions made to him so that necessary remedial
steps/action can be taken by him. We are sure that the members of the Registry will regularly
interact with the office bearers of SCAORA and sort out the issues raised by the Association.

48. No order is required to be passed on merits of the case of the appellant for grant of premature
release. His remedies are kept open.

49. This appeal is disposed of on the above terms. Pending applications in the appeal, except IA
No.259649 of 2024 which is de-tagged vide order dated 20th January 2025, stand disposed of.

WRIT PETITION (CRL.) NO.418 OF 2024

50. Writ Petition (Crl.) No.418 of 2024 is de-tagged and is not to be treated as part-heard.

……..……………………….J. (Abhay S. Oka) …….……………………….J. (Augustine George Masih) New
Delhi:

February 20, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161206620/

24

