Ahmednagar Mahanagar Palika vs Ahmednagar Mahanagar Palika Kamgar ... on 5 September, 2022

Ahmednagar Mahanagar Palika vs Ahmednagar Mahanagar
Palika Kamgar ... on 5 September, 2022

Author: M.R. Shah

Bench: B.V. Nagarathna, M.R. Shah

REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5944 OF 2022
(Arising from SLP(Civil) No.9933/2022)

Ahmednagar Mahanagar Palika                               …Appellant

Versus

Ahmednagar Mahanagar Palika Kamgar Union                  …Respondent

WITH
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5945 OF 2022
(Arising from SLP(Civil) No.10279/2022)

JUDGMENT

M.R. SHAH, J.

1. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned common judgment and order dated
22.03.2022 passed by the High Court of Judicature at Bombay, Bench at Aurangabad in Writ
Petition Nos. 6806/2017 & 3465/2017, by which the High Court has dismissed the said two writ
petitions preferred by the appellant herein – Ahmednagar Mahanagar Palika, Ahmednagar and has
confirmed the judgment(s) and award(s) passed by the Industrial Court dated 16.09.2016 and
21.09.2016 in Complaint (ULP) No. 55/2005 and Complaint (ULP) No. 83/2005 respectively,
directing the Ahmednagar Mahanagar Palika to provide compassionate appointment to the eligible
heirs in accordance with the provisions of award dated 30.03.1981 passed in Reference IT No. 51 of
1979, the Ahmednagar Mahanagar Palika has preferred the present appeals.

2. The facts leading to the present appeals in a nutshell are as under:

That in the year 2003, Ahmednagar Municipal Council was converted to Ahmednagar
Mahanagar Palika. At the time when the Municipal Council was in existence, an
industrial dispute was raised by the Union being Reference IT No. 51 of 1979.

1

Ahmednagar Mahanagar Palika vs Ahmednagar Mahanagar Palika Kamgar ... on 5 September, 2022

Demand No. 3 was with respect to the employment to be given to the heirs of the
employees. At the relevant time, it was agreed by the Municipal Council that the
employees in Class-IV category (if they die before their retirement) in all
departments, except Health Department, if they become invalid, or if they retire,
their heirs will be given appointment in their place.

Consequently, by judgment and award dated 30.03.1981, the Industrial Court
directed that the employees in Class-IV category, if they die before their retirement; if
they become invalid, or if they retire, their heirs should be given appointment in their
place.

2.1 It appears that thereafter some further demands were raised and the judgment
and award dated 30.03.1981 in Reference IT No. 51 of 1979 was sought to be modified
and therefore the references were made to the Industrial Court being Reference (IT)
No. 2 of 1993 to Reference (IT) No. 4 of 1993. Demand No. 4 was with respect to the
employment of the heirs of the employees (the same was at the instance of the
Mahanagar palika). Ahmednagar Mahanagar Palika gave a notice of change in
respect of demand of employment to the heirs of the employees as per Reference IT
No. 51 of 1979 and the said dispute was referred for adjudication as Reference (IT)
No. 2 of 1993. By judgment and award dated 21.02.2005, with respect to the
aforesaid Demand No. 4, the Industrial Court modified the earlier award in
Reference IT No. 51 of 1979 and directed the Ahmednagar Mahanagar Palika to
provide (1) employment to the legal heirs of the employees of Class-IV category
working in health department only (2) to provide the employment to the legal heirs of
all categories, i.e., Class-I category to Class-IV category on compassionate ground as
per government resolutions and circulars at par with government employees.
Meaning thereby, under the said award, the compassionate appointment to the heirs
of the employees on their superannuation/retirement was not provided and the
compassionate appointment was provided only to the heirs of the deceased
employees of Class-IV category.

2.2 It appears that thereafter two other industrial disputes were raised by the Ahmednagar
Mahanagar Palika Kamgar Union against the Municipal Corporation/Mahanagar Palika which were
in the year 2005 being Complaint (ULP) No. 55 of 2005 and Complaint (ULP) No. 83 of 2005. One
of the reliefs claimed was for employment for the legal heirs of retired employees as per judgment
and award dated 30.03.1981 passed in Reference IT No. 51 of 1979. By judgment(s) and award(s)
dated 16.09.2016 and 21.09.2016 respectively, impugned before the High Court, the Industrial
Court directed the Ahmednagar Mahanagar Palika to provide employment to the eligible heirs in
accordance with the provisions in the award passed in Reference IT No. 51 of 1979. Thus, the
Industrial Court directed to provide employment to the heirs of the employees on their retirement
on attaining the age of superannuation. The judgment(s) and award(s) passed by the Industrial
Court dated 16.09.2016 and 21.09.2016 passed in Complaint (ULP) No. 55/2005 and Complaint
(ULP) No. 83/2005 respectively were the subject matter of writ petitions before the High Court. By
the impugned common judgment and order, the High Court has dismissed/disposed of the aforesaid

2

Ahmednagar Mahanagar Palika vs Ahmednagar Mahanagar Palika Kamgar ... on 5 September, 2022

writ petitions as under:

“(a) The candidates in Annexures ‘A’ and ‘B’, who have not completed 45 years of age
as on date, i.e., 01.03.2022 shall be granted compassionate appointment on or before
30.04.2022 in the light of the vacancies available in view of the affidavit in reply
dated 21.03.2022.

(b) Those candidates who have completed 45 years of age as on 01.03.2022, would be
entitled for a lump sum compensation of Rs. 5 lacs in lieu of compassionate
appointment. Such compensation amount shall be paid, on or before 31.05.2022.

(c) The Municipal Corporation shall issue the orders of appointments to eligible candidates in view
of the above directions, on or before 30.04.2022.” 2.3 Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the
impugned common judgment and order passed by the High Court, the original writ petitioner –
Ahmednagar Mahanagar Palika through its Commissioner has preferred the present appeals.

3. Mr. Suhas Kadam, learned Advocate has appeared on behalf of the appellant – Ahmednagar
Mahanagar Palika and Ms. Iyer Shruti Gopal, learned Advocate has appeared on behalf of the
respondent – Union. 3.1 Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant – Mahanagar Palika
has vehemently submitted that both, the Industrial Court as well as the High Court have passed
orders relying upon the judgment and award dated 30.03.1981 passed in Reference IT No. 51 of
1979. That the said award was passed at a time when Ahmednagar Mahanagar Palika was a
Municipal Council. In the year 2003, the Municipal Council has been converted to a Municipal
Corporation and the employees of the Mahanagar Palika/Municipal Corporation are governed by
the rules and regulations/scheme framed by the State Government. Therefore, the employees of the
Mahanagar Palika/Municipal Corporation shall be entitled to the benefit of the scheme of
appointment on compassionate grounds at par with the government employees. It is submitted that
therefore both, the Industrial Court as well as the High Court have committed a grave error in
directing the Mahanagar Palika/Municipal Corporation to give appointment to the heirs of the
employees on their retirement and/or superannuation as per judgment and award dated 30.03.1981
passed in Reference IT No. 51 of 1979, which was in the year 1981 at the time when the Municipal
Council was in existence. 3.2 Relying upon the recent decision of this Court in the case of The
Secretary to Govt. Department of Education (Primary) & Others v. Bheemesh alias Bheemappa,
2021 SCC OnLine SC 1264, it is further submitted that the appointment on compassionate ground
shall have to be made as per the modified scheme. It is submitted that in the present case,
subsequently by judgment and award dated 21.02.2005 passed in Reference (IT) No. 2/1993, the
Industrial Court modified the demand with respect to employment to the heirs of the employees on
their retirement/superannuation and directed that only the legal heirs of the deceased employees
shall be entitled to appointment on compassionate ground. Also the legal heirs of all the categories
shall be entitled to compassionate appointment as per the government resolutions and circulars at
par with the government employees. It is submitted that both, the Industrial Court as well as the
High Court have seriously erred in directing the Mahanagar Palika to given appointment to the heirs
of the employees on their retirement/superannuation.

3

Ahmednagar Mahanagar Palika vs Ahmednagar Mahanagar Palika Kamgar ... on 5 September, 2022

3.3 It is further submitted that even otherwise such a direction to give appointment to the heirs of
the employees on their retirement/superannuation shall be hit by Article 14 of the Constitution of
India and against the object of providing appointment on compassionate grounds.

3.4 It is submitted that as observed and held by this Court in a catena of decisions, the appointment
on compassionate grounds is not automatic, but subject to strict scrutiny of various parameters
including the financial position of the family, the economic dependence of the family upon the
deceased employee and such factors. It is submitted therefore also that such a direction to give
appointment to the heirs of the employees on their retirement/superannuation ought not have been
passed by the Industrial Court, confirmed by the High Court. 3.5 It is next submitted by the learned
counsel appearing on behalf of the Mahanagar Palika/Municipal Corporation, that even otherwise,
the direction issued by the High Court to pay a lump sum compensation of Rs. 5 lacs in lieu of the
compassionate appointment to those candidates who have completed 45 years of age as on 1.3.2022
is unsustainable. 3.6 Making the above submissions and relying upon the above decision, it is
prayed to allow the present appeals.

4. Both these appeals are vehemently opposed by learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
respondent.

4.1 It is vehemently submitted by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent that in
the facts and circumstances of the case and considering the binding nature of the judgment and
award passed by the Industrial Court dated 30.03.1981 in Reference IT No. 51 of 1979, neither the
Industrial Court nor the High Court have committed any error in directing appointments to be given
to the heirs of the employees on their superannuation and/or retirement.

4.2 It is submitted that in the present case the parties are governed by the terms of the Bipartite
Agreement resulting in judgment and award dated 30.03.1981 passed in Reference IT No. 51 of
1979. It is submitted therefore that there is no question of any discretion and the heirs of the
employees are entitled to the appointment on compassionate grounds on the superannuation
and/or retirement of the concerned employees. Reliance is placed on the decision of this Court in
the case of Subhadra v. Ministry of Coal and another, (2018) 11 SCC 201.

4.3 It is further submitted that as the heirs of the employees acquire the right of appointment under
the judgment and award passed in Reference IT No. 51 of 1979, the concerned heirs of the
employees are entitled to appointment being heirs of the employees on their retirement and/or
superannuation.

4.4 It is contended that the appointment to the heirs of the employees on their superannuation
and/or retirement cannot be said to be an appointment on compassionate grounds but it is called
varas hakka. It is submitted that therefore any decision of this Court on compassionate appointment
shall not be applicable to the facts of the case on hand.

5. We have heard learned counsel for the respective parties at length.

4

Ahmednagar Mahanagar Palika vs Ahmednagar Mahanagar Palika Kamgar ... on 5 September, 2022

At the outset, it is required to be noted that in the present case, the Industrial Court has directed the
Mahanagar Palika/Municipal Corporation to give appointment to the heirs of the employees on
their superannuation/retirement as per judgment and award passed in Reference IT No. 51 of 1979.
However, it is required to be noted that the said judgment and award was passed in the year 1981, at
the time when the Municipal Council was in existence. That thereafter in the year 2003, the
Municipal Council has been converted to Municipal Corporation/Mahanagar Palika and all the
employees under Mahanagar Palika/Municipal Corporation are governed by the scheme/rules &
regulations framed by the State Government, which does not provide for any appointment on
c o m p a s s i o n a t e   g r o u n d s   o r   t h e   a p p o i n t m e n t   t o   t h e   h e i r s   o f   t h e   e m p l o y e e s   o n   t h e i r
superannuation/retirement.

6. Even otherwise, it is required to be noted that in Reference (IT) No. 2/1993, which was at the
instance of Mahanagar Palika on the notice of change in respect of demand of employment to the
heirs of the employee as per Reference (IT) No. 51 of 1979, the Industrial Court vide judgment and
award dated 21.02.2005 directed the appointment on compassionate grounds to the heirs of the
deceased employees only. It was specifically observed by the Industrial Court that at the time of
passing earlier award in Reference IT No. 51 of 1979, i.e., in the year 1979 the demand to provide the
employment to the legal heirs of the employees on their retirement/superannuation was reasonable,
however, in the present situation the said demand does not appear to be good and reasonable. The
Industrial Court further observed that, needless to say, now-a-days the unemployment problem is a
very major problem and in spite of high qualifications the qualified persons are not getting jobs and
they remain unemployed. While modifying the demand and directing to provide appointment on
compassionate grounds to the legal heirs of the employees (on the death of the concerned
employee), in judgment and award dated 21.02.2005 in Reference IT No. 2/1993, it was observed by
the Industrial Court as under:

“It seems from the oral submissions of the parties that, at the time of passing earlier
award in Ref. (IT) No. 51/1979 i.e., in the year 1979 the demand for providing the
employment to the legal heir of employee was reasonable however in present
situation the said demand does not appears to be good and reasonable. Needless to
say, that nowadays the unemployment problems is very major. In spite of high
qualifications, the qualified persons are not getting job and they are unemployed. In
view of this demand there is no scope for qualified unemployed person to get the job
in the establishment of the party no. 1, as the legal heirs of the employees will get the
job in place of the employee working in the establishment of the party no. 1. Mr. Patil
learned advocate for the party no. 1 rightly submitted that on the basis of this
demand the legal heirs are claiming employment on attaining the majority and if the
legal heir is minor at the time of superannuation and that too after 10 years also
under such circumstances in my opinion also the demand of providing employment
to the legal heirs does not appears to be proper.

It has sufficiently come on record through the oral evidence of the parties that as per
this demand the employment has been claimed as of right and there is no scope for
selection of proper candidate, even the guidelines of the government regarding

5

Ahmednagar Mahanagar Palika vs Ahmednagar Mahanagar Palika Kamgar ... on 5 September, 2022

Reservation could not be followed. It is pertinent to note here that, as per the
government policy certain post in the establishment are reserved for back ward
classes and on those post- employment is to be given to the candidate from reserve
category however as there is no scope for employment to others, therefore, it is very
difficult for the candidates from reserve category to get employment in the
establishment of the party no. 1.

It has also come on record that, as per this demand the employment is being claimed
for distant relative on the basis of adoption. True it is that the adoption can be made
as per law and after adoption the adopted child because legal heir of that person
however it seems from the various copies of documents placed before the Court that
employment has been claimed for nephew on the basis of affidavit saying that the
nephew is taking care of that employee. Similarly, in another matter the employment
is sought for adopted son by application dated 02.05.1997 and deed of adoption has
been executed on 30.04.1997.

From these documents it can be said positively that the demand or providing
employment to the legal heirs of the employees has been misused. Furthermore,
nothing has been placed on record on behalf of the party no. 2 union that such
practice is being continued in any other establishment. The witness of the party no. 2
union specifically asked about the however he could not brought any documentary
evidence. In my opinion also even though this demand was reasonable in 1979
however the same is certainly not reasonable and justified during present days and in
the light of misuse of the demand it can be safely said that the party no. 1 is justified
in seeking change in the demand in respect of providing the employment to the legal
heirs of the employees on superannuation, invalidity or resignation, be now I am
inclined to modify the demand and directing the party no. 1 to provide (1)
employment to the legal heirs of the employees of Class-IV category working in
health department only (2) to provide the employment to the legal heirs of all
categories i.e. Class-I category to Class-IV category on compassionate ground as per
government Resolutions and circulars at par with governments employees.” In view
of the above also, thereafter it was not open for the Industrial Court and/or even the
High Court to direct the Mahanagar Palika/Municipal Corporation to provide
appointment to the heirs of the employees on their retirement/superannuation,
relying upon the judgment and award passed by the Industrial Court in Reference IT
No. 51 of 1979.

7. After the conversion of the Municipal Council to Municipal Corporation/Mahanagar Palika, the
employees of the Mahanagar Palika/Municipal Corporation shall be governed by the scheme framed
by the State Government and at par with the government employees. As per the recent decision of
this Court in the case of Bheemesh alias Bheemappa (supra), the appointment on compassionate
ground shall be as per the modified scheme. Therefore, the employees of the Mahanagar
Palika/Municipal Corporation shall be governed by the scheme of the State Government at par with
the government employees, which does not provide for appointment on compassionate grounds to

6

Ahmednagar Mahanagar Palika vs Ahmednagar Mahanagar Palika Kamgar ... on 5 September, 2022

the heirs of the employees on their retirement and/or superannuation.

8. Even otherwise, such an appointment to the heirs of the employees on their retirement and/or
superannuation shall be contrary to the object and purpose of appointment on compassionate
grounds and is hit by Article 14 of the Constitution of India. As observed and held by this Court in a
catena of decisions, compassionate appointment shall always be treated as an exception to the
normal method of recruitment. The appointment on compassionate grounds is provided upon the
death of an employee in harness without any kind of security whatsoever. The appointment on
compassionate grounds is not automatic and shall be subject to the strict scrutiny of various
parameters including the financial position of the family, the economic dependence of the family
upon the deceased employee and the avocation of the other members of the family. No one can
claim to have a vested right for appointment on compassionate grounds. Therefore, appointment on
compassionate grounds cannot be extended to the heirs of the employees on their superannuation
and/or retirement. If such an appointment is permitted, in that case, outsiders shall never get an
appointment and only the heirs of the employees on their superannuation and/or retirement shall
get an appointment and those who are the outsiders shall never get an opportunity to get an
appointment though they may be more meritorious and/or well educated and/or more qualified.
Therefore, the submission on behalf of the respondent that the appointment is not on
compassionate grounds but the same be called as varas hakka cannot be accepted. Even if the same
be called as varas hakka the same is not supported by any scheme and even the same also can be
said to be violative of Article 14 as well as Article 15 of the Constitution of India.

13. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, both the Judgment and award passed by
the Industrial Court as well as the High Court in directing the Mahanagar Palika/ Municipal
Corporation to give appointment to the heirs of the employees on their superannuation and/or
retirement is unsustainable and the same deserves to be quashed and set aside.

14. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, both these appeals succeed. The impugned
common judgment and order dated 22.03.2022 passed by the High Court as well as the judgment(s)
and award(s) dated 16.09.2016 and 21.09.2016 passed in Complaint (ULP) No. 55/2005 and
Complaint (ULP) No. 83/2005 respectively directing the Mahanagar Palika/Municipal Corporation
to appoint the heirs of the employees on their retirement/superannuation in terms of judgment and
award dated 30.03.1981 passed in Reference IT No. 51 of 1979 are hereby quashed and set aside.

15. Accordingly, the instant appeals are allowed in the aforesaid terms. However, in the facts and
circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.

………………………………J.
[M.R. SHAH]

NEW DELHI;                               ………………………………..J.
SEPTEMBER 05, 2022.                      [B.V. NAGARATHNA]

7

Ahmednagar Mahanagar Palika vs Ahmednagar Mahanagar Palika Kamgar ... on 5 September, 2022

8