Amarendra Kumar Pandey vs Union Of India on 14 July, 2022

Amarendra Kumar Pandey vs Union Of India on 14 July, 2022

Author: Surya Kant

Bench: Surya Kant

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 11473−11474 OF 2018

AMARENDRA KUMAR PANDEY                             ….APPELLANT(S)

VERSUS

UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                              ….RESPONDENT(S)

JUDGMENT

J. B. PARDIWALA, J.

1. These appeals, by special leave, are directed against the judgment and order passed by a Division
Bench of the Guwahati High Court dated 21.12.2017 in the Writ Appeal No. 354 of 2017 by which the
High Court allowed the appeal filed by the Union of India & Ors. thereby setting aside the judgment
and order passed by a learned Date: 2022.07.14 Single Judge of the High Court dated 19.01.2015 in
the Writ Petition (C) 2783 of 2004 filed by the appellant herein.

2. The facts giving rise to this appeal may be summarized as under:

(i) The appellant herein (original writ petitioner) had joined the Assam Rifles as a
Rifleman in the year 1993. While he was in service, he came to be discharged vide
order dated 31.01.2004 passed by Lt.

Col Offg Comdt.

1

(ii) The order of discharge referred to above reads thus:

Amarendra Kumar Pandey vs Union Of India on 14 July, 2022

OFFICE OF THE COMMANDANT 24 ASSAM RIFLES, C/O 99 APO ORDER
2401637/AKP/2004 DATED 31.01.2004

1. WHEREAS it is considered that the conduct of No 2401637W Rfn/GD Amrandra
Kumar Pandey of which has led him getting four Red Ink entries is such as to render
his further retention in the public Service undesirable being a incorrigible offender
and having shown no improvement during his service.

2. AND WHEREAS No. 2401637W Rfn/GD Amrandra Kumar Pandey was afforded
opportunity to show cause against the proposed action vide 24 AR letter No.
11014/A36−2003/635 dt. 02 Sep., 2003.

3. AND WHEREAS No 2401637W Rfn/GD Amrandra Kumar Pandey submitted his
replies vide letter No. Nil dated 01. Oct.2003. the same was considered in terms of
ROI 4/99 and was found unsatisfactory by the competent authority.

4. NOW WHEREFORE, In exercise of the powers conferred on me under AR Act 1941
Sec 4(a) read with Para 24, Chapter VIII of AR Manual and Para 6 of ROI 4/99, the
undersigned hereby discharge the said No.2401637W Rfn/GD Amrandra Kumar
Pandey from the Assam Rifles being incorrigible offender soldier with effect from 31
Jan., 2004 (Afternoon) No.2401637W Rfn/GD Amrandra Kumar Pandey is entitled
to get pension and gratuity as admissible under rule.

s/d (Santosh Joseph) Lt. Col Offg Comdt

3. Thus, the aforesaid order of discharge was passed on the basis of the four Red−Ink entries
received by him during his period of service. The four Red−Ink entries were on the following
grounds:

Entry 1 (1996) For staying back to take care of his ailing mother – ‘without sufficient
cause over staying leave granted’.

Sentenced to 14 days of rigorous imprisonment with deduction in salary.

Entry 2 (1998) For being on the way out to make a phone call, but stopped before he
could leave the compound – “visited out of bound areas as specified in unit BRO Part
I Ser No 202 dated 30 Aug 96 without permission from his superior officers”.
Sentenced to 28 days of rigorous custody and 14 days of Military Custody.

Entry 3 (1999) For losing his luggage while coming back from home – “lost his
identity card bearing machine No. 078550 by neglect the property of the Government
issued to him for his use”. Sentenced to 28 days of rigorous imprisonment and 14

2

Amarendra Kumar Pandey vs Union Of India on 14 July, 2022

days of detention in AR custody.

Entry 4 (2004) For playing cards all alone by himself – ‘to obey unit standing orders
and was found Gambling in unit line’. Sentenced to 28 days of rigorous
imprisonment and 14 days of fine.

4. The appellant herein challenged the order of discharge before the Guwahati High
Court by filing the Writ Petition (C) No. 2738 of 2002. It appears from the materials
on record that a learned Single Judge of the Guwahati High Court decided the Writ
Petition filed by the appellant herein along with two other identical petitions of two
similarly situated riflemen and by a common judgment and order dated 19.01.2015
allowed the same. The impugned order of discharge came to be set aside. The learned
Single Judge remitted the matter to the authorities concerned for a fresh decision in
the light of a Division Bench decision of the Guwahati High Court.

5. The learned Single Judge while allowing the Writ Petition filed by the appellant
herein held as under:

“The issue regarding discharge from Assam Rifles on securing four Red Ink entries
was gone into by a Division Bench of this Court in Balwant Singh Vs. Union of India
& Ors., reported in 2011 (5) GLT 640. That was a case where a Rifleman was
discharged from the Assam Rifles on getting four Red Ink entries. Out of the four Red
Ink entries, three related to intoxication and one related to overstay of leave period.
The Division Bench examined the provisions of Clause−5 of the Record Branch
Instruction (ROI) No.1/2004. Clause−5 of ROI provides that under Chapter−VIII,
Rule 24 of the Assam Rifles Manual power is conferred on the Commandant of an
Assam Rifles battalion to discharge any member of the Assam Rifles below the rank
of Naib Subedar in case he receives four or more Red Ink entries. The Division Bench
held that the use of the expression “four or more Red Ink entries” and also the use of
the word “may” in Clause−5 indicates that discretion is vested in the disciplinary
authority to decide as to whether the person who is found to have received the Red
Ink entries ought to be discharged from service or not. It was held that merely
because a man receives four Red Ink entries, discharge is not automatic. Discretion is
given to the Commanding Officer to consider discharge. The severity and the nature
of the misconduct will have to be weighed before recourse is taken to exercise power
conferred by Clause−5 of the ROI.

It is a settled position in law that when a discretion is vested in an authority to
exercise a particular power, the same is required to be exercised with due diligence,
and in reasonable and rational manner. Since order of discharge and the procedure
preceding such discharge is of a summary nature, it is necessary that the order of
discharge is a speaking order and must indicate how and in what manner the
authority exercised the discretionary power. The Hon’ble Supreme Court in a catena
of decisions has reiterated time and again the necessity and importance of giving

3

Amarendra Kumar Pandey vs Union Of India on 14 July, 2022

reasons by the authority in support of its decision. It has been held that the face of an
order passed by a quasi−judicial authority or even by an administrative authority
affecting the rights of parties must speak. The affected party must know how his case
or defence was considered before passing the prejudicial order. Coming back to the
three impugned orders, it is evident that none of the orders disclose how the
responses of the petitioners were considered and why discharge was necessary. As
held by the Division Bench just because the petitioners incurred four Red Ink entries,
it does not ipso facto mean that they are to be discharged from the Assam Rifles. As
pointed out by the Division Bench, the authority vested with the power to discharge
must examine the response of the concerned person and weigh the same vis−à−vis
the severity of the misconduct which led to incurring of the Red Ink entries in the
service rolls. Such examination is not discernible from the impugned orders.

Having regard to the above, this Court is of the view that the impugned orders of
discharge cannot be sustained. Accordingly, the orders of discharge of the petitioners
are set aside and quashed. Matter is remanded back to the respondents for a fresh
decision in the light of the Division Bench judgment in Balwant Singh (Supra) and
the discussions made above. Respondents may consider imposition of any lesser
punishment on the petitioners balancing the interest of the organization and also that
of the petitioners subject to assessment of physical fitness of the petitioners.

Writ petitions are allowed to the above extent. No costs.”

6. The Union of India being dissatisfied with the judgment and order passed by the
learned Single Judge referred to above challenged the same by filing the writ appeal
before the Division Bench of the Guwahati High Court. The Division Bench allowed
the writ appeal filed by the Union of India and thereby set aside the order passed by
the learned Single Judge referred to above. The Appeal Court while allowing the writ
appeal filed by the Union of India essentially took the view that neither the Assam
Rifles Act, 1941 under which the decision to discharge was taken nor the Assam Rifles
Act, 2006 requires the authority to record any reasons or the satisfaction in the order
of discharge itself. The Appeal Court took the view having regard to the provision of
Clause 5 of the ROI 1/2004 that the Commandant has the discretion to discharge a
person who has four or more Red Ink entries.

All that is required is to serve a notice on the individual affording an opportunity to explain. The
provision of Clause 5 does not require the Commandant to record the reasons of satisfaction in the
order of discharge.

7. Being dissatisfied with the impugned order passed by the Appeal Court of the High Court, the
appellant herein (original writ petitioner) is here before this Court with the present appeal.
SUBMISSIONS :

4

Amarendra Kumar Pandey vs Union Of India on 14 July, 2022

8. The learned Counsel appearing for the appellant vehemently submitted that the High Court
committed a serious error in passing the impugned order. He would submit that there was no good
reason for the Appeal Court to disturb the order passed by the learned Single Judge of the High
Court.

9. The learned Counsel has broadly classified his submissions as under:

(a) Discharge is not mandatory even after four Red entries.

(b) There is a difference between cases of major misconducts and minor misconducts.

(c) In the order of discharge no reasons have been assigned.

(d) The plea of malafide raised against the authority has not been considered.

10. The learned Counsel appearing for the appellant invited the attention of this Court to the Record
Office Instruction No. 4 of 1999 which provides for the procedure for discharge/retirement from
service of Assam Rifles personnel. The same reads thus:

R E C O R D   O F F I C E   I N S T R U C T I O N   N O . 4 / 9 9   P R O C E D U R E   F O R
DISCHARGE/RETIREMENT FROM SERVICE ASSAM RIFLES PERSONNEL

1. A comprehensive instruction, containing all existing orders on the subject has been
compiled in the form of this ROI for guidance and strict compliance by all concerned.

***** ***** ***** ***** ***** ***** ***** ***** *****

6. Discharge/Disposal of Undesirable/Inefficient Personnel Chapter VIII, Rules 24 of the Assam
Rifles Manual invests powers to the Commandant of Assam Rifles Battalions to ‘dismiss’ or ‘remove’
any member of the Assam Rifles below the rank of Nb/Sub. This power may be invoked by a
Commandant in case where a person has got four red ink entries. As far as practicable, however,
discharge under this provision should be avoided as personnel sent on discharge on this account are
not eligible for pension. In case it is necessary to send an individual on discharge under this
provision, a notice will be served on the individual to give opportunity to explain his case. Complete
case will be forwarded to Range HQ alongwith the notice and reply received from the individual, for
the approval of the DIGAR. The documents will be sent to this Directorate Records (Doc)/UPAO
(And the individual to Depot Coy (No.1 Constr Coy))……

11. The learned Counsel also invited the attention of this Court to the Assam Rifles Manual. The
relevant clause of the Assam Rifles Manual reads thus:

ASSAM RIFLES MANUAL “24. A Commandant may dismiss any member of the
Assam Rifles below the rank of Jemadar.

5

Amarendra Kumar Pandey vs Union Of India on 14 July, 2022

The word “dismissal” should be restricted to the case of an officer removed with
disgrace. In other cases “removal” is the proper word to be used. A “dimissed” officer
may not be re−employed.

Dismissal is the last resource, and should not ordinarily be ordered until all other
means of punishment have been tried and failed. For incorrigible offenders;
confirmed bad characters, confirmed drunkards, for offences involving moral
disgrace, fraud and dishonesty, continued and willful disobedience or neglect, it is
generally the only appropriate punishment”

12. The principal argument of the learned Counsel appearing for the appellant is that the discharge
from service is not automatic or mandatory after four Red entries. Four Red entries are only a
minimum requirement and cannot be the sole ground to order discharge. It is argued that the Rule
itself states that the power “may be invoked” and that “as far as practicable, however, discharge
under this provision should be avoided as the Personnel sent on discharge on this account are not
eligible for pension”. The submission is that the provision can be pressed into service only when
“continued and willful disobedience or neglect” comes on record.

13. The learned Counsel with a view to fortify his aforesaid submission placed strong reliance on the
decisions of this Court in the case of Virendra Kumar Dubey v. Chief of Army Staff & Ors., (2016) 2
SCC 627, and Vijay Shankar Mishra v. Union of India and Ors., (2017) 1 SCC 795, respectively.

14. In such circumstances referred to above, the learned Counsel prays that there being merit in his
appeal the same be allowed and the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court may be
set aside including the order of discharge and the appellant may be ordered to be reinstated in
service with all Full Back Wages and all other statutory benefits.

15. On the other hand, this appeal has been vehemently opposed by the learned Counsel appearing
for the respondents. The learned Counsel would submit that no error not to speak of any error of law
could be said to have been committed by the High Court in passing the impugned judgment and
order. She would submit that the High Court was absolutely justified in taking the view that it was
not necessary for the authority concerned to assign any reasons for the purpose of passing an order
of discharge. The four Red Ink entries were sufficient for the authority to arrive at the subjective
satisfaction that the appellant herein was not fit to be retained in service and more particularly
being a Rifleman with the Assam Rifle.

16. It is argued that before passing the order of discharge, notice to show cause was issued to the
appellant herein and an opportunity of hearing was given to him.

17. The learned Counsel submitted that all that the appellant did was to tender an apology for his
mistakes. No other ground was raised in his reply to the show cause notice except that he hails from
a poor family and his parents and children are dependent on him. Having regard to the reply the
authority concerned rightly formed an opinion that the appellant was a habitual offender. She
invited the attention of this Court to Para 6 of the impugned judgment of the High Court wherein

6

Amarendra Kumar Pandey vs Union Of India on 14 July, 2022

the High Court has noted that the appellant failed to offer any explanation in the reply to the show
cause notice except the family circumstances.

18. The learned Counsel further submitted that the decision of this Court in the case of Union of
India v. Balwant Singh, (2015) 14 SCC 389, has not been referred to in the case of Virendra Kumar
Dubey (supra).

19. In the last the learned Counsel placed reliance on the decision of this Court in the case of Satgur
Singh v. UOI & Ors. reported in (2019)9 SCC 205, more particularly, the observations made in Para
6 and 7 respectively. Para 6 & 7 respectively are as under:

“6. We do not find any merit in the present appeal. Para 5(a) of the circular dated 28−
12−1988 deals with an enquiry which is not a court of inquiry into the allegations
against an army personnel. Such enquiry is not like departmental enquiry but
semblance of the fair decision−making process keeping in view the reply filed. The
court of inquiry stands specifically excluded. What kind of enquiry is required to be
conducted would depend upon facts of each case. The enquiry is not a regular enquiry
as Para 5(a) of the Army Instructions suggests that it is a preliminary enquiry. The
test of preliminary enquiry will be satisfied if an explanation of a personnel is
submitted and upon consideration, and order is passed thereon. In the present case,
the appellant has not offered any explanation in the reply filed except giving vague
family circumstance. Thus, he has been given adequate opportunity to put his
defence. Therefore, the parameters laid down in Para 5(a) of the Army Instructions
dated 28−12−1988 stand satisfied….

7. In reply to the show−cause notice, the appellant has not given any explanation of
his absence from duty on seven occasions. He has been punished on each occasion for
rigorous imprisonment ranging from 2 days to 28 days. A member of the Armed
Forces cannot take his duty lightly and abstain from duty at his will. Since the
absence of duty was on several different occasions for which he was imposed
punishment of imprisonment, therefore, the order of discharge cannot be said to be
unjustified.

The Commanding Officer has recorded that the appellant is a habitual offender. Such fact is
supported by absence of the appellant from duty on seven occasions.”

20. In such circumstances referred to above the learned Counsel appearing for the respondents pray
that there being no merit in this appeal, the same may be dismissed.

ANALYSIS

21. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having gone through the
materials on record, the only question that falls for our consideration is whether the Division Bench
of the High Court committed any error in passing the impugned order?

7

Amarendra Kumar Pandey vs Union Of India on 14 July, 2022

22. We must first look into the decision of this Court rendered in the case of Virendra Kumar Dubey
(supra). In the said case, the appellant Virendra Kumar Dubey was enrolled as an operator in the
corps of Artillery of Indian Army on 27.09.1980. Having served in that capacity for nearly twelve
years, he received a show cause notice pointing out that he had been awarded four Red Ink entries
for various offences set out in the notice and that Virendra Kumar Dubey had become a habitual
offender, thereby setting a bad example of indiscipline in the army. Virendra Kumar Dubey
ultimately came to be discharged from service by an order dated 14.12.1992. He preferred a
departmental appeal, which failed. He, thereafter, went to the High Court of Madhya Pradesh at
Jabalpur, however, the High Court declined to entertain the petition on the ground of lack of
territorial jurisdiction. He, thereafter, preferred an appeal before the Appeal Court and the writ
appeal was ultimately ordered to be transferred to the Armed Forces Tribunal Regional Bench,
Lucknow. The Tribunal ultimately dismissed the transferred petition which gave rise to the appeal
before this Court.

23. This Court in Virendra Kumar Dubey (supra) held as under:

“19. It is common ground that a red ink entry may be earned by an individual for
overstaying leave for one week or for six months. In either case the entry is a red ink
entry and would qualify for consideration in the matter of discharge. If two persons
who suffer such entries are treated similarly notwithstanding the gravity of the
offence being different, it would be unfair and unjust for unequals cannot be treated
as equals. More importantly, a person who has suffered four such entries on a graver
misconduct may escape discharge which another individual who has earned such
entries for relatively lesser offences may be asked to go home prematurely. The
unfairness in any such situation makes it necessary to bring in safeguards to prevent
miscarriage of justice. That is precisely what the procedural safeguards purport to do
in the present case.” Taking the aforesaid view, this Court ultimately passed the
following order:

“21. In the result this appeal succeeds and is hereby allowed. The order of discharge
passed against the appellant is hereby set aside. Since the appellant has already
crossed the age of superannuation, interest of justice will be sufficiently served if we
direct that the appellant shall be treated to have been in service till the time he would
have completed the qualifying service for grant of pension. No back wages shall,
however, be admissible. Benefit of continuity of service for all other purpose shall be
granted to the appellant including pension. Monetary benefits payable to the
appellant shall be released expeditiously but not later than four months from the date
of this order. No Costs.”

24. In Vijay Shankar Mishra (supra), the appellant therein was enrolled in the Army Medical Corps
on 23.06.1984. On 03.10.1997, a notice to show cause was issued to him to explain why he should
not be discharged from service under Rule 13(3) Table (III)(v) of the Army Rules, 1954 on the
ground that his conduct and service had not been found satisfactory. He ultimately came to be
discharged from service. By that time, he had rendered service of thirteen years and eight months.

8

Amarendra Kumar Pandey vs Union Of India on 14 July, 2022

The minimum qualifying service for earning pension under Rule 132 of the Pension Regulations for
the Army ,1961 is fifteen years. He filed a writ petition before the Madhya Pradesh High Court which
was dismissed on 21.11.2006. In appeal, a Division Bench directed reconsideration of the case of the
appellant. Pursuant to the order of the High Court, an order was issued rejecting his claim for
pension on the ground that he had not put in fifteen years of service and had been discharged for the
reason that he was unlikely to become an efficient soldier. He again filed a writ petition before the
Madhya Pradesh High Court which was transferred to the Armed Forces Tribunal. The Tribunal
dismissed the matter. Thereafter, Mishra came before this Court. The very same argument was
canvassed before this Court on behalf of Vijay Shankar Mishra that the mere fact that he had been
punished while in service on nine occasions inclusive of six Red entries was no ground to exercise
the power under the relevant rule for the purpose of discharge. The Court relied upon Vijay Shankar
Mishra (supra) and ultimately held as under:

“9. In the present case, it is evident that there was no application of mind by the
authorities to the circumstances which have to be taken into consideration while
exercising the power under Rule

13. The mere fact that the appellant had crossed the threshold of four red entries
could not be a ground to discharge him without considering other relevant
circumstances including: (i) the nature of the violation which led to the award of the
red ink entries; (ii) whether the appellant had been exposed to duty in hard stations
and to difficult living conditions; (iii) long years of service, just short of completing
the qualifying period for pension. Even after the Madhya Pradesh High Court
specifically directed consideration of his case bearing in mind the provisions of the
circular, the relevant factors were not borne in mind. The order that was passed on
26−2−2007 failed to consider relevant and germane circumstances and does not
indicate a due application of mind to the requirements of the letter of Army
Headquarters dated 28−12−1988 and the Circular dated 10−01−1989.

10. For these reasons, we are of the view that the Armed Forces Tribunal was in error
in rejecting the application. The orders of the Tribunal dated 23−9− 2010 Vijay
Shankar Mishra V. Union of India, 2010 SCC OnLine AFT 1127 and 15−9−2011 are set
aside.

Since the appellant would have attained the age of superannuation, the ends of justice would be met
if he is treated to have been in service till the time he would have completed the qualifying service
for grant of pension. No back wages shall however be admissible. The benefit of continuity of service
for all other purposes shall be granted to the appellant including pension. The monetary benefits
payable to the appellant shall be released within a period of four months from the date of this
order.”

25. In both the aforesaid decisions, this Court took into consideration the fact that there was no
application of mind by the authority to the relevant aspects which were taken into consideration
while exercising the power under Rule 13 of the Rules. In both the aforesaid cases, this Court took

9

Amarendra Kumar Pandey vs Union Of India on 14 July, 2022

the view that the mere fact that the Personnel had crossed the threshold of few Red Ink entries could
not have been made a ground to discharge them without considering other relevant circumstances,
more particularly, the nature of the violation which led to the award of the Red Ink entries. The crux
of the ratio of the decision of this Court in the case on Veerendra Kumar Dubey (supra) is that the
only safeguard against arbitrary exercise of power by the authority would be to ensure that there is
an enquiry, howsoever, summary and a finding about the defence set up by the individual besides
consideration of the factors made relevant under the procedure.

26. The reliance placed by the learned Counsel appearing for the respondents on the decision of this
Court in the case Satgur Singh (supra) is of no avail. It was a case in which the appellant failed to
furnish any explanation of his absence from duty on seven occasions. On facts, this Court took the
view that as the absence from duty was on several different occasions for which he was imposed
punishment of imprisonment, the order of discharge could not be said to unjustified.

27. We may elaborate the aforesaid a little further.

28. Where an Act or the statutory rules framed thereunder left an action dependent upon the
opinion of the authority concerned, by some such expression as ‘is satisfied’ or ‘is of the opinion’ or
‘if it has reason to believe’ or ‘if it considered necessary’, the opinion of the authority is conclusive,
(a) if the procedure prescribed by the Act or rules for formation of the opinion was duly followed, (b)
if the authority acted bona fide, (c) if the authority itself formed the opinion and did not borrow the
opinion of somebody else and (d) if the authority did not proceed on a fundamental misconception
of the law and the matter in regard to which the opinion had to be formed.

29. The action based on the subjective opinion or satisfaction, in our opinion, can judicially be
reviewed first to find out the existence of the facts or circumstances on the basis of which the
authority is alleged to have formed the opinion. It is true that ordinarily the court should not inquire
into the correctness or otherwise of the facts found except in a case where it is alleged that the facts
which have been found existing were not supported by any evidence at all or that the finding in
regard to circumstances or material is so perverse that no reasonable man would say that the facts
and circumstances exist. The courts will not readily defer to the conclusiveness of the authority’s
opinion as to the existence of matter of law or fact upon which the validity of the exercise of the
power is predicated.

30. The doctrine of reasonableness thus may be invoked. Where there are no reasonable grounds for
the formation of the authority’s opinion, judicial review in such a case is permissible. [See Director
of Public Prosecutions v. Head, (1959) AC 83 (Lord Denning).

31. When we say that where the circumstances or material or state of affairs does not at all exist to
form an opinion and the action based on such opinion can be quashed by the courts, we mean that
in effect there is no evidence whatsoever to form or support the opinion. The distinction between
insufficiency or inadequacy of evidence and no evidence must of course be borne in mind. A finding
based on no evidence as opposed to a finding which is merely against the weight of the evidence is
an abuse of the power which courts naturally are loath to tolerate. Whether or not there is evidence

10

Amarendra Kumar Pandey vs Union Of India on 14 July, 2022

to support a particular decision has always been considered as a question of law. [See Reg. v.
Governor of Brixton Prison, Armah, Ex Parte, (1966) 3 WLR 828 at p. 841].

32. It is in such a case that it is said that the authority would be deemed to have not applied its mind
or it did not honestly form its opinion. The same conclusion is drawn when opinion is based on
irrelevant matter. [See Rasbihari v. State of Orissa, AIR 1969 SC 1081].

33. In the case of Rohtas Industries Ltd. v. S.D. Agarwal and another, AIR 1969 SC 707, it was held
that the existence of circumstances is a condition precedent to form an opinion by the Government.
The same view was earlier expressed in the case of Barium Chemicals Ltd. and another v. Company
Law Board and others, AIR 1967 SC 295.

34. Secondly, the court can inquire whether the facts and circumstances so found to exist have a
reasonable nexus with the purpose for which the power is to be exercised. In other words, if an
inference from facts does not logically accord with and flow from them, the Courts can interfere
treating them as an error of law. [See Bean v. Doncaster Amalgamated Collieries, (1944) 2 All ER
279 at p. 284]. Thus, this Court can see whether on the basis of the facts and circumstances found,
any reasonable man can say that an opinion as is formed can be formed by a reasonable man. That
would be a question of law to be determined by the Court. [See Farmer v. Cotton’s Trustees, 1915 AC
922]. Their Lordships observed:

“……….. in my humble judgment where all the material facts are fully found, and the
only question is whether the facts are such as to bring the case within the provisions
properly construed of some statutory enactment, the question is one of law only.”
[See also Muthu Gounder v. Government of Madras, (1969) 82 Mad LW 1].

35. Thirdly, this Court can interfere if the constitutional or statutory term essential for the exercise
of the power has either been misapplied or misinterpreted. The Courts have always equated the
jurisdictional review with the review for error of law and have shown their readiness to quash an
order if the meaning of the constitutional or statutory term has been misconstrued or misapplied.
[See Iveagh (Earl of) v. Minister of Housing and Local Govt., (1962) 2 QB 147; Iveagh (Earl of) v.
Minister of Housing and Local Govt. (1964) 1 AB 395].

36. Fourthly, it is permissible to interfere in a case where the power is exercised for improper
purpose. If a power granted for one purpose is exercised for a different purpose, then it will be
deemed that the power has not been validly exercised. If the power in this case is found to have not
been exercised genuinely for the purpose of taking immediate action but has been used only to avoid
embarrassment or wreck personal vengeance, then the power will be deemed to have been exercised
improperly. [See Natesa Asari v. State of Madras, AIR 1954 Mad 481].

37. Fifthly, the grounds which are relevant for the purpose for which the power can be exercised
have not been considered or grounds which are not relevant and yet are considered and an order is
based on such grounds, then the order can be attacked as invalid and illegal. In this connection,
reference may be made to Ram Manohar v. State of Bihar, AIR 1966 SC 740; Dwarka Das v. State of

11

Amarendra Kumar Pandey vs Union Of India on 14 July, 2022

J. and K., AIR 1957 SC 164 at p. 168 and Motilall v. State of Bihar, AIR 1968 SC 1509. On the same
principle, the administrative action will be invalidated if it can be established that the authority was
satisfied on the wrong question: [See (1967) 1 AC 13].

38. At this stage, it may be apposite to refer to the Assam Rifles Regulation, 2016. We are conscious
of the fact that these regulations do not apply to the case on hand as the order of discharge is of
2004. However, we deem fit to reproduce the relevant regulations, more particularly, 107(c) and 108
respectively, as these regulations seem to have been enacted and brought into force having regard to
the ratio of the decision of this Court in the case of Veerendra Kumar Dubey (supra). Regulation
107(c) reads thus:

“107. Removal of undesirable, incorrigible and inefficient Subordinate Officers,
Under Officers and other enrolled persons.

(a) …………

(b) …………

(c) The procedure for dismissal/discharge of unsuitable subordinate officer/under
officer/enrolled person will be as under:−

(i) As provided under Rules 24 and 25 of Assam Rifles Rules, the person concerned,
subject to the exception mentioned therein, shall be served with a Show Cause Notice
against the contemplated action.

(ii) Preliminary enquiry. Before recommending discharge or dismissal of an
individual the authority concerned will ensure that an impartial enquiry (not
necessarily a Court of Inquiry) has been made into the allegations against him and
that he has had adequate opportunity of hearing.

(iii) Rule 24 of the Assam Rifles confers powers on the Commandants of the Assam
Rifles Units/ establishment to discharge any subordinate officer/under
officer/enrolled persons of Assam Rifles. However, the power of discharge by the
Commandant shall be exercised with prior approval of immediate superior officer not
below Sector Commander in case of Under Officers and other enrolled person and
that of Inspector General Assam Rifles in case of Subordinate Officers.

(iv) After compliance of the provisions enumerated above, a show cause notice will be
served on the individual affording him an opportunity to explain his case. Thereafter,
the complete case file will be forwarded to next superior authority/Sector
Headquarters for approval of the superior authority/Sector Commander.

(v) The authority competent to sanction the dismissal/discharge of the individual will
before passing orders re−consider the case in the light of the individual reply to the

12

Amarendra Kumar Pandey vs Union Of India on 14 July, 2022

show cause notice. A person who has been served a show cause notice for proposed
dismissal may be ordered to be discharged if it is considered that discharge would
meet the end of justice. If the competent authority accepts the reply of the individual
to the show cause notice as entirely satisfactorily, he will pass orders accordingly.

108. Discharge on ground of red ink entries. A Subordinate Officer, Under Officer or other enrolled
person who has incurred four or more red ink entries may be recommended for discharge from the
service on the ground of unsuitability, subject to the following conditions:−

(a) After an individual has earned three red ink entries, he shall be warned in writing that his service
will be liable to be terminated by the competent authority if he earns one more red ink entry. Such a
warning letter shall be issued to him by the concerned Sector Commander through Commandant of
the individual.

(b) Each case of individuals having earned four or more red ink entries shall be examined on its own
merit depending upon the nature and gravity of the offences and the aggravating circumstances
under which these were committed. The authority competent to sanction discharge under this para
shall record reasons for ordering the discharge, or otherwise.

(c) A person who has put in eighteen years of qualifying service for pension may be allowed to
complete the required qualifying service for grant of pension before he is recommended for
discharge on ground of four or more red ink entries, unless there are compelling reasons to sanction
his discharge before completion of the qualifying service for pension, which must be specified in the
discharge order.

(d) Before taking the final decision to order the discharge, the person concerned shall be informed
through a show cause notice that his retention in the service is considered undesirable for having
incurred four or more red ink entries, thereby also calling upon him to show cause as to why he
should not be discharged from the service for being considered unsuitable for the service in the
Assam Rifles. The individual shall be given minimum fifteen days, after receipt of Show Cause
Notice, to submit his reply.

(e) After receipt of the individual’s reply, if any, the case shall be put up to the authority competent
to sanction the discharge alongwith recommendations of the Commandant of the unit concerned.
Before passing the discharge order, the authority competent to sanction the discharge under this
para may seek the advise of the Law Officer concerned.

(f) An order of discharge under this para shall be passed by an officer not less than a Sector
Commander in the case of Under Officer or other enrolled persons and an officer not less than
Inspector General Assam Rifles/Additional Director General Assam Rifles in case of Subordinate
Officers.”

39. Having regard to the nature of the misconduct alleged against the appellant we are of the view
that the ends of justice would be met if we set aside the order of discharge and treat the appellant

13

Amarendra Kumar Pandey vs Union Of India on 14 July, 2022

herein to have been in service till the time, he could be said to have completed the qualifying service
for grant of pension. We are inclined to pass such an order with a view to do substantial justice as
there is nothing on record to indicate that the nature of the misconduct leading to the award of four
Red Ink entries was so unacceptable that the competent authority had no option but to direct his
discharge to prevent indiscipline in the force.

40. The order of discharge passed against the appellant herein is hereby set aside. The appellant
shall be treated to have been in service till the time he would have completed the qualifying service
for grant of pension. We are informed that only six months were left for the qualifying service to be
completed before the appellant came to be discharged. No back wages shall, however, be admissible.
The benefit of continuity of service for all other purpose shall be granted to the appellant including
pension. The monetary benefits payable to the appellant shall be released expeditiously but not later
than four months from the date of this order.

41. The appeals are allowed in the aforesaid terms. No order as to costs.

42. Pending application, if any, stands disposed of.

………………………………………..J. (SURYA KANT) ………………………………………..J. (J.B. PARDIWALA)
NEW DELHI JULY 14, 2022

14