Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November,
2022

Author: Chief Justice

Bench: Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha, S. Ravindra Bhat, Uday Umesh Lalit

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 946-947 OF 2019

ASHOK KUMAR SINGH CHANDEL                            ....APPELLANT(S)

VERSUS

STATE OF U.P.                                       ...RESPONDENT(S)

WITH
CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 1030-1031/2019
ASHUTOSH SINGH @ DABBU Vs. THE STATE OF U.P., ETC.

WITH
CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 1046-1047/2019
RAGHUVIR SINGH Vs. STATE OF U.P. ETC

WITH
CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 1269-1270/2019
PRADEEP SINGH & ANR. Vs. STATE OF U.P., ETC.

WITH
CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 1804-1805/2019
BHAN SINGH Vs. THE STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH ETC.

WITH
CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 1980-1981/2019
SAHAB SINGH Vs. THE STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH

WITH
CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 1279-1280/2019
NASEEM Vs. THE STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
Rajni Mukhi
Date: 2022.11.04
16:47:52 IST

1

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

Reason:

Page 1 of 102
(cid:12)                                 WITH
SLP (CRL) NO. 10742/2019
RAJEEV SHUKLA Vs. ASHOK SINGH CHANDEL & ORS.

WITH
W.P.(CRL.) NO. 57/2022
RAJEEV KUMAR SHUKLA Vs. STATE OF U.P. & ORS.

JUDGMENT

PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA, J.

1. These Criminal Appeals are by seven accused convicted and sentenced to life by the High Court of
Judicature at Allahabad for the murder of five persons. The deceased belonged to or were associated
with the same family; two of them were brothers, the third was their minor son and the other two
were their close family friends. Apart from these criminal appeals, there is also a Special Leave
Petition filed by the informant (PW-1), who is the sole surviving brother in the family, praying for
enhancement of the sentence from life to death and also a Writ Petition seeking transfer of accused
no. 5 to a jail outside Uttar Pradesh for serving out the sentence in lieu of his influence in the State.

2.1 The judgment of the High Court was rendered in an appeal against acquittal of all the accused by
the Trial Court1. The High Court by its judgment2 impugned herein reversed the findings of the
Trial Court and 1 Court of the Upper Sessions Judge, Hamirpur; ST No. 145/2000, 146/2000 and
147/2000 dated 15.07.2002.

2 In Government Appeal No. 5123/2002 and Criminal Revision No. 1548/2002 dated 19.04.2019.

convicted all the accused for the offences under Sections 148, 302 read with 149, 307 read with 149
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 3 and sentenced them to life imprisonment. The details of the
conviction and sentences are as under. 2.2 All these accused were sentenced to undergo life
imprisonment for the offence under Section 302 read with Section 149 IPC and to pay a fine of Rs.
20,000/- each, in default to undergo six months additional simple imprisonment. The accused were
sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for three years for the offence under Section 148 IPC
and to pay a fine of Rs. 5000/- each and in default to undergo simple imprisonment of six months.
All the accused were sentenced to undergo ten years rigorous imprisonment for the offence under
Section 307 read with149 IPC and to pay a fine of Rs. 10,000/- each, in default to undergo six
months simple imprisonment. 2.3 The acquittal of Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel(A5) under Sections
379 and 404 IPC by the Trial Court was upheld. Further, the acquittal of accused Sahab Singh (A8)
for an offence under Section 25 of the Arms Act, 1959 4 and the acquittal of accused Ashok Singh
Chandel(A5) for an offence under Section 30 of the Arms Act was also confirmed by the High Court

2

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

without any variation. With these findings, the Criminal Appeal of the State and the Criminal
Revision of the informant (PW-1) were substantially allowed. 3 hereinafter referred to as ‘IPC’.

4 hereinafter referred to as the ‘Arms Act’.

3. Challenging the judgment of the High Court, the present criminal appeals are filed by the accused
Raghuvir Singh (A1) in Crl. A Nos. 1046- 1047/2019, Ashutosh Singh @ Dabbu (A2) in Crl. A. Nos.
1030-1031/2019, Uttam Singh (A3) and Pradeep Singh (A4) in Crl. A Nos. 1269-1270/2019, Ashok
Kumar Singh Chandel (A5) in Crl. A Nos. 946-947/2019, Naseem (A6) in Crl. A Nos.
1279-1280/2019, Sahab Singh (A8) in Crl. A No. 1980- 1981/2019, and Bhan Singh (A10) in Crl. A
Nos. 1804-1805/2019. The Incident:

4. The prosecution case as it unfolds in the First Information Report 5 is that there has been a
long-standing factional dispute between two groups in Hamirpur, U.P. The group represented by
Ashok Chandel (A5) and the group represented by Shukla family were inimically disposed against
each other for a long time. The FIR is about the incident that has occurred at 09.10 P.M. on
26.01.1997 at Mohalla Subhash Bazar, Kasba, Hamirpur as two events occurring one after another in
quick succession. The first incident is in front of the gun shop owned by accused no. 6, referred to as
‘Naseem’s gun shop’ and the second incident is near the residence of Parma Pandit which is about
50-75 meters from Naseem’s gun shop. The two incidents are as follows. 5.1 First part of the
incident: On 26.01.1997, Rajiv Shukla (PW-1) along with his servant Lallan went to the market
Mohalla Subhash Bazaar, Kasba, Hamirpur in the evening of 26.01.1997 at around 07.30 PM to buy
some 5 hereinafter referred to as ‘FIR’.

articles. As they were returning from the market, they saw PW-1’s elder brother, Rakesh Kumar
Shukla, his two sons, Gudda and Chandan, Sri Kant Pandey, Vipul (PW-1’s son) and Ved Prakash,
returning home in a vehicle, all through referred to as a ‘jonga’.

5.2 On seeing the jonga, PW-1 and Lallan stopped to speak to Rakesh Kumar Shukla and others in
the jonga. As the jonga was parked in the middle of the road, facing east direction in front of
Naseem’s (A6) gun shop, six accused, namely Ashok Kumar Chandel (A5), Naseem (A6), Shyam
Singh (A7), Sahab Singh (A8), Jhandu (A9) and Rukku (driver of A5) came out of Naseem’s gun
shop, all armed with rifles and guns and suddenly started firing indiscriminately at the jonga.

5.3 It is stated in the FIR that immediately after hearing the sound of fire from the side of the
market, Raghuvir Singh, liquor contractor (A1), his son Ashutosh alias Dabbu Singh (A2), Pradeep
Singh (A4), Uttam Singh (A3) and Bhan Singh (A10) arrived at the spot in another vehicle and
started firing at the jonga. Due to the firing, Sri Kant (since deceased) and Ved Prakash (since
deceased), who were sitting on the rear side of the jonga, received bullet injuries. Rakesh Kumar
Shukla (since deceased), Gudda (since deceased), Chandan and Vipul also received bullet injuries.
Because of the firing, panic gripped, and the market was shut down.

6.1 Second part of the incident: Immediately on getting information about the occurrence, Rajesh
Kumar Shukla, elder brother of PW-1, Ravi Kant Pandey (PW-2), Bhagwati Sharan Nayak, Sri

3

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

Prakash Nayak, Anil and many others reached the place of the incident. As the children Chandan
and Vipul sustained minor injuries, they were immediately taken out of the jonga and sent home
with the help of some people in the area.

6.2 Rajesh Shukla reversed the jonga from in front of Naseem’s gun shop and started driving it
towards the hospital, which is on the west side of the Subhash Bazar Road. However, as they
reached Parma Pandit’s house, which is just 50-75 meters from Naseem’s gun shop, the accused,
having already reached the spot. At that moment, Ashok Chandel (A5) exhorted that “no one from
the Shukla Family should escape alive”, and on hearing that, all the accused again started firing
indiscriminately. At this point, Rajesh Shukla got out of the jonga with his rifle to take aim and fire
back at the accused persons. However, during the cross-fire, Rajesh Shukla sustained fatal injuries
and fell down on the spot. PW-1, who was standing on the driver’s side (right side) of the jonga, also
received bullet injuries on his leg. Similar is the position of PW- 2, who also received bullet injuries
on his leg. As PW-1 and his companions took cover to conceal themselves, PW-1 saw the assailants
snatch the rifle from Rajesh Kumar Shukla (since deceased), who had fallen due to bullet injuries
and escaped from the scene of offence, towards ‘chowraha’ in their vehicles. 6.3 Having seen Rajesh
Kumar Shukla also succumb to bullet injuries like Gudda and Rakesh Kumar Shukla, hoping to save
Srikant Pandey and Ved Prakash, PW-1 put them in the jonga and drove to the hospital. At the
hospital:

7.1 PW-1 reached the hospital at around 07.50 P.M, and he was immediately examined by Dr. N.K.
Gupta, PW-8 who gave the injury report- Exb. Ka-13 which records injuries on his left thigh (back
portion) caused by firearms. Dr. S.R. Gupta, PW-7, who was the Radiologist on duty that day, got his
X-Ray-Exbs. Ka-44-46 done.

7.2 While PW-1 was being treated, Dr. P.N Paya, PW-5, examined the bodies of deceased Rakesh
Kumar Shukla, Rajesh Kumar Shukla and Sri Kant Pandey and declared them dead. Dr. R.S. Gupta,
PW-6, examined Gudda and Ved Prakash and declared them dead. One Mr. Hardayal was also
injured in the firing was examined by PW-8 Dr. N.K. Gupta. His injury report, Exb. Ka-14 was
prepared at 8.45 P.M. PW-8 also examined PW-2 at 10 P.M. and gave the injury report, marked as
Exb. Ka-15. Vipul and Chandan were also examined at 10.30 P.M., and their injury reports were
marked and exhibited as Exbs. Ka- 16 and Ka-17, respectively.

Filing of the FIR:

8.1 After obtaining immediate medical attention, PW-1’s statement (‘tehreer’) was
recorded at the hospital by Saraswati Sharan, the scribe who was examined as PW-3.
Upon completion of the tehreer, at around 09.10 PM, PW-1 went to the police station
to report the incident and to lodge the FIR. At the Police Station, Constable Mahesh
Singh, examined as PW-9 prepared the FIR6, Exb. Ka-20, in his own handwriting, by
copying the contents from the tehreer under Sections 147, 148, 149, 307, 302, 34 &
395 IPC.

4

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

8.2 In the FIR, PW-1 mentioned about the two incidents, first in front of Naseem’s
gun shop and second near Parma Pandit’s house and named ten accused and two
unknown persons. The motive behind the attack was stated to be a political rivalry
between Ashok Kumar Chandel and the Shukla family. In this context, the informant
mentioned about a criminal case involving Shyam Singh (A7). In that case, Rakesh
Kumar Shukla and Rama Kant Pandey (brother of Sri Kant Pandey) assisted the
prosecution against Shyam Singh (A7). He also mentioned about the Assembly
Elections, where the Shukla family opposed Shyam Singh (A7) and Ashok Kumar
Chandel (A5), leading to a political rivalry.

8.3 The FIR was thereafter copied into the General Diary by the Investigating Officer, Lalman
Verma, PW-12. After copying the FIR, PW-12 proceeded to the place of occurrence in furtherance of
the investigation.

9. It is important to mention at this stage that on the next day, i.e. on 27.01.1997, at 7.50 P.M. two
more FIRs 7, were registered against Sahab Singh 6 FIR no. 33/1997.

7 FIR no. 34/1997 and FIR no. 35/1997.

and Ashok Kumar Chandel under Sections 25 and 30 of the Arms Act, 1959 respectively.

Investigation:

10. After lodging the FIR, PW-1 returned to the hospital where the panchayatnama8
of the deceased was being conducted. Thereafter, PW-1 went to the place of
occurrence in the jonga, which was driven by Lallan, where he met the Investigating
Officer, PW-12. The Investigating Officer, recorded the statement of PW-1 in the
presence of an independent witness and also prepared a site map-Exb. Ka-25. Having
noticed a pool of blood on the road near Naseem’s gun shop, PW-12 collected
samples of bloodstained soil and grass-

Exb. Ka-26. The Investigating Officer also collected 12 blank cartridges (6 bore and 6 brass)- Exb.
Ka-27 in front of Parma Pandit’s house. An expired Manarth Card (Railway travel card), issued by
the Indian Railways Board, New Delhi-Exb. Ka-28 was also recovered by him in front of Naseem’s
gun shop, the card bore the name of Ashok Kumar Chandel. The jonga by which PW-1 went to the
place of occurrence was also seized along with a piece of the footrest which had blood on it, a sample
of the broken piece of the front glass of the jonga and some pieces of glass lying at the spot, all of
them later marked as -Exb. Ka- 29.

8 Panchnama has been referred to as ‘Panchayatanama’ in the High Court as well as the Trial Court
Judgment. For the purposes of the present appeals, we will use the word ‘Panchnama’.

11. After the investigation at the place of occurrence, PW-12 went to the hospital where
Sub-Inspector R.N. Singh Pal and ASI Harishchandra Singh were present and preparing the

5

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

panchnamas9 of the dead bodies. All the dead bodies were sealed separately and sent for
post-mortem. The post-mortems of the bodies of Rakesh Shukla, Rajesh Shukla and Sri Kant
Pandey were conducted on 27.01.1997 the following day between 10 AM to 12.30 PM by PW-510.
Similarly, the post-mortems of Gudda and Ved Prakash were also done on 27.01.1997 between 2 PM
and 2.30 PM by PW-611.

Arrests:

12. The next day, that is on 27.01.1997, the Investigating Officer proceeded to Laxmibai Tiraha after
finding out that some of the accused were at Naseem’s house. Upon reaching the place, the police
party found Naseem (A6), Shyam Singh (A7), Sahab Singh (A8) and Bhan Singh (A10) trying to flee
through the backdoor of Naseem’s house leading to River Betwa. They were arrested and a rifle
along with 10 brass bullets tied in a green belt was recovered from the possession of Sahab
Singh(A8). On being questioned about the rifle, Sahab Singh stated that the rifle belonged to Ashok
Kumar Chandel. The seized rifle and the bullets were marked as Exb. Ka-24 and they were sent for
FSL Report. A copy of the seizure memo was provided to Sahab Singh. On the basis of the 9 Rakesh
Shukla (Exb. Ka-30); Rajesh Shukla (Exb. Ka-37); Sri Kant Pandey (Exb. Ka 43); Guddu (Exb.
Ka-48); Ved Prakash (Exb Ka-53).

10 Rakesh Shukla (Exb. Ka-3); Rajesh Shukla (Exb. Ka-4); Sri Kant Pandey (Exb. Ka-5). 11 Gudda
(Exb. Ka-6); Ved Prakash (Exb. Ka-7).

seizure memo, cases under Sections 25 and 30 of the Arms Act were registered against accused
Sahab Singh (A8) and Ashok Kumar Chandel (A5).

13. A search for the rest of the other accused was made, however, as they could not be found a report
under Sections 82 and 83 (proclamation of person absconding) of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
197312 was presented to the court on 28.01.1997. On the very same day, on receiving information
regarding the looted rifle of Rajesh Kumar Shukla at the residence of Ashok Kumar Chandel, at
Mohalla Vivek Nagar, his house was raided and a country-made pistol and one licensed Double
Barrel Breach Loading (DBBL) gun were recovered.

14. There was another lead regarding the looted rifles at the residence of one Mr. Anand Purwar.
However, nothing in relation to the murders was recovered in the raid, except one licensed DBBL
gun of 12 bore, four cartridges and a licensed Mauser gun with 8 cartridges. These were seized in the
presence of independent witnesses and a copy of the same was provided to Anand Purwar. These
weapons were not sent for forensic examination.

15. On 29.01.1997, statements of witnesses to the panchnama were recorded. Section 161, Cr.P.C
statement of Bhagwati Saran Nayak who was present on the day of the incident was recorded,
however statement of victims Vipul and Chandan could not be recorded as they were very young.
The 12 hereinafter referred to as ‘Cr.P.C’ Investigating Officer (PW-12) also recorded the statement
of Hardayal on 16.02.1997.

6

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

16. Upon obtaining information about the presence of accused Raghuvir Singh (A1), Dabbu (A2),
Pradeep (A4) and Uttam (A3), in a Maruti car near city forest, they were perused and arrested on
01.02.1997.

17. Another raid was conducted at Ashok Kumar Chandel’s Kanpur residence however no weapons
were recovered. Upon receipt of information about the weapons used by Raghuvir (A1) and Dabbu
(A2), their Moradabad residence was raided but nothing could be recovered. Later, even a Court
witness was again sent to Moradabad for recovery of the weapons, but nothing was recovered.

18. On 21.02.1997, accused Jhandu (A9) was arrested and his Section 313 Cr.P.C statement was
recorded. As accused Rukku was absconding, his trial was separated from the present case.
Ultimately, he was convicted by the Trial Court13 on 12.04.2007 and sentenced to life
imprisonment. His conviction and sentence was confirmed by the High Court14 by judgment dated
24.05.2019. He has not filed a Special Leave Petition before us.

19. On completion of the investigation, a charge-sheet, Exb. Ka-58, was filed against 10 accused on
22.02.1997 and the case was set for trial. The Trial:

13 Sessions Trial number 127/2003.

14 Criminal Appeal No. 2617/2017.

20. The Trial Court framed charges against the accused persons on 25.01.2002 under sections 147,
148 and 302 read with section 149, IPC against all the 10 accused and under Sections 25 and 30,
Arms Act against Sahab Singh and Ashok Kumar Chandel respectively. The Trial Court also framed
charges against Ashok Kumar Chandel under Sections 379 and 404 IPC. While prosecution
examined fourteen witnesses being PW-1 to PW-14, the defence examined three witnesses being
DW-1 to DW-3. There was also one Court witness being CW-1.

21. The following are the prosecution witnesses with an indication about the purpose for which they
were examined.

PW-1     Rajiv Shukla, informant and injured eye-witness
PW-2     Ravi Kant Pandey, injured eye-witness
PW-3     Saraswati Sharan, Scribe
PW-4     Malkhan Singh, SI, MT 33rd Battalion PAC, Jhansi
PW-5     Dr. P.N. Paya, Surgeon District Hospital, Hamirpur
PW-6     Dr. R.S. Gupta, Paediatrician, District Hospital,
Hamirpur
PW-7     Dr. S.R. Gupta, Radiologist, District Hospital, Hamirpur
PW-8     Dr. N.K. Gupta, Medical Officer, District Hospital,
Hamirpur
PW-9     Constable, Mahesh Singh, Constable, P.S. Kothwali,
Hamirpur
PW-10    Munnalal Mishra, Head Mohrir, P.S. Kothwali, Hamirpur
PW-11    Aftab Ali, Aftab Ali, Constable. Kothwali, Hamirpur

7

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

PW-12    Lalman Verma, Inspector In-Charge, Investigating
Officer, P.S. Kotwali Hamirpur
PW-13    KD Pal, Sub-Inspector, P.S. Kotwali Hamirpur
PW-14    Sukhram Sonkar, Deputy Superintendent of Police,
CDCID
Court    SI Ramsurat Mishra, Second Officer, (S.I.), P.S. Kotwali

(cid:12)      witness    Hamirpur

22.     The following are the defence witnesses.

DW-1      Lalram Kushwah – Executive Engineer, Electricity
Distribution Division, Hamirpur
DW-2      Premdas Saloniya, Jailor, Jail, Hamirpur
DW-3      Akhilesh Kumar, Constable Clerk, Vigilance Office,

Office of the Superintendent of Police, Hamirpur 23.1 Of all the witnesses, the prosecution strongly
relied on the evidence of PW-1 and PW-2 who are examined as injured eye-witnesses. 23.2 PW-1 in
his testimony gave a detailed description of the events at the place of incident. He deposed about the
first as well as the second incident including the position at which the deceased as well as the
eye-witnesses were situated at the time of the incident. He also deposed about the weapons used by
the accused persons, injuries sustained by the deceased persons and the bullet marks on the jonga.
PW-1 also recounted the events that followed the incidents including the lodging of the FIR, medical
treatment at the hospital and recording of his statement by the IO at the place of occurrence. 23.3
The other ocular witness presented by the prosecution is Ravi Kant Pandey, PW-2. He testified
about his presence during the second incident and his involvement in rescuing the children from the
jonga. He gave a detailed description about his position during the incident and the injury sustained
by him. He also detailed the deceased persons in the jonga, including his brother Sri Kant Pandey
while naming all the accused and the firing. He further mentioned about his treatment in the
hospital and also that of the children who he accompanied.

24. Other witnesses are the police officers and the doctors who treated the deceased persons as well
as the injured witnesses as mentioned in the table above. The defence witnesses were examined only
to contradict the statements of PW-1 and PW-2.

Judgment of the Trial Court:

25. By its judgment dated 15.07.2002, the Trial Court acquitted all the accused. As this is a case of
reversal in an appeal against acquittal, it is extremely important to examine the reasoning and the
findings of the Trial Court in minute detail. This is for the reason that in an appeal against acquittal,
the appellate court must exercise its jurisdiction only for very substantial and compelling reasons.
For determining whether substantial, compelling and sufficient reasons existed for the High Court
to reverse a finding of acquittal, we will first scrutinize the judgment of the Trial Court in detail. The
decision of the Trial Court is based on its conclusions on the (a) motive, (b) place of occurrence, (c)
contradictions in the statement of PW-1 and PW-2, (d) recovery of weapons (e) and the illegality

8

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

with respect to the FSL report. 26.1 Motive: The Trial Court found that the prosecution failed to
establish any motive for the accused to commit the offence. The conclusions were based on three
grounds:

26.2 Firstly, the Trial Court held that the motive based on the alleged involvement of
Shyam Singh (A7) in a past murder case in which the deceased and his associates
assisted the prosecution is ‘insufficient’ and ‘far-fetched’.

26.3 Secondly, the Trial Court dismissed the alleged opposition of the deceased party
to the election of Ashok Kumar Chandel in the Assembly Elections of 1996 as not
convincing enough. Trial Court also held that PW-1 could not clearly articulate the
political animosity.

26.4 Thirdly, the alleged animosity between the Chandel group and the Shukla group
based on the competing interests of the educational institutions run by Naseem
–Islamia Inter College, Hamirpur and those supported by Shukla group – Vidya
Mandir is not based on any evidence.

27. Place of occurrence: The Trial Court recorded that the incident occurred in two
parts. As far as the first part is concerned, it returned a finding that “this place of
occurrence has not been challenged by the defence and from the questions by
Naseem himself during the cross-examination of the witness it is clear that the
incident had taken place.” With respect to the second incident, the Trial Court again
returned a finding to the effect that “the investigation officer during inspection of the
place of occurrence found blood but he did not collect blood stained soil from here.
This is his mistake but this does not draw any adverse inference on the prosecution
case.”

28. The prosecution’s contention that the entire incident was pre-planned did not
impress the Trial Court because there were three different routes by which the
deceased party could reach their residence from their sister’s house.

In view of this, the Trial Court held that there was no certainty about PW-1 and Lallan on the one
hand and Rakesh Shukla and others in the jonga meeting in front of Naseem’s gun shop, i.e. the
place of occurrence on the other. The Trial Court held that this meeting could not have been
expected by the accused party to lay an ambush.

29. Differences in the contents FIR copied from the Tehreer: The Trial Court examined the tehreer
and compared it with the FIR. The discrepancies were highlighted to come to a conclusion of
improbability of scribing the tehreer within ‘10-15 minutes’ and for coming to a conclusion that the
FIR is ante-dated and fragmented. In this context;

i. The Trial Court doubted the FIR for the reason that certain words and phrases in the tehreer did
not appear in the FIR. For the reason that words such as ‘tatha’ in the tehreer was replaced with

9

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

‘aur’ and the sentence ‘tatha mere per me goliya lagi’ was omitted in the FIR, the Trial Court
concluded that the FIR was ante-dated and fragmented. It was also noted that while the tehreer
ends with a prayer for police protection, the FIR is silent on the same.

ii. Taking into account the time at which PW-1 was medically examined (8.30 PM), followed by his
narration of the incident to PW-3 for scribing the tehreer, the Trial Court held that the tehreer could
not have been prepared within 10-15 minutes. This conclusion was based on a calculation made by
the Trial Court on the statement of PW-1 with respect to his medical examination and the lodging of
the FIR. Further, the Trial Court considered that the tehreer is meticulously written without any
mistake, which is not possible to be done in less than 30 minutes. For this reason, the Trial Court
concluded that the tehreer itself is doubtful and, therefore, even the FIR is doubtful.

30. Contradictions in the timings of lodging the FIR: The Trial Court came to the conclusion that
there are inconsistencies in the statements of PW-1 about the lodging of the FIR. This finding led to
the conclusion that the prosecution has not proved the fact beyond a reasonable doubt. The
conclusion was based on the following grounds:

i. While the FIR states that the incident took place at 7:30 PM, the fax sent by the
Superintendent of Police mentions the incident as 7.45 PM. This contradiction cast a
doubt on the story of the prosecution, particularly the veracity of the statement of
PW-1.

ii. Based on the statement of PW-1 that he left the place of occurrence 10- 15 minutes
after the incident and reached the hospital within 3-4 minutes after which he was
examined by PW-8 at 8.30 PM, the Trial Court concluded that the incident could
have taken place only at 8.00 PM and not 7.30 PM. Yet another reason for the Trial
Court to disbelieve the statement of PW-1.

31. Fax sent by Superintendent of Police, Hamirpur: The Trial Court heavily relied on the fax
message sent from the office of the Superintendent of Police, Hamirpur to the higher authorities
informing them of the occurrence of the incident. This fax message, though not part of the
investigation was introduced by the defence through DW-3. The description of the events in the FIR
are in stark contradiction with the events narrated in the fax. Relying on the fax and accepting the
evidence of DW-3, the Trial Court came to the conclusion that the prosecution failed to prove
beyond reasonable doubt, the occurrence of the event at the time mentioned in the FIR, the motive,
presence of the accused persons etc. As the fax contradicts the statement of PW-1 his entire evidence
must be rejected.

32. Trial Court on the testimony of injured eye-witness PW-1: The Trial Court’s reason for rejecting
the evidence of PW-1 as an eyewitness is based on its conclusions about the following
inconsistencies in his statement:

i. The veracity of statement of PW-1 based on the bullet marks on the jonga: Taking
note of the bullet marks on the jonga, the Trial Court came to the conclusion that the

10

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

version of PW-1 that there was indiscriminate firing is unbelievable. The Trial Court
held that there was only one bullet hole on the back side of the jonga while the other
parts of the jonga were intact, except a partially broken mirror on driver’s side. On
this basis, the Trial Court disbelieved that there was indiscriminate firing towards the
jonga by the accused persons. ii. The veracity of statement of PW-1 as it contradicts
the injuries sustained by him: Based on the statement of PW-1 that he was on the
non-driver side of the jonga, the Trial Court came to the conclusion that this version
cannot be believed as the injuries sustained by him do not match his own description
as if that were true, he would have been in the direct line of firing and could not have
escaped with just one bullet injury on his leg.

iii. The veracity of the statement of PW-1 based on injuries sustained by the deceased
persons: The Trial Court came to the conclusion that the gun shot injuries on the
body of Rakesh Kumar Shukla do not match the description of PW-1. Similarly, the
gunshot wounds received by Sri Kant, Ved Prakash and Gudda were contrasted with
the narration of events by PW-1 to disbelieve his version. Further, in view of the fact
that there were no independent witnesses to vouchsafe for the incident, the Trial
Court concluded that the prosecution failed to establish PW-1’s presence and in turn
the event.

iv. The veracity of PW-1’s statement based on the documentary evidence relating to
the treatment at the hospital: The Trial Court concluded that the entries made in the
medical register were back-dated as there was no record with respect to any payment
made in furtherance of the treatment. The injury report prepared by PW- 8 indicated
that the injuries on PW-1 were on the left knee, whereas the G.D. entry noted that the
bandage was on his left calf. This led the Trial Court to disbelieve the injury on PW-1.
Further, with respect to the medical examination of PW-1, it was observed that the
Bed Head Ticket, as well as the medical examination report, had certain
discrepancies with regard to the timing, date, parental name as well as the place of
injury which had over-writing and cuttings. Due to these factors, PW-1’s injuries as
well as the medical evidence were disbelieved. v. Unnatural behaviour by PW-1
during the second incidence: PW-1’s presence at the second incident was also
disbelieved by the Trial Court on the ground that his behaviour is unnatural. The
reason for such a conclusion is this. The Trial Court felt that PW-1 should have in the
natural course narrated the incident to Rajesh Shukla and Ravi Kant Pandey as they
reached the place of occurrence. Further, the Trial Court held that if the firing was
indiscriminate, he could not have narrated the incident with minor details as to who
used which gun. In this context, the Trial Court also noted that PW-1 could not
remember the persons who took the children Vipul and Chandan home at the time of
the incident.

vi. The veracity of PW-1’s statement with respect to electricity connection at the time
of the incident: The Trial Court believed the evidence of DW-1, Executive Engineer at
the Electricity Distribution Division, Hamirpur that there was no electricity between

11

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

7.50 PM to 8.45 PM. In view of this, the Trial Court concluded that PW-1 could not be
an eye-

witness of the incident as he could neither have identified the accused nor clearly
seen the incident.

33. Trial Court on the testimony eyewitness, PW-2: The Trial Court disbelieved the presence of
PW-2 at the second place of the incident based on its conclusion that the injury on his body was not
that of a firearm. The Trial Court held that this witness cannot be believed as there is a contradiction
in his statement about who had actually taken the children, Vipul and Chandan home. Further, the
Trial Court concluded that the conduct and behaviour of PW-2 is unnatural as he did not
immediately go to the hospital after receiving bullet injuries and also did not accompany his brother
who died during the incident.

34. Recovery of weapons:

i. The Trial Court disbelieved the story of the prosecution about the recovery of an
8x60 bore rifle from Sahab Singh during his arrest, as it contradicted the fax message
sent by the Superintendent of Police which mentioned the recovery of a 0.315 bore
rifle from Sahab Singh. Based on this contradiction, the Trial Court concluded that
the recovery from Sahab Singh is false as there are two different rifles mentioned in
two different documents.

ii. Trial Court found it strange that PW-12 searched only Ashok Kumar Chandel and
Raghuvir’s Moradabad house for the murder weapons, and none of the houses of the
other accused persons were searched. iii. In view of the fact that the Court Witness
(CW-1) could not recover any weapon from the Moradabad house, the Trial Court
concluded that the whole investigation was mala-fide and was intended to implicate
Ashok Kumar Chandel.

iv. The Trial Court discredited the seizure of the weapon and the bullet cartridges
from Sahab Singh as the statement of PW-14Dy.

Superintendent of Police, CBCID that PW-11 and 12 mentioned to him that they
recovered 18 bullets, contradicts with evidence PW-11 and 12 who stated that they
recovered 10 bullets.

35. Ballistic Report: The Trial Court held that the ballistic report is not admissible in evidence as the
requirements of Section 293, Cr.P.C were not followed.

36. Recovery of Railway Manarth Card belonging to Ashok Chandel from the place of occurrence:
The Trial Court came to the conclusion that the Manarth Card recovered from the place of
occurrence had expired way back on 12.01.1994 which is more than three years prior to the incident.
The Trial Court also found that the said Manarth Card was not sealed and stamped like other pieces

12

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

of evidence. While the Trial Court did not dispute that the Railway Manarth Card belonged to Ashok
Kumar Chandel it doubted the recovery from the place of occurrence.

37. In view of the above findings and conclusions, the Trial Court acquitted all the accused of all the
charges.

38. Challenging the judgment of the Trial Court, the State preferred a criminal appeal and the
informant (PW-1) filed a criminal revision before the High Court.

Judgment of the High Court:

39. We have undertaken a detailed description of the reasons and conclusions adopted by the Trial
Court only to see if the High Court while reversing an order of acquittal has sufficient and cogent
reasons to interfere with the reasoning of the Trial Court. A strict scrutiny of the judgment of the
High Court is necessary as an order of acquittal can be interfered with only for substantial and
compelling reasons. Following the same structure adopted by the Trial Court, we will consider and
examine the reasons adopted by the High Court with respect to each and every finding of the Trial
Court.

40. As stated earlier, the High Court in appeal convicted all the accused under Sections 148, 302
read with 149, 307 read with 149 IPC and acquitted the accused Ashok Kumar Chandel under
Sections 379 and 404 IPC and Section 30 Arms Act. Sahab Singh was also acquitted of 25 of the
Arms Act. The High Court’s findings are as under:

41. Motive: The High Court held that there is sufficient evidence to conclude that there existed a
motive for the Chandel group for committing the offences against the deceased and their men. The
High Court concluded on the basis of evidence on record that Rakesh Kumar Shukla along with
Rama Kant Pandey (brother of deceased Sri Kant Pandey) lobbied against Shyam Singh (A7), who
was involved in a criminal case. Further, it also came on record that the deceased party opposed
Ashok Kumar Chandel in the Assembly Elections. All this, according to the High Court establishes
that Shyam Singh and Ashok Kumar Chandel were on hostile terms with the Shukla family. As
regards Sahab Singh, it was held that he was Ashok Kumar Chandel’s private gunner and therefore,
he also had the same motive. In so far as Naseem (A6) is concerned, he was supported by the
Chandel group because Naseem’s Educational Institution – Islamia Inter College was in competition
with Vidya Mandir, supported by the Shukla Family. In view of all these factors, as indicated above,
the High Court concluded that there is sufficient motive. At the same time, the plea of Ashok Kumar
Chandel that he was falsely implicated and that one Alok Purwar alias Titu who is the owner of a
petrol pump was responsible for the murders was discarded by the High Court as there was no
evidence.

42. High Court’s analysis of the approach adopted by the Trial Court in drawing its conclusions on
the evidence of witnesses and the documentary evidence: Apart from reversing the findings given by
the Trial Court on specified issues such as motive, the contradiction in the timing of lodging the FIR,
its inconsistencies with the tehreer, reliability on the fax message, recoveries of firearms etc., which

13

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

are being recounted hereinbelow, the High Court noted a fundamental problem. The problem
related to the approach adopted by the Trial Court, the High Court was of the opinion that much of
the conclusions drawn by the Trial Court were based on a very technical and pedantic approach in
analysing the evidence of witnesses or drawing inferences from the documentary evidence. The
technical approach adopted by the Trial Court has according to the High Court caused grave
miscarriage of justice. This is explained by the High Court while dealing with each issue in the
following manner.

43. FIR and Tehreer discrepancies: The High Court was of the opinion that the approach adopted by
the Trial Court in construing the tehreer and the FIR were super technical. The High Court found
that the explanation proffered by the prosecution for omissions in the FIR to be genuine as the
investigating officer was pressurizing PW-9 who prepared the FIR to provide a copy of the report
and therefore, it is reasonable to assume that such omissions could have taken place. Moreover, the
possibility of a few words being left out while writing a long report cannot be ignored and hence the
mistakes were considered bonafide. Rejecting the allegation that FIR is ante-timed, the High Court
observed that after PW-1 was treated in the hospital at 8.30 PM he could go to the police station to
lodge an FIR and that there is nothing unnatural about it, considering the nature of his injuries. The
High Court examined the spot map as per which the hospital and the police station were in close
proximity. The documentary evidence supported the statement of PW-1 that he returned to the
hospital for proper treatment and was discharged the next day at 09.00 AM.

44. Testimonies of PW-1 and PW-2: The High Court was of the opinion that the approach adopted
by the Trial Court in discarding the evidence of PW-1 and PW-2 was hyper-technical. At the outset,
the place of occurrence and also the occurrence of the event were not doubted by the Trial Court.
The evidence of PW-1 and PW-2 being injured witnesses cannot be discarded based on minor
inconsistencies. The High Court examined each of the contradictions and inconsistencies found by
the Trial Court and concluded that the same was drawn on a speculative premise. The High Court
held that, “a perusal of above analysis made by the Trial Court appears to have been done over
meticulously with lot of guess work made on this part”. In this context, the High Court relied on the
decision of the Supreme Court in the case of State of U.P. v. Gokaran and ors15. In this case,
Supreme Court had interfered with the order of acquittal by the High Court stating that – “it
becomes the duty of the Court to interfere with the acquittal in order to redeem the course of
justice......the High Court has adopted a hyper-technical approach to the entire prosecution case....”

45. Reversing the finding of the Trial Court based on the evidence of DW-1, Executive Engineer,
Electricity Distribution Division, Hamirpur suggesting that there was no power during the time of
occurrence of the incident, the High Court held that even according to DW-1, he was not sure as to
which phase the electricity connection to the Subhash Market was connected. Yet again, the High
Court felt that the Trial Court judgment is based on surmises and conjectures, particularly when
there were direct injured eye-witnesses.

46. On the question of contradictions in the statements of PW-1 and PW-2 with regard to their
position and injuries sustained, it was held that the Trial Court was incorrect in discarding their
testimonies as in a situation of indiscriminate firings, it becomes very difficult for any witness to

14

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

recollect as to who exactly was shooting at whom and from which exact direction. It was also
observed that it is too much to expect an injured witness to depose 15 (1984) Supp SCC 482.

distinctly about each and every injury received by the deceased and other injured persons. The High
Court went on to observe that the Trial Court paid more attention to ascertain as to which particular
injury was caused in what sitting position to the injured and the deceased rather than looking at the
incident as a whole. The findings of the Trial Court doubting the presence of the witness on technical
grounds was not accepted by the High Court.

47. While considering the conduct of PW-2 right after the incident, the High Court did not find
anything unnatural. PW-2 was asked to look after the injured children Vipul and Chandan and
hence he went home, and this is completely natural.

48. Recovery of Weapons: The High Court rejected the findings of the Trial Court with respect to (a)
the fax message sent by the Superintendent of Police mentioning the arrest of Sahab Singh with a
0.315 bore rifle as opposed to the recovery memo which mentioned 8x60 bore rifle recovered from
Sahab Singh

(b) non-examination of a public witness during the arrest and recoveries (c) the search made during
the arrest of the accused for the following reasons.

49. The High Court came to the conclusion that the Trial Court erred in arriving at the decision that
there was no recovery made from Sahab Singh on the basis of the fax message. The High Court
found that the conclusions of the Trial Court were perverse as the 0.315 bore rifle in the continental
system having measurements are in millimeters (mm) is nothing but an 8x60 bore rifle which is the
British system of annotation. However, on the legality of recovery, the High Court held that the
seizure was not corroborated by an independent witness and therefore it proceeded to acquit Sahab
Singh (A8) as well as Ashok Kumar Chandel (A5) under Sections 25 and 30 of the Arms Act.

50. Manarth Card Recovery: As regards the recovery of Manarth Card (railway travel card)
belonging to Ashok Kumar Chandel is concerned, the Trial Court’s decision to discard the same as
the card had expired long before the incident was rejected by the High Court for the reason that it is
not uncommon that people carry passes or ID cards even after the date of expiry. According to the
High Court, the recovery of the card cannot be rejected just because the validity of the card expired
before the incident. The High Court also observed that the Investigating Officer has nothing against
Ashok Kumar Chandel to falsely implicate him.

51. Ballistic Report: Accepting the ballistic report, the High Court observed that the report was
forwarded by one of the Director/ Deputy Director/ Assistant Director of the said lab under the seal.
This is in compliance with the statutory requirement under Section 239 Cr.P.C and hence the report
was not discarded and was considered admissible.

52. In support of its conclusions, the High Court relied on the decisions of this Court in Masalti v.
State of U.P.16; Praveen Kumar v. State of Karnataka17; 16 (1964) 8 SCR 133.

15

17 (2003) 12 SCC 199.

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

State of U.P v. Gokaran and ors18; Menoka Malik and ors v. State of West Bengal and ors19.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellants:

53. In this batch of appeals, we heard Mr. Harin P Raval, Mr. Siddharth Dave, Mr.
Jayant Muthuraj, Mr. Ratnakar Dash, Mr. Basava Prabhu Patil, Mr. Vishvajit Singh,
Senior Advocates, followed by Ms. Bansuri Swaraj, Advocate for the Appellants. We
have also heard, Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, Learned Additional Solicitor General and Mr.
A.K. Mishra, Additional Advocate General for the State of U.P. and Ms. Sonia
Mathur, Senior Advocate for the Informant.

54. The senior counsels were assisted by S/Shri Shiv Kumar Pandey, Abhay Raj Singh
Chandel, Chandrashekhar A. Chakalabbi, Awanish Kumar, Abhinav Garg, D.Girish
Kumar, Kumar Vinayakam Gupta, Kartikey Kanojia, M/s Dharmaprabhas Law
Associates, AOR, S/Shri Sandeep Jha, Arjun D. Singh, Ashish Singh, Advocates,
Dharmendra Kumar Sinha, AOR, Uday Prakash Yadav, Simarjeet Singh Saluja, Ms.
Prerna Dhall, Ms. Noor Rampal, Ms. Aastha Mehta, Ms. Ishita Sinha, S/Shri Rohit
Pandey, Murari Tiwari, Advocates, Ramjee Pandey, AOR, Ms. Manisha Chava, Shri
Rustam Singh Chauhan, Ms. B.L.N. Shivani, Shri Rajeev Kumar Dubey, Ms. Harshita
Raghuvanshi, Ms. Shreyase Aggrwal, Shri Ashiwan Mishra, Advocates, S/Shri
18Supra no. 15.

19 (2019) 18 SCC 721.

Kamlendra Mishra, Shashank Singh, AOR, Anupam Chaudhary, Manoj Kumar Dwivedi, Mrinal
Kumar Sharma, Ms. Ana Upadhyay, Shri Akash Singh, Ms. Manya Hasija, Advocates, S/Shri Prem
Sunder Jha, AOR, Pankaj Bist, Advocate, Krishnanand Pandeya, AOR, Manish Kumar, Advocate,
Anshuman Srivastava and Shri Naresh Kumar, AOR.

55. We will encapsulate the submission of the learned counsels for the Appellants as well as the
State before we proceed to analyze and answer the same.

56. Leading the arguments on behalf of the Appellants, Mr. Harin Raval for A5 submitted that in
case of an appeal against acquittal, there is a double presumption in favour of the accused. As having
secured an acquittal from one of the courts, the presumption of his innocence is reinforced and
reaffirmed. Therefore, if two conclusions are possible on the basis of the evidence on record, then
the appellate court should not disturb the finding of acquittal recorded by the trial court. He relied
on the decision of this Court of N. Vijaykumar v. State of Tamil Nadu20. He also submitted that the
High Court has reversed the findings of the Trial Court without providing any reasons and has
simply supported its findings by stating that the Trial Court decision was based on assumptions and
speculations.

16

20 (2021) 3 SCC 687.

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

57. As the substantial part of the case of the prosecution is dependent on the evidence of PW-1, he
rightly focused on the credibility and veracity of the evidence of this witness. He argued that the
following features of the case would make it clear that PW-1 was not present at the scene of offence
and he cannot be accepted as an eyewitness at all.

i. According to PW-1, he was on the right side of the jonga (non-driver side) when he was speaking
to deceased Rakesh Shukla at which point the alleged ‘indiscriminate’ firing began from Naseem’s
gun shop. If this were true, in this positioning PW-1 would have been in the direct line of firing and
could not have escaped with one bullet injury on his leg. Further, as per the evidence of PW-8, the
bullet injury on PW-1 was on the upper portion of his left leg, which would only be possible if his
back was facing the assailants.

ii. Since, PW-1 had stated that he was on the non-driver side and so was deceased Gudda in the
jonga who received fatal injuries, it is highly improbable that PW-1 did not receive any injuries in
the first incident while being present on the non-driver side.

iii. As per PW-1’s evidence, he was standing in front of the jonga during the first incident when there
were bystanders. However, none of them were made witnesses and examined by the prosecution.

iv. During the second incident, when deceased Rajesh Kumar Shukla was injured by 16 bullets as per
the post-mortem report, it is highly improbable that PW-1 would receive minor injuries on the lower
part of the body while standing adjacent to Rajesh.

v. As per the evidence of PW-5 (Dr. PN Paya), Rakesh Shukla received injuries on his left side which
contradicts his position in the jonga on the right side.

vi. PW-9 had stated that when PW-1 reached the police station to lodge the FIR, the bandage was on
his calf, however, as per PW-1’s injury report, his injuries were on his thigh. If he had received
immediate medical treatment from PW-8 then his bandage would have been on the thighs. vii.
PW-2 sustained a 2x2 CM wound which cannot be caused by a rifle, DBBL or an SBBL gun.
Therefore, the description of the firearms as deposed by PW-1 cannot be believed. Moreover, no
firearms were recovered expect for the one recovered from Sahab Singh which is also not proved to
be used in the incident.

58.1 Referring to the contradictions arising out of the treatment of PW-1 in the hospital the learned
counsel tried to establish that the presence of PW-1 is doubtful for the following reasons:

i. The Bed Head Ticket of PW-1 does not mention an X-Ray recommendation.

ii. There is no entry in the cash register of any money being deposited regarding any
X-Ray or treatment being done.

17

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

iii. It was deposed by PW-1 that the X-Ray took place at 10 PM however, the X-Ray
department closes at 2 PM. Therefore, the timings of the same cannot be believed.

iv. There is no mention of date on the X-Ray plates of PW-1.

v. As per the evidence of PW-12, one Srideen took PW-1, Ravi Kant, Hardayal and
Vipul to the hospital for X-Ray on 28.01.1997 and he also brought them back home.
Thus, the statement of PW-1 regarding the X-

Ray is doubtful. Moreover, a material witness, Srideen was never examined by the
prosecution.

58.2 It was argued that if PW-1 was admitted to the hospital on 26.01.1997 and was
discharged only on 27.01.1997 at 9 AM, his statement that he went to the police
station at 09.10 PM to register the FIR and then returned to the hospital and then to
the place of occurrence at 10 PM cannot be believed. PW-

1 stated that he took all the dead bodies to the hospital, however, the police memo
initially recorded four bodies and the fifth dead body was received after 9 PM. If
PW-1 left to lodge the FIR at 9 PM and at the same time if the hospital records
received the fifth body at 9 PM then how was PW-1 aware of this fact to mention it in
the tehreer which was written at 8.30 PM. In light of this, it was contended that the
FIR is ante-timed. The learned Senior Counsel submitted that there is only one hole
on the left side of the windscreen of the jonga and the remaining parts were intact. If
this is true, then the version of PW-1 that the incident was of indiscriminate firing
cannot be believed. Further, as per the evidence of PW-4, there was no diesel in the
jonga and this is directly in line with the defence theory put up that, the incident was
a result of a quarrel with one Titu regarding moving the jonga which according to
Rakesh Shukla had no diesel. In this context, the fax message sent by S.P. Mathur
was relied on. It is submitted that Hardayal was treated in the hospital at 8.30 P.M
and therefore, the statement of PW-1 that he did not see Hardayal cannot be believed.

58.3 Mr. Raval submits that the fax sent by S.P. Mathur to the higher authorities
mentions arrest of Sahab Singh on 26.01.1997 with 315 bore rifle and what is shown
in the recovery memo is an 8x60 bore rifle. The High Court’s findings that rifle of
8x60 bore and 315 bore are the same is fallacious as the conversion comes to 480
bore.

59.1 Questioning the presence of PW-2 at the scene of the offence Mr. Raval
submitted that:

i. The conduct of PW-2 was very unnatural as he reached the hospital only at 10 PM
even though he had allegedly received a bullet injury. Moreover, his brother Sri Kant
Pandey has also died. ii. PW-2 stated that Chandan and Vipul were sent home with

18

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

someone from the Mohalla but they were neither produced nor examined by the
prosecution. There is also a material contradiction as to whether PW-2 took Vipul
and Chandan home or not.

59.2 Mr. Raval also relied on the evidence of the defence witness DW-1, to discredit prosecution
witnesses, PW-1 and PW-2 on the ground that there was no electricity at the place of occurrence
when the incident happened. 60.1 Mr. Siddharth Dave, learned Senior Advocate appearing for
Ashutosh Singh alias Dabbu (A2), argued that no evidence was led by the prosecution to prove how
two groups of accused gathered at one place by forming an unlawful assembly in pursuance of a
common object to fire indiscriminately at the persons sitting in the jonga. It is the case of the
prosecution that at around 7.30 PM on 26.01.1997, PW-1 along with his servant Lallan who had
gone to purchase some articles from the market met Rakesh Shukla in the jonga. If the said meeting
was a chance meeting, then the formation of an unlawful assembly with a common object would
stand disproved. Moreover, there were no allegations as to at what prior point in time the accused
form an unlawful assembly.

60.2 It was urged that the incident took place in two parts and therefore, it was incumbent upon the
prosecution to lead evidence as to when the unlawful assembly in the first part dispersed and when
it gathers again during the second incident. In light of this, it was argued that offence under Section
149 was not made out by the Appellants as there was no evidence to prove the formation of an
unlawful assembly with a common object. The Counsel placed reliance on the judgments of this
Court in Nawab Ali v. The State of U.P.21, Masalti v. State of U.P.22 and State of Rajasthan v. Shiv
Charan and ors23 to say that it is incumbent upon the prosecution to show that the person
concerned was a member of the unlawful assembly at the time of the commission of the offence.
Moreover, mere presence or association with other members alone is not per se sufficient to hold
that each member is criminally liable for the offence committed by the others, unless, there is
sufficient evidence on record to show that each member intended to or knew the likelihood of
commission of such an offending act, being a member of the unlawful assembly as provided for
under Section 149, IPC.

61. Mr. Jayanth Muthuraj, learned Senior Advocate, appearing for Pradeep Singh (A4), submitted
on the improbabilities of the first as well as the second incident. With respect to the first incident, he
would say that PW-1 sustained no injury and it has remained unexplained how the new vehicle
comprising of five people comes all of a sudden and starts firing, and even after that PW-1 was not
injured. So far as the second incident is concerned, he took us to the inquest report and argued that
the prosecution is not able to explain interpolation and cutting in many places. He argued in similar
lines as that of Mr. Raval about the non-examination of certain witnesses, he also submitted that
there were contradictions about sending Vipul and Chandan to the house. 21 (1974) 4 SCC 600.

22 (1964) 8 SCR 133.

23 (2013) 12 SCC 76.

19

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

Who took them to the residence is a mystery. He also touched upon the issue relating to the delay in
FIR, the fax message sent by the Superintendent of Police and the recovery of Manarth card bearing
the name of Ashok Kumar Chandel near Naseem’s shop and the evidence of DW-1 establishing that
there was no electricity at the time of the incident.

62. Mr. Ratnakar Dash, learned Senior Counsel appearing for Uttam Singh (A3) and Bhan Singh
(A10) commenced with U.P. Police Regulation 97 about the recording of the FIR. He, however, did
not pursue this submission. He adopted the same line of submission as that of Mr. Raval about the
credibility of the PW-1 in view of the uncertainty about the injuries. Mr. Dash argued that there was
no motive attributable to his clients Uttam Singh and Bhan Singh. He adopted the same argument
as that of Mr. Siddharth Dave with respect to the second incident and concluded by stating that
there are no recoveries from Uttam Singh as well as Bhan Singh.

63. Mr. Basava Prabhu Patil, learned Senior Advocate, appeared on behalf of Sahab Singh (A8)
submits that his client’s name appears in the FIR along with the gunner of Chandel who was also
cited. However, after the filing of the charge sheet, the gunner’s name is deleted and his client is
prosecuted as accused no. 8. He submits that his client is a farmer and he is falsely implicated. Mr.
Patil also questioned the veracity of the evidence of PW-1 and PW-2. He argued that the prosecution
has taken the Government gunner out and substituted him instead. He has nothing to do with
Chandel and the recovery of the rifle, for this he relied on his Section 313, Cr.P.C statement. It is
interesting to note that Mr. Patil has questioned the authenticity of the fax alleged to have been sent
by Mr. S.K. Mathur, SP to his superior officers. In the fax, it is alleged that Ashok Singh Chandel’s
private gunner Sahab Singh was arrested while carrying a 0.315 bore rifle before the alleged arrest
on 27.01.1997. Mr. Patil submitted that though his client was acquitted of the charge under Section
25 of the Arms Act, in view of the fact that the recovery was not based on any independent witness
he was convicted under Section 302, IPC along with all others only on the basis of evidence given by
PW-1.

64. Ms. Bansuri Swaraj, learned Advocate made submissions on behalf of Naseem (A6) who is
referred to as the Bandukwala. She submitted that Naseem is 70 years old and has no motive to
indulge in the crime at all. She joined the other counsels in making the common argument about the
contradictions in statement of PW-1 and PW-2. Questioning the arrest memo, she argued that if the
fax mentions Sahab Singh’s arrest before 27.01.1997, then Naseem’s arrest along with Sahab Singh
as evidenced by the arrest memo dated 27.01.1997 is a forged document. Finally, she concluded by
stating that no recovery of weapons was made from his client.

Submissions by the State:

65. The State was represented by the Learned Additional Solicitor General, Ms. Aishwarya Bhati.
The learned ASG commenced her submission with the occurrence of the incident on 26.01.1997
which is not disputed. The death of 5 persons was also not disputed. With the aid of a pictographic
depiction of the site map and injuries on the body, she explained the incident in the context of place,
time, and persons involved. Recounting the relationship between the parties, from the very
beginning she states that there is sufficient evidence to conclude that there is a longstanding rivalry

20

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

between the group of Chandel, Raghuvir Singh, Naseem, and other members as against the group
comprising of the Shukla family.

66. Learned ASG identified the injuries of the witnesses and the deceased and compared them with
the documentary evidence and the statements of doctors to emphasize the veracity of the
eyewitnesses. She has also referred to the post-mortem report of Rakesh Shukla, Rajesh Shukla,
Srikant Pandey, Gudda, and Ved Prakash and again co-related it to the evidence of the doctors who
were examined with the corresponding exhibits. This is another factor, according to the learned ASG
to add credence to the statement of the eyewitnesses.

67. Learned ASG referred to the evidence of PW-1 in detail and sought to correct the statements
made by the witness with the evidence on record. She would further submit that there is no reason
to disbelieve the evidence of the eyewitnesses and if their version is accepted then the various
possibilities and contradictions that the Appellants have suggested have to be discarded. The
learned ASG laid emphasis on the approach adopted by this Court in dealing with an appeal against
acquittal and submitted that there is no inviolable rule that an Appellate Court would refrain from
interfering with the judgment of acquittal even if there is grave miscarriage of justice.

68. Referring to the submission of the Appellants that non-examination of witnesses would be fatal
for the prosecution, she has referred to certain decisions of this Court indicating the correct
approach that needs to be adopted. The reasoning adopted by the High Court in reversing the
decision of the Trial Court was brought to our notice. The learned ASG emphasized that the Trial
Court had adopted a super technical approach in analyzing the statement of the eyewitnesses and
rejected them without appreciating the principles on the basis of which an injured eyewitness
evidence is to be considered. It is her submission that the Trial Court has committed a serious error
in acquitting all the accused in the teeth of clear evidence of the eyewitnesses. The learned ASG
concludes by saying that the High Court has not committed any error, in fact or in law while
reversing the decision of the Trial Court. For this reason, she had prayed dismissal of these appeals.
Submissions by the Informant:

69. Ms. Sonia Mathur learned Senior Counsel supporting the learned ASG has submitted that there
is sufficient proof of the presence of PW-1 in the first as well as the second incident. She referred to
the 1995 murder involving Shyam Singh, where Rakesh Kumar Shukla and Rama Kant Pandey
assisted the prosecution. These incidents coupled with the Shukla family and associates opposing
Ashok Chandel in the Assembly Election are a strong motive for killing five members of the Shukla
family. In the alternative, she has submitted that in view of the presence of injured eyewitnesses the
need to prove motive becomes irrelevant. Ms. Sonia Mathur took us through the compilation
comprising important pieces of evidence and explained the position in which the witnesses and the
deceased got bullet injuries and corroborated them with the medical evidence. She has also
supported the prosecution on all the points that were taken up by the ASG.

Analysis and Findings:

21

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

70. Preliminary: We will commence with dealing with three preliminary submissions, commonly
urged by all the learned counsels for the Appellants. First of this submission relates to the error
committed by the High Court in interfering with the judgment of the Trial Court while exercising
jurisdiction of a criminal appellate court against an order of acquittal. The second common
submission relates to the alleged failure on the part of the prosecution to establish a clear motive for
the accused to commit the offences. The third submission advanced by some of the counsels relates
to the lack of evidence regarding the occurrence of the event and that too at two places.

71. After the preliminary submissions, we will deal with the arguments advanced by the defence to
impeach the veracity of the testimonies of PW-1 and PW-2 as the injured eye-witnesses. These
arguments relate to the discrepancies in the timing of lodging of the FIR and contradictions about
the presence of PW-1 at the place of incidence because of the evidence relating to

(a) the bullet marks on the jonga (b) the physical position of PW-1 and the injuries sustained by him
and the deceased at the time of the incident (c) the contradictions arising out of the timing of X-Ray
reports and issuance of the Bed Head Ticket (d) and the absence of electricity at the time of the
incident. With respect to PW-2, we will examine the submissions (a) regarding his presence at the
place of the incident (b) injuries sustained by him (c) his unnatural behaviour at the time of the
incident.

72. We will then deal with the submission questioning the conviction under Section 149 IPC.
Thereafter, we will deal with the contradictions in the FIR on the basis of the fax message. Then,
dealing with the submission on recoveries, we will consider the submissions relating to (a) recovery
of the Railway Manarth Card from the scene of the offence (b) and recovery of the weapon and
bullets during the arrests. We will finally deal with the submission about the admissibility of the
ballistic report.

I. Jurisdiction of the High Court in Appeals Against Acquittals

73. This is the first preliminary submission and it is based on a principle laid down by this Court that
in an appeal against acquittal, the criminal appellate court will not interfere with the acquittal unless
there are substantial and compelling reasons. The common submission of all the counsels appearing
for the Appellants is, therefore, that the High Court was not justified in reversing the order of
acquittal.

74. The position of law with respect to the jurisdiction of the High Court in cases of appeals against
acquittals is well established. After reviewing the judgments on this subject, this Court clarified in
Chandrappa and Ors v. State of Karnataka24 that:

“3. Various expressions, such as, “substantial and compelling reasons”, “good and
sufficient grounds”, “very strong circumstances”, “distorted conclusions”, “glaring
mistakes”, etc. are not intended to curtail extensive powers of an appellate court in an
appeal against acquittal. Such phraseologies are more in the nature of “flourishes of
language” to emphasise the reluctance of an appellate court to interfere with acquittal

22

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

than to curtail the power of the court to review the evidence and to come to its own
conclusion.”

75. It is sufficient to note the principle laid down in the Constitution Bench of this Court in M.G.
Agarwal v. State of Maharashtra25:

“16. …But the true legal position is that however circumspect and cautious the
approach of the High Court may be in dealing with appeals against acquittals, it is 24
(2007) 4 SCC 415.

25 (1963) 2 SCR 405.

undoubtedly entitled to reach its own conclusions upon the evidence adduced by the prosecution in
respect of the guilt or innocence of the accused. This position has been clarified by the Privy Council
in Sheo Swarup v. King Emperor and NurMohammad v. Emperor [AIR 1945 PC 151] ...

17. …Similarly in Ajmer Singh v. State of Punjab [(1953) SCR 418] it was observed that the
interference of the High Court in an appeal against the order of acquittal would be justified only if
there are “very substantial and compelling reasons to do so”. In some other decisions, it has been
stated that an order of acquittal can be reversed only for “good and sufficiently cogent reasons” or
for “strong reasons”. In appreciating the effect of these observations, it must be remembered that
these observations were not intended to lay down a rigid or inflexible rule which should govern the
decision of the High Court in appeals against acquittals. They were not intended, and should not be
read to have intended to introduce an additional condition in clause (a) of Section 423(1) of the
Code. All that the said observations are intended to emphasise is that the approach of the High
Court in dealing with an appeal against acquittal ought to be cautious because as Lord Russell
observed in the case of Sheo Swarup, the presumption of innocence in favour of the accused “is not
certainly weakened by the fact that he has been acquitted at his trial”. Therefore, the test suggested
by the expression “substantial and compelling reasons” should not be construed as a formula which
has to be rigidly applied in every case. That is the effect of the recent decisions of this Court, for
instance, in Sanwat Singh v. State of Rajasthan [AIR 1961 SC 715] and Harbans Singh v. State of
Punjab [AIR 1962 SC 439] and so, it is not necessary that before reversing a judgment of acquittal,
the High Court must necessarily characterise the findings recorded therein as perverse…”

76. Following the Constitution Bench, this Court in Ghurey Lal v. State of UP26 has formulated the
following principles:

26 (2008) 10 SCC 450.

“69. The following principles emerge from cases

1. The Appellate Court may review the evidence in appeals against acquittal under
sections 378 and 386 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973. Its power of reviewing
evidence is wide and the appellate court can reappreciate the entire evidence on

23

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

record. It can review the trial court's conclusion with respect to both facts and law.

2. The accused is presumed innocent until proven guilty. The accused possessed this
presumption when he was before the trial court. The trial court's acquittal bolsters
the presumption that he is innocent.

3. Due or proper weight and consideration must be given to the trial court's decision.
This is especially true when a witness' credibility is at issue. It is not enough for the
High Court to take a different view of the evidence. There must also be substantial
and compelling reasons for holding that the trial court was wrong.

70. In light of the above, the High Court and other appellate courts should follow the
well-settled principles crystallized by number of judgments if it is going to overrule or
otherwise disturb the trial court's acquittal:

1. The appellate court may only overrule or otherwise disturb the trial court's
acquittal if it has "very substantial and compelling reasons" for doing so.

A number of instances arise in which the appellate court would have "very substantial and
compelling reasons" to discard the trial court's decision. "Very substantial and compelling reasons"
exist when:

i. The trial court's conclusion with regard to the facts is palpably wrong;

ii. The trial court's decision was based on an erroneous view of law;

iii. The trial court's judgment is likely to result in "grave miscarriage of justice";

iv. The entire approach of the trial court in dealing with the evidence was patently
illegal;

v. The trial court's judgment was manifestly unjust and unreasonable;

vi. The trial court has ignored the evidence or misread the material evidence or has
ignored material documents like dying declarations/ report of the ballistic expert, etc.
vii. This list is intended to be illustrative, not exhaustive.

2. The Appellate Court must always give proper weight and consideration to the
findings of the trial court.

3. If two reasonable views can be reached - one that leads to acquittal, the other to
conviction - the High Courts/Appellate Courts must rule in favor of the accused.”

24

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

77. Keeping in mind the above-referred principles we will now proceed to examine the impugned
judgment and see if the High Court has properly applied the principles while exercising the criminal
appellate jurisdiction against the order of acquittal.

II. Motive

78. The second common ground raised by many Appellants relates to the motive behind the
commission of the offence. The Trial Court held that the disputes between Chandel and other
accused with the Shukla group are ‘insufficient’ for committing murder. Counsels for the Appellants
have repeatedly argued that the prosecution failed to establish any motive for the accused to commit
the crime. We will deal with this submission in fact as well as in law.

79. On facts, three instances are referred to by the prosecution to indicate the existence of a prior
rivalry between the two groups. Firstly, in the year 1995, one Sanjay Kumar Shukla of Sumerpur and
Shiv Narain Mishra, President of Degree College were murdered by accused Shyam Singh (A7) and
others. In that murder case, deceased Rakesh Kumar Shukla along with Rama Kant Pandey (brother
of deceased Sri Kant Pandey) lobbied against Shyam Singh. Ashok Kumar Chandel and Raghuvir
Singh were in close alliance with Shyam Singh. Secondly, the Shukla family and associates opposed
Ashok Kumar Chandel in the Assembly Elections that year. As a result, accused Shyam Singh, Ashok
Kumar Chandel and Raghuvir were on hostile terms with the Shukla family. Sahab Singh is stated to
be the private gunner of Ashok Kumar Chandel and therefore he would have the same disposition
against the Shukla family. Thirdly, accused Naseem was the Manager of Islamia Inter College and
the other competing educational institution in the town, Vidya Mandir was run by the members
associated with Shukla family. Naseem was close to Ashok Kumar Chandel and they were acting
together since they were inimical towards Shukla’s individually and also as a group.

80. PW-1 has in his deposition spoke about the existence of long political enmity with Ashok
Chandel in the following terms.

“13. I had long political enmity with Ashok Chandel. My family used to oppose him in the election.
Ashok Chandel used to contest election for MLA. He lost the 1996 election for MLA with a huge
margin because of our opposition.

Ashok Chandel had lost the election before this in the year 1995. Shiv Narayan Mishra and Abhay
Shukla, Chairman, of degree college were killed at Sumerpur publicly in which accused Shyam Singh
and others were prime accused against which chargesheet had been filed. In the said incident, my
brother Rakesh Shukla and Sh. Ramakant Pandey, Advocate, i.e. brother of deceased Shrikant
Pandey, had favoured the deceased. Ashok Chandel and Raghuvir Singh and other had favoured
Shyam Singh. This is the reason for their animosity/grudge.

14. Naseem was the manager of Islamiya Inter College, Hamirpur. Whereas, the Chairman of the
Vidya Mandir, Hamirpur (Inter College). are Brahmins. There exists competition between both the
institutions. Ashok Chandel, Raghvir Singh, Naseem etc. used to sit together often.”

25

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

81. At the outset, we hold that the finding of the Trial Court that the motive suggested by the
prosecution is ‘insufficient’ for the commission of the murder of five persons is an inappropriate
measure.

82. Sufficiency or insufficiency of motive does not have a direct bearing on the actual evidence
against the accused, particularly when the prosecution relies on direct evidence of injured
eyewitnesses. This position of law is clear from the following decisions of this Court. In Shivaji Genu
Mohite v. The State of Maharashtra27, this Court held:

“11. Assuming that the prosecution evidence was not sufficient or cogent enough for a
motive to be spelt out of it, the fact that the prosecution was not able to discover such
an impelling motive would not reflect upon the credibility of a witness, proved to be a
reliable eyewitness…..

12. As stated earlier, the fact that the prosecution in a given case has been able to
discover a sufficient motive or not cannot weigh against the testimony of an
eyewitness. Evidence as to motive would, no doubt, go a long way in cases wholly
dependent on circumstantial evidence. Such evidence would form one of the links in
the chain of circumstantial evidence in such a case. But that would not be so in cases
where there are eye-

witnesses of credibility, though even in such cases if a motive is properly proved, such proof would
strengthen the prosecution case and fortify the court in its ultimate conclusion. But that does not
mean that if a motive is not established the evidence of an eye-witness is rendered untrustworthy.”
27 (1973) 3 SCC 219.

83. In the case of State of Uttar Pradesh v. Kishanpal and Others28 it was held that:

“39. The motive may be considered as a circumstance which is relevant for assessing
the evidence but if the evidence is clear and unambiguous and the circumstances
prove the guilt of the accused, the same is not weakened even if the motive is not a
very strong one. It is also settled law that the motive loses all its importance in a case
where direct evidence of eyewitnesses is available, because even if there may be a very
strong motive for the accused persons to commit a particular crime, they cannot be
convicted if the evidence of eyewitnesses is not convincing. In the same way, even if
there may not be an apparent motive but if the evidence of the eyewitnesses is clear
and reliable, the absence of in adequacy of motive cannot stand in the way of
conviction.”

84. In another case of Sheo Shankar Singh v. State of Jharkhand and Anr29, this Court observed:

“15. ….. These decisions have made a clear distinction between cases where the
prosecution relies upon circumstantial evidence on the one hand and those where it
relies upon the testimony of eyewitnesses on the other………. Proof of motive, recedes

26

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

into the background in cases where the prosecution relies upon an eye witness
account of the occurrence. This is because if the court upon a proper appraisal of the
deposition of the eyewitnesses comes to the conclusion that the version given by
them is credible, absence of evidence to the motive is rendered inconsequential…

16. The case at hand rests upon the deposition of the eyewitnesses to the occurrence.
Absence of motive would not, therefore, by itself make any material difference……”
28 (2008) 16 SCC 73.

29 (2011) 3 SCC 654.

85. Also, in the case of Darbara Singh v. State of Punjab30:

“15. ……In a case where there is direct evidence of witnesses which can be relied
upon, the absence of motive cannot be a ground to reject the case. Under no
circumstance, can motive take the place of direct evidence available as proof……...

16. Motive in criminal cases based solely on the positive, clear, cogent and reliable
ocular testimony of witnesses is not at all relevant. In such a fact situation, the mere
absence of a strong motive to commit the crime, cannot be of any assistance to the
accused…..”

86. In view of the evidence on the aspect relating to motive, coupled with the clear position of law
with respect to the relevance and weightage of motive in cases of evidence of direct injured
eyewitness to the incident, the conclusion of the Trial Court that the case of the prosecution fumbles
as it failed to prove the motive is incorrect. The decision of the High Court, based on the principles
laid down by this Court is unexceptionable.

III. Place of occurrence

87. Some of the counsels for the Appellants submitted that the prosecution has failed to adduce any
evidence about the occurrence of the event at the place alleged. This submission need not detain us
for long as this was also raised before the Trial Court and it was not accepted even by the Trial
Court. It is, therefore, sufficient for us to refer to the finding of the Trial Court on this submission.
While rejecting this argument, the Trial Court recorded that the 30 (2012) 10 SCC 476.

incident occurred as two events in quick succession. With respect to the first event the Trial Court
held:

“This place of occurrence has not been challenged by the defence and by the
questions by Naseem himself during the cross examination of witnesses it is clear
that the incidence had taken place.”

27

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

88. Similarly, the Trial Court recorded the following with respect to the second event
of the incident in the following manner:

“The second place of incident has been said to be occurred in front of the house of
Parmanand Pandit and as per site map [Exh. A-25], house of Anirudh Kumar Sahu is
located west side of house of Naseem….

xxx The investigation officer during inspection of the place of occurrence found blood
but did not collect blood-stained soil from there. This is his mistake but this does not
draw any adverse inference on the prosecution case.B. B. words have been shown by
the investigation officer in the site map [Exh-A-25] after inspection of the place of
occurrence, on which places it is said that bullet cartridges total 12 have been found,
out of which 6 are to said of 12 bore and 6 of brass. He has not indicated as to which
bullet cartridges was found from which place separately. These B. B. marks are
shown in the map as the road below the platform at Nasim's house an in front of
house of Parma Pandit. Therefore the place of incident is not doubtful.”

89. In view of the clear and categorical finding of the Trial Court itself about the place
of occurrence, we need not entertain any doubt about the place of occurrence. This
issue is answered accordingly.

IV. Timings of lodging of the FIR and Discrepancies therein

90. Faced with the direct evidence of eyewitnesses cited by the prosecution, the defence mounted a
challenge to the veracity and the truthfulness of the eyewitnesses. At the outset, they would submit
that the prosecution could not answer the severe improbabilities depending upon the time taken by
PW-1 to move from the scene of the offence to the hospital and then to the police station. We will
presently deal with this issue.

91. The prosecution case is that the incident took place at around 07.30 PM and lasted for about
8-10 minutes. Thereafter, PW-1 reached the hospital with all the deceased in the jonga by 07.50 PM.
After reaching the hospital, he got the dead bodies examined first and then himself. He was
eventually examined at 8.30 PM. After his preliminary examination, Saraswati Sharan, PW-3,
scribed the tehreer as narrated by PW-1 in the hospital itself. It is after this that PW-1 left for the
police station at around 09:00 PM to lodge the FIR which came to be registered at 09.10 PM.

92. Challenging the prosecution story, the learned counsel for the Appellants made four submissions
(i) it was contended that the statement in the tehreer that PW-1 brought five dead bodies with him
to the hospital, and thereafter he left for the police station at 9PM is in contradiction to the police
memo (Exb. Ka-18) sent by the hospital to the police station at 9PM, which in turn mentions only
four dead bodies and two injured persons (ii) it could not have been possible for PW-3 to write such
a long tehreer and that too without any mistake in a span of 15-20 minutes before PW-1 proceeded
to the police station

28

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

(iii) it was also urged that, there were certain omissions made in the FIR which was copied from the
tehreer and hence, there were material discrepancies in both the documents (iv) finally, according to
PW-1’s Bed Head Ticket received from the hospital, the discharge timing is mentioned to be 9 AM
on 27.01.1997 on the next day and therefore he could not have lodged the FIR at 09.10 PM on
26.01.1997. We will now deal with each of these submissions.

93. Firstly, it can be observed from the evidence of the doctor, PW-8 that he examined the dead
bodies and the two injured namely, PW-1 and Hardayal and prepared a police memo to that effect.
The same was sent to the police station by 9 PM. The evidence of PW-8 is extracted below:

“All these injuries have possible to come at 7 .30 PM of 26.1.97. On that day I had
sent a Police Memo to the Inspector in-charge of P.S. Kotwali for information. I had
sent this memo at 9 PM. I had prepared this in my handwriting and signature and it
was mentioned that dead bodies of five persons have been brought in this hospital
and two injured have also come, whose names are Rajiv Shukla S/o Sh. Bhishm
Prasad Shukla and name of other is Hardyal Verma S/ o Sh. Mahadev Prasad.
Original of it was sent to the Police, which is Ex. 7 6A / 7 on the case file, exhibited as
Ex.A-18”

94. The above-referred evidence, when contrasted with Exb. Ka-18 (which is in Hindi) does not give
rise to any contradiction for the following reason. In the first paragraph of Exb. Ka-18 there is a
mention of four dead bodies and two injured. The second paragraph mentions one more dead body
brought at 9 PM.

95. Further, as per the evidence of PW-1, he has taken all the deceased to the hospital together. He
has also stated that from the hospital he did not take the jonga to the police station to lodge the FIR,
instead, he went by autorickshaw. This was because one dead body was still in the jonga and was
surrounded by female members of the family. It was brought inside the hospital around the time he
was about to leave for the police station. The relevant portion of PW- 1’s testimony is extracted
herein below:

“250. I had gone to the Kotwali by rickshaw, reason being that a few ladies had come
from home. A dead body was inside the Jonga.

251. The ladies had surrounded the car and the kotwali was at a short distance only.
The ladies of my own family also had come (illegible) ladies from colony and Pandey
jee's family also had come when. I had gone to lodge a report.”

96. It is thus clear that there were five bodies and PW-1 brought them to the hospital in the jonga
after the incident. The conclusion of the Trial Court is therefore erroneous and is not based on the
evidence on record. The High Court is fully justified in reversing this finding as it is not merely an
alternative view but a correction of an error which is substantial and compelling.

29

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

97. Secondly, we have seen the tehreer, it is a short document. The conclusion of the Trial Court that
the tehreer could not have been written in less than 30 minutes and therefore the FIR could not
have been filed at 9.10 PM is speculative and based on an imaginative arithmetic calculation. There
was no basis for the Trial Court to assume that this document could not have been written in 15-20
minutes, particularly in view of the evidence of PW-3 who is stated to be an experienced scribe. In
this very context, the further conclusion of the Trial Court that the document could not have been
written without any mistakes or cuttings is yet again speculative and without any basis.

98. Thirdly, it was argued that Constable Mahesh Singh, PW-9 who prepared the FIR by copying the
contents of the tehreer made certain omissions like the word ‘tatha’ were replaced by ‘aur’ and the
word ‘anya’ was written out of alignment. Also, the sentence ‘tatha mere per me goliya lagi’ was
omitted. During the examination-in-chief of this witness, he mentioned that he was under pressure
to complete the FIR formalities and the investigating officer was hurrying him to hand over the
report. This explanation was accepted by the High Court as such omissions cannot be held to be fatal
to the case of the prosecution.

The Trial Court committed a serious error in discrediting the version of PW-1 about the occurrence
of the event on the basis of such minor and inconsequential omissions. It was therefore necessary
for the High Court to interfere with the glaring mistakes committed by the Trial Court. This is a
good and sufficient ground to interfere.

99. Finally, we are in agreement with the observation made by the High Court with regard to the
discharge timing mentioned on the Bed Head Ticket, as this is a natural conclusion to be drawn
based on the evidence available on record. It is, therefore, logical to conclude that PW-1 would have
gone to the police station to lodge the FIR and returned to the hospital for further treatment.

100. The variations indicated in the tehreer and the FIR, as well as the argument of improbability
based on a minute-by-minute construct by the learned counsels for the Appellants, can under no
circumstance become fatal to the acceptance of the tehreer and the FIR. This Court, while noting the
defects and variations in the investigation observed in Rammi Alia Rameshwar v. State of M.P.31:

“24. When an eyewitness is examined at length it is quite possible for him to make
some discrepancies. No true witness can possibly escape from making some
discrepant details. Perhaps an untrue witness who is well tutored can successfully
make his testimony totally non- discrepant. But courts should bear in mind that it is
only when discrepancies in the evidence of a witness are so incompatible with the
credibility of his version that the court is justified in jettisoning his evidence. But too
serious a view to be adopted on mere variations falling in the narration of an incident
(either as between the evidence of two witnesses or as between two statements of the
same witness) is an unrealistic approach for judicial scrutiny.

25. It is a common practice in trial courts to make out contradictions from the
previous statement of a witness for confronting him during cross-examination.
Merely because there is inconsistency in evidence it is not sufficient to impair the

30

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

credit of the witness. No doubt Section 155 of the Evidence Act provides scope for
impeaching the credit of a witness by proof of an inconsistent former statement. But
a reading of the 31 (1999) 8 SCC 649.

section would indicate that all inconsistent statements are not sufficient to impeach the credit of the
witness….

26. A former statement though seemingly inconsistent with the evidence need not necessarily be
sufficient to amount to contradiction. Only such of the inconsistent statement which is liable to be
“contradicted” would affect the credit of the witness…..”

101. The Trial Court has taken a super technical approach in doubting the timing of lodging of the
FIR for arriving at an erroneous conclusion the FIR and the tehreer are ante-timed. In these
circumstances, there are compelling and substantial reasons for the High Court to interfere with the
findings and conclusions of the Trial Court.

V. Presence of PW-1 at the place of incidence

102. Yet another substantive argument advanced on behalf of the Appellants is that the presence of
PW-1 at the scene of the offence is doubtful. Therefore, his testimony must be rejected on the
ground that he is not an eye-witness at all. To make this point good, the learned counsels advanced
four-fold submission, which is also the reasoning of the Trial Court. We will refer to each of the
submissions and deal with them.

A. Bullet marks on the jonga

103. Based on the statement of PW-1 in the FIR that the accused party fired at them
‘indiscriminately’, it is argued that this statement cannot be believed as there were no multiple bullet
holes on the jonga. In fact, the jonga only has one bullet hole on the left side of the windscreen.

104. A proper reading of the evidence demonstrates the following. The Head Constable, M.T.,
Malkhan Singh, PW-4, conducted the technical examination of the vehicle and prepared a report
exhibited as Ex-A2. Though Exb. A-2 is in Hindi, and the content of it is available in the testimony of
PW-4, which we can consider and understand the correct fact situation. PW-4 states in the report
that the jonga had a hole in the windscreen window and multiple holes in the back side of the
driver’s seat. He also stated that there were holes in the upper body of the back tyre of the left side of
the jonga and on both sides of the window. The driver-side mirror was also broken.

105. This description matches the seizure memo of the jonga exhibited as Ka- 29, which was
prepared when the jonga was seized. The relevant part of PW- 4’s testimony is as under:

“….There was a hole in the body towards back in left side. Condition of steering was
ok. Condition of break was ok. Condition of Back Pedal, Electric (Light) was fine.
Transmission was fine. Suspension was fine. Tyres were in running condition. There

31

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

was a hole in the front mirror (wind screen) window and right side and there were
holes in the back seat of right side (driver seat). Driver mirror was also broken…..

xxxx

9. Holes were found in the side doors of both side windows. Holes were not found in
the back curtain. Holes of curtains, except one or two, remaining holes ' are inside the
fold of curtain. That which is one or half hole has not gone while folding the curtains
from many places.”

106. We have carefully perused the seizure memo of the jonga which clearly describes “kai jagah par
goliyon ke nishan hai”, meaning thereby that there are many bullet marks found on the jonga.
Further, the inspection report prepared by PW-4 on 25.02.2002 also mentions about the existence
of multiple bullet marks on the jonga. This is also the version of PW-1.

107. Even the investigating officer, PW-12 who prepared the seizure memo of the jonga, found 12
blank cartridges on the spot along with samples of the broken front glass of the jonga.

108. It is in the context of the above-referred evidence that we need to look at the testimony of PW-1
about which the Appellants have argued as if he supports their case. The following extraction from
his testimony makes it clear that this submission has no ground to stand.

“…I don’t remember the number of hole, I had seen at that time. I had seen only one hole in the
glass (wind shield). I did not notice the hole on other parts of the body of the vehicle. It is incorrect
to suggest that there might not been any other gun shot hole in the vehicle except one on the glass
(wind shield).”

109. On an overall examination of the testimonies and the documentary evidence on record, it is
evident that the jonga had multiple bullet holes on different parts. The contention that only one
bullet hole was found on the windscreen is to be rejected, and we have no hesitation in holding that
the conclusion drawn by the Trial Court that there was no ‘indiscriminate’ firing is based on the
misreading of the evidence. We are also of the opinion that this is a substantial and compelling
reason for the High Court to interfere with the judgment of the Trial Court.

B. Position of PW-1 and the injuries sustained by him and the deceased at the time of the incident

110. The Appellants argued that the injuries on PW-1 and the deceased persons do not match the
position they were in when the firing occurred. We will answer this with reference to the first as well
as the second incident.

111. At the first incident, from the testimony of PW-1 as well as the site plan drawn by PW-12, PW-1
was initially standing in front of the jonga when he stopped to speak to the deceased Rakesh Shukla.
While explaining that the site plan does not accurately describe Lallan’s and his position, he
categorically states that he moved to the right side (non-driver side) of the jonga when it was facing

32

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

east to speak to the deceased Rakesh as there were people on the driver’s side. We will quote this in
his own words as this is of some importance:

“….The Jonga had been stopped/parked in the mid of the road. I was in front of the
Jonga only, when it was stopped there. I do not recall exactly if I was on the right side
(Patari) of the road. At that time, the Jonga was facing east. The east falls in the
direction of my home. I moved to the Jonga at non-driver side to speak to him. I had
gone to my right side. There were a few people standing in the side of driver. My
servant· (domestic help) Lallan had come to me xxx I had told the I.O. the fact that
the Jonga was standing exactly in the mid of the road but not that we were standing
on the right side of the road. I do not know the reason why the LO. has shown
(demarcated) our location in the right side of the road but not in front of the Jonga…”

112. It is at this point of time that the firing started, that is when PW-1 was on the non-driver side. If
this is considered true, then PW-1’s testimony that he shielded himself behind the jonga falls into
place and he is certainly not in the direct line of firing. We have no hesitation in rejecting the
contention of the Appellants that PW-1 is in the direct line of firing. It is not in dispute that PW- 1 is
on the non-driver side of the vehicle and when the firing began from Naseem’s gun shop which is in
the south side of the jonga. In fact, this submission is speculative as the complainant has not even
indicated in the FIR that he was on the driver-side of the jonga during the first instance. PW-1’s
testimony is clearly in consonance with the statement in the FIR. It is surprising that Trial Court has
rejected the very presence of PW-1 on the scene of the offence on the basis of a hypothetical
argument, and the High Court was justified in interfering with such a finding.

113. In so far as the second incident is concerned, Appellants contend that, when deceased Rajesh
stepped out of the jonga after turning the same towards the hospital to fire back at the Appellants,
he was hit by several bullets, PW-1 could not have escaped with just one bullet shot. This, according
to the Appellants, is so improbable that his presence is falsified. In fact, the Trial Court accepted this
submission. We have examined this submission in detail and have found it to be incorrect for the
following reasons.

114. After the first incident, the jonga was turned to proceed towards the hospital. On reaching the
second spot near Parma Pandit’s house, when the assailants again attacked, Rajesh got down from
the jonga with his rifle in an attempt to retaliate. At that point, he suffered multiple bullet injuries.
Consistent with his stand, PW-1 was behind the jonga on the right side, which is the driver’s side,
and that is how he could take cover of the jonga, but he could not escape a bullet injury on his leg. So
far as deceased Rajesh Shukla is concerned, he proactively got out of the jonga and took a position to
fire at the assailants. There is a clear distinction between the position taken by Rajesh on the one
hand and PW-1 on the other. There is, therefore, sufficient explanation for PW-1 receiving not as
many bullets injuries as the deceased Rajesh. We may also add that the submission made by the
Appellants is not based on any evidence but proceeds on a theory of probability. The High Court has
correctly rejected this theorization, which has unfortunately impressed the Trial Court. This is
without any basis. It was, therefore compelling for the High Court to interfere and correct the
glaring mistake of the Trial Court.

33

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

115. In a situation like this, when there is a group attack which lasted for only a few minutes, it is
unreasonable to expect an eye-witness to recount each fact in mathematical detail. A recent decision
of this Court recounted a chaotic situation like this by reviewing the existing case laws on the
subject. In Abdul Sayeed v. State of Madhya Pradesh32, this Court held as under:

“27. In the instant case, a very large number of assailants attacked Chand Khan and
Shabir (the deceased), caused injuries with deadly weapons to them. The incident
stood concluded within few minutes. Thus, it is natural that the exact version of the
incident revealing every minute detail i.e. meticulous exactitude of individual acts
cannot be given by the eyewitnesses.

28. The question of the weight to be attached to the evidence of a witness that was
himself injured in the course of the occurrence has been extensively discussed by this
Court. Where a witness to the occurrence has himself been injured in the incident,
the testimony of such a witness is generally considered to be very reliable, as he is a
witness that comes with a built-in guarantee of his presence at the scene of the crime
and is unlikely to spare his actual assailant(s) in order to falsely implicate someone.
“Convincing evidence is required to discredit an injured witness.”…..”

116. Reiterating the same principle about the evidence of an injured witness, this Court in Rajendra
Alia Rajappa & Ors v. State of Karnataka33, held as under:

“18. This Court in Narayan Chetanram Chaudhary v. State of Maharashtra [Narayan Chetanram
Chaudhary v. State of Maharashtra, (2000) 8 SCC 457 :

2000 SCC (Cri) 1546] , has considered the minor contradictions in the testimony,
while appreciating the evidence in criminal trial. It is held in the said judgment that
only contradictions in material particulars and not minor contradictions can be a
ground to discredit the testimony of the witnesses….” 32 (2010) 10 SCC 259.

33 (2021) 6 SCC 178.

117. In light of this, the argument of improbability that while deceased Rajesh Shukla received 16
bullet injuries, Rakesh and Gudda received fatal bullet injuries and PW-1 received just one bullet
injury, must be rejected.

118. Yet another argument raised by the Appellants is that, as per the injury report of PW-1, he
received one bullet injury on the upper portion of his left thigh. However, as per the testimony of
PW-9, the bandage was not on PW-1’s thigh but on his calf. This statement of PW-9 must be
understood in the context of the statement that PW-1 sustained a bullet injury. This is an important
part of the evidence. The mathematical analysis of PW-9’s evidence is unnecessary. The injury
report of PW-1 is in corroboration with the evidence of the doctor, examined as PW-8. Further, even
the X-Ray supports the view that PW-1 received an injury on his left thigh. All these evidences,
which are contemporaneous and credible, cannot be discarded on the basis of the testimony of PW-9

34

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

given four years after the incident. The oral and documentary evidence consistently points towards
an injury on the leg of PW-

1. That one of the witnesses refers to the injury being on the calf cannot cast doubt on the presence
of PW-1 at the scene of the offence. The Trial Court committed a serious error in relying on the
evidence of PW-9 for discarding the entire evidence of PW-1. This finding was rightly set aside by
the High Court.

C. X-Rays and Bed Head Ticket

119. PW-1 and PW-12, both depose that PW-1 went back to the hospital from the place of occurrence
due to the pain of his injury. After reaching the hospital, it was stated that PW-1 was advised an
X-Ray for his injuries by PW- 8, who did his preliminary examination. It has been argued by the
Appellants that the X-Ray done on PW-1 was forged for three reasons (i) there was no entry for
treatment of PW-1 in the medico-legal register or recommendation of X-Ray in the Bed Head Ticket
(ii) the time of X-Ray of PW-1 is 10 PM, however, the department stops working at 2 PM (iii) there
was no money deposited by PW-1 and Hardayal for their treatment.

120. We will deal with these submissions by taking the last argument first. The Medical Officer,
PW-8 who treated PW-1 as well as Hardayal has deposed that after the preliminary treatment of the
deceased and the victims, a police memo describing the deceased as well as the injured victims was
sent by him to the police station at 9 PM. It was also stated that the entry of treatment of the victims
was made in the accidental register instead of the medico legal register as the police did not
accompany PW-1 and Hardayal. Therefore, no entry was made in the medico legal register. Further,
this witness also admitted that in cases where entries are made in the accidental register, no fees is
charged from the patients. The statement of this witness is important and it is extracted
hereinbelow:

“…..Entry which is made in the medico legal register, which are sent by police for
medical examination or any doctor himself conducts the medical examination by
writing application. We do so because no charges are levied of the matter referred by
police and medical fees has to deposit in the matter of giving application at his own.
These injuries would have come by some quarrel and from any other reason or
beatings etc., which relates to medical examination. No charge is deposited in case of
accidental case, treatment has to be given by us, hence we recorded further
proceeding in the accidental register. The report which I have given in respect of the
injuries of those injured, they have been recorded in accidental register. When police
has not come with the injured and injured has come, neither gives application nor
deposits fees and has asid to do the examination then under compulsion we write
injuries in the accidental register after conducting his examination. First we demand
application from the injured or says that to come with police when he does not give
application then we examined him in the accidental register. Injured come and write
in medico legal case that how the injuries have come, then we examined him…..”

35

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

121. It has also been admitted by the PW-7, the Radiologist, under whose supervision the X-Ray was
done that the X-Ray was conducted on the reference of the Emergency Medical Officer, PW-8 who
sent a reference slip for the same. In view of the statements of the doctor PW-8 as well as the
Radiologist, PW-7, there is clarity and certainty about the entry in the accidental register and as
such, there is no money deposited by PW-1 and Hardayal. There is absolutely no justification for the
Trial Court to conclude that these documents are forged. Seen in the context of various
contemporaneous documents, supporting the injuries on the body of PW-1, it is difficult to accept
the submission made by the Appellants that the X-Ray is a forged document or that it is ante-dated.

122. Coming to the submission that the X-Ray of PW-1 and Hardayal could not have been taken at
10 PM when the department closes at 2 PM, we have examined the evidence of PW-7, who has
categorically stated that the X-Ray was taken under his supervision. The relevant portion of his
statement is as under:

“On dated 27 .1. 97 also I was posted at the post of Radiologist in Dist. Hospital,
Hamirpur. On that day under my supervision the X-Ray of the right thigh, along with
left thigh and left knee of injured Rajiv Shukla S/o Sh. Bhishm Shukla R/o Ramedi
P.S. Kotwali Hamirpur aged about 31 years was conducted who was referred by
E.M.O. District Hospital, Hamirpur for X-ray. He himself had come from the
emergency ward. In the X-ray one small round metal non-transparent (torn paper)
was seen in the right thigh, left thigh and left knee alongwith leg. Report was
prepared by me on the basis of X-ray plate, which bears the identification mark and
thumb impression of the injured. This Rajiv Shukla is present in the Court, the report
exhibited as Ex.A-8. Three X-Ray plates exhibited as Ex.44 to 46, which bears thumb
impression of the injured and is attested by me.”

123. This witness was cross-examined at length but he explained that despite the department
normally closing at 2 PM, he insisted that the X-Ray of PW-1 and Hardayal was actually taken at 10
PM on 26.01.1997. The defence tried to discredit this witness by suggesting that he had some issues
with Ashok Kumar Chandel which he denied. We have no reason to disbelieve this witness.
Moreover, it is not unbelievable that a hospital could make a special provision for X-Ray in times of
immediate medical aid. Instead of referring to and considering the material evidence on record
relating to X-Ray and the bed head ticket, the Trial Court arrived at its own conclusion based on
probabilities. The High Court was therefore justified in setting aside the judgment of the Trial Court.

D. Electricity failure at the time of the incident

124. The last attempt to persuade the court to discard the evidence of PW-1 is based on an argument
that during the period commencing from 07.30 PM to 08.45 PM, there was no electricity at the
scene of the offence. To make good this argument, the defence examined DW-1, who was working as
an Engineer at the Electricity Distribution Division. This witness deposed that he received
information at 07.50 PM regarding the breakdown of the electricity connection at Akil Tiraha; as a
result, the electricity supply discontinued in areas from Kali Chauraha to Devi Das, which included
Subhash Market (place of the occurrence) and Suphiganj. It was informed that the connection broke

36

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

down 15-20 mins before 07.50 PM, i.e., around 7.30 PM. He stated that the connection was only
restored at 08.45 PM after repairing the broken wires. On this basis, it was urged that it would have
been difficult for PW-1 to identify the Appellants and also for other witnesses to identify persons
around the market.

125. The High Court examined this issue in detail. It was observed that DW-1 has admitted to the
fact that although there was an electricity cut between 07.30 PM to 08.45 PM, he was not sure if the
place of occurrence, i.e., Subhash Market was affected by the same. He went on to state that there
were total of three phases connected to Akil Tiraha, and out of those three phases, two continued to
remain operational despite the breakdown. DW-1, in his cross-examination, has affirmed that:

“…..I am unable to say about how many connection of the electricity was connected
there at Subahs Bazara from Akil Tiraha with that phase that is broken and the
electricity supply was interrupted. There in total number of three phases but after
breaking the wire, two phases of electrification were continued. Akil Tiraha is in very
far distance from Subhash Bazaar. I am not able to say about electricity connections
from Akhil Tiraha to Subhash Bazar or whether was connected there or not….”

126. Having examined the matter in detail, the High Court came to the correct
conclusion that electricity shutdowns are quite common and the public is not solely
dependent on street lights. In a place like Subhash Market, people must keep their
own arrangements like generators in cases of electricity cuts.

Moreover, DW-1 clearly admitted that, “…but after breaking the wire, two phases of electrification
were continued. Akil Tiraha is in very far distance from Subhash Bazaar. I am not able to say about
electricity connections from Akhil Tiraha to Subhash Bazar or whether was connected there or
not….”.

127. As against the reasoning and the conclusions drawn by the High Court, the Trial Court has
simply referred to the evidence of DW-1 stating that there was no electricity and immediately
concluded that the testimonies of PW-1 and PW-2 are not trustworthy. The Trial Court has not
examined the evidence of DW-1 in detail and has, in fact left out the crucial portion of the evidence.
The High Court was, therefore, completely justified in reversing this finding drawn by the Trial
Court.

128. In conclusion, with respect to the issue relating to the presence of PW-1 as doubted by the Trial
Court, we have examined the matter in detail. The evidence about the existence of multiple bullet
holes on the jonga establishes ‘indiscriminate’ firing, as stated by PW-1. We have also seen that the
injuries on the body of PW-1 and that of the deceased persons co-relate with the testimony
establishing PW-1’s presence at the scene of occurrence. Further, the injury on PW-1 at the scene of
the offence is proved on the basis of the medical evidence supported by testimonies of the doctors.
Furthermore, we have also seen that the defence could not probablize their theory that there was no
electricity at the scene of offence in view of the equivocal evidence of their own witness DW-1.

37

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

129. For all these reasons we are of the opinion that the High Court was correct in its conclusion that
the prosecution has successfully established the presence of PW-1 at the scene of the offence. We are
also convinced that the High Court is justified in reversing the order of acquittal for the glaring
mistakes and distorted conclusions that the Trial Court has drawn.

VI. Presence of PW-2 at the place of incidence

130. Learned Counsel for the Appellants submitted that the evidence of PW-2 must be discarded for
the following reasons; (i) he cannot be accepted as an eye-witness as the injuries on his body are not
of a firearm (ii) his version is in contradiction to PW-1 who instructed PW-2 to check on the children
and that he is unaware as to who took the children home (iii) the conduct and behaviour of PW-2
are unnatural because when his own brother Sri Kant Pandey received fatal injuries, he chose not to
go to the hospital.

131. The way to answer this first issue is to refer to the medical evidence. While the X-Ray report
described the injury on PW-2 as “one small metallic radio opaque shadow is seen in left leg”
corroborating the same, Dr. SK Gupta, PW-7 has, in his own words, stated:

“…Shadow of a small non-transparent radio thing of metal was seen in it. I had
prepared the report in my handwriting and signature on the basis of X-ray plates...”

132. The doctor’s evidence as well as the X-Ray report stand duly corroborated and the Appellants
have brought nothing on record to falsify the same. In light of the report and the testimony, the
injury sustained by PW-2 has to be believed.

133. With respect to the second issue, there is no confusion or contradiction about the shifting of the
children. We have gone through the evidence of PW-2 and he has clearly explained that upon
hearing gunshots he rushed to the spot along with Rajesh Shukla and others and saw PW-1 and
Lallan moving the children out of the jonga. In his cross-examination, he stated that he was unaware
as to who actually took the children to the residence. It is after the second incident when he also
received an injury that PW-1 asked him to go home and check on the children, Chandan and Vipul.
It can be seen from his testimony that:

“18. When I reached there, Chandan was outside the Jonga and Vipul was being
driving out. At that time, in my first glimpse, Chandan was standing at left side of
Jonga. Rajeev was standing outside the vehicle. He was driving Vipul from the
vehicle. He pulled out Vipul immediately. I cannot tell the name of the person, with
whom Chandan and Vipul were send the home. Then voluntarily told that they were
send home along-with some known person of the mohalla. I cannot tell that they
were taken to the house in some vehicle or on foot.

xxx

38

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

22. I was there, when Rajeev Shukla took Rakesh, Gudda, Sri Kant, Ved, Rajesh to the
hospital by putting them in Jonga. I cannot tell whether there was someone else in
the vehicle or not, as I had come back to the house. The moment, Rajeev Shukla sit in
the Jonga, I moved to the house as per his instruction.

xxx

29. Rajeev told me to go to the house, I am going to the hospital. I do not remember
whether I had told this fact to the ‘Daroga’ or not”

134. Coming to the third issue, the evidence of PW-2 cannot be brushed aside under the assumption
that he did not accompany his brother to the hospital. It is not as if he left his brother on the road
and went home to check on Chandan and Vipul. He saw his own person, PW-1, a close family
associate taking his brother along with PW-1’s own brothers to the hospital. In such situations, it is
natural for people to share responsibilities. PW-2 come forward to take care of and protect children.
There is nothing unnatural about it. While PW-1 was taking PW-2’s brother to the hospital it is
natural that PW-2 would take care of the other emergencies of checking on the children who also
received minor injuries. In any event, there is no standard for expecting a particular behavior or
reaction of a victim. This Court in Rana Pratap and ors v. State of Haryana34, held:

“6. Yet another reason given by the learned Sessions Judge to doubt the presence of
the witnesses was that their conduct in not going to the rescue of the deceased when
he was in the clutches of the assailants was unnatural. We must say that the comment
is most unreal. Every person who witnesses a murder reacts in his own way. Some are
stunned, become speechless and stand rooted to the spot. Some become hysteric and
start wailing. Some start shouting for help. Others run away to keep themselves as far
removed from the spot as possible. Yet others rush to the rescue of the victim, even
going to the extent of counter-attacking the assailants. Every one reacts in his own
special way. There is no set rule of natural reaction. To discard the evidence of a
witness on the ground that he did not react in any particular manner is to appreciate
evidence in a wholly unrealistic and unimaginative way.”35 34 (1983) 3 SCC 327.

135. For the reasons stated above, there is absolutely no reason for rejecting the evidence of PW-2
and doubting his presence at the scene of the offence. The Trial Court was not justified in
disbelieving the evidence of PW-2. VII. Discrepancies in the FIR and the Fax sent by the
Superintendent of Police

136. The learned counsels have referred to a fax message said to have been sent from the office of
the Superintendent of Police (SP) to the superiors informing them about the occurrence of this very
incident. The contents of this fax are used by the defence to contradict the very happening of the
incident in the manner described by the prosecution. They also contradict the time of the incident,
apart from certain alleged recoveries.

39

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

137. This fax message is said to have emanated from the office of the Superintendent of Police.
Except for this fax, we have not been informed of any role being played by the SP during the
investigation. It is through the evidence of DW-3, examined by the defence on 27.06.2002 that a
parallel story advanced by the defence comes into play.

138. The circumstances in which the fax never formed a part of the investigation and that it
emanated only with its introduction by DW-3 examined on 27.06.2002, causes much suspicion
about the fax as well as its 35 This principle has been reiterated in a number of decisions of this
court in Leela Ram (Dead) through Duli Chand v. State of Haryana and anr (1999) 9 SCC 525; State
of U.P. v. Devendra Singh (2004) 10 SCC 616; Kathi Bharat Vajsur and anr v. State of Gujarat (2012)
5 SCC 724.

contents. There is nothing to corroborate the contents of the fax. The prosecution has in fact
established the contents of the FIR with clinching evidence, both oral and documentary. The entire
evidence of the defence was to discredit the eyewitnesses and to show contradictions in their
statements on the basis of contemporaneous documentary evidence. We have already considered
those submissions and have rejected the same by upholding the conclusions drawn by the High
Court. The circumstance in which the fax originated has not been established to the satisfaction of
the Court. The evidence of DW-3 does not inspire confidence as well.

139. In conclusion, we reject the fax as well as the submissions based on the contents of the fax for
the reason that firstly, the timings as indicated in the FIR stand confirmed by other oral and
documentary evidence as discussed earlier. There is nothing to suggest about the happening of the
event as mentioned in the fax. Secondly, as the prosecution has established the occurrence of the
incident as described in the FIR on the basis of bullets on the vehicle, empty cartridges, blood
recovery from the place of occurrence coupled with proof of injuries based on medical evidence we
have to accept the story in the FIR and reject the one propagated in the fax involving Titu leading
the attack on the victims. Even the so-called recovery of a 0.315-bore rifle referred to in the fax must
be rejected and we will explain this aspect in more detail while discussing the next argument
relating to the recoveries and the arrest.

140. Fax is not part of the investigation. Even assuming that there is some defect in the investigation
on this count, it will have no bearing on the prosecution case. This Court has observed in a number
of cases, that defective investigation by the investigating authorities by itself does vitiate the case of
the prosecution when there are credible eye-witness testimonies as well as other compelling pieces
of evidence. In Karnel Singh v. State of M.P.36 this Court held that:

“5.….In cases of defective investigation the court has to be circumspect in evaluating
the evidence but it would not be right in acquitting an accused person solely on
account of the defect; to do so would tantamount to playing into the hands of the
investigating officer if the investigation is designedly defective…..”

141. Similarly in the case of C. Muniappan and Others v. State of Tamil Nadu37 this Court held:

40

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

“55. There may be highly defective investigation in a case. However, it is to be
examined as to whether there is any lapse by the IO and whether due to such lapse
any benefit should be given to the accused. The law on this issue is well settled that
the defect in the investigation by itself cannot be a ground for acquittal. If primacy is
given to such designed or negligent investigations or to the omissions or lapses by
perfunctory investigation, the faith and confidence of the people in the criminal
justice administration would be eroded. Where there has been negligence on the part
of the investigating agency or omissions, etc. which resulted in defective
investigation, there is a legal obligation on the part of the court to examine the
prosecution evidence dehors such lapses, carefully, to find out whether the said
evidence is reliable 36 (1995) 5 SCC 518.

37 (2010) 9 SCC 567.

or not and to what extent it is reliable and as to whether such lapses affected the object of finding
out the truth. Therefore, the investigation is not the solitary area for judicial scrutiny in a criminal
trial…..” VIII. Unlawful Assembly and Common Object

142. Mr. Siddharth Dave, Senior Counsel, appearing for Ashutosh, Appellant No. 2 made three-fold
submissions. He argued that the prosecution has failed to prove that there was an unlawful
assembly and that Appellant No.2 was one of the persons constituting the unlawful assembly. He
submitted that mere presence or association with other members alone is not sufficient to hold
everyone criminally liable as vicarious or constructive liability can be fastened only if it is proved
that an unlawful assembly is physically formed.

143. The submission proceeds on a premise that a prior formation of an unlawful assembly with a
common object is a must and should have been a condition precedent for roping the accused within
the fold of Section 149, IPC. Mr. Dave submitted that the prosecution has not explained that there
was a common object on the basis of which the accused came to the spot and fired at the jonga in
front of Naseem’s gun shop. An extension of this very argument is that the prosecution failed to
prove how the unlawful assembly was disbanded after firing in front of Naseem’s gun shop and
again reassembled as an unlawful assembly before Parma Pandit’s house. These submissions pale
into insignificance if we appreciate the true and correct effect of an unlawful assembly as enunciated
by this Court. We will refer to some of the leading judgments on the point. In the case of Amzad Ali
Alias Amzad Kha and ors v. State of Assam38, this Court held:

“5. ....It is incorrect to claim that prior formation of an unlawful assembly with a
common object is a must and should have been found as a condition precedent before
roping the accused within the fold of Section 149 IPC. No doubt the offence
committed must be shown to be immediately connected with the common object, but
whether they had the common object to cause the murder in a given case would
depend and can rightly be decided on the basis of any proved rivalry between two
factions, the nature of weapons used, the manner of attack as well as all surrounding
circumstances. Common object has been always considered to be different from

41

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

common intention and that it does not require prior concert and common meeting of
minds before the attack. Common object could develop eo instanti and being a
question of fact it can always be inferred and deduced from the facts and
circumstances of a case projected and proved in a given case…..”

144. Also in Bhargavan and ors v. State of Kerala39, it was held by this Court. that:

“14. “Common object” is different from a “common intention” as it does not require a
prior concert and a common meeting of minds before the attack. It is enough if each
has the same object in view and their number is five or more and that they act as an
assembly to achieve that object. The “common object” of an assembly is to be
ascertained from the acts and language of the members composing it, and from a
consideration of all the surrounding circumstances. It may be gathered from the
course of conduct adopted by the members of the assembly. What the common object
of the unlawful 38 (2003) 6 SCC 270.

39 (2004) 12 SCC 414.

assembly is at a particular stage of the incident is essentially a question of fact to be determined,
keeping in view the nature of the assembly, the arms carried by the members, and the behaviour of
the members at or near the scene of the incident. It is not necessary under law that in all cases of
unlawful assembly, with an unlawful common object, the same must be translated into action or be
successful. Under the Explanation to Section 141, an assembly which was not unlawful when it
assembled, may subsequently become unlawful. It is not necessary that the intention or the purpose,
which is necessary to render an assembly an unlawful one comes into existence at the outset. The
time of forming an unlawful intent is not material. An assembly which, at its commencement or
even for some time thereafter, is lawful, may subsequently become unlawful. In other words, it can
develop during the course of incident at the spot eo instanti.”

145. Further, the PW-1 is an eye-witness to the first incident before Naseem’s gun shop. The advent
of Raghuvir Singh’s gang in a vehicle is immediately after the firing commenced from and in front of
Naseem’s gun shop. PW-1 clearly mentioned about Raguvir Singh, Ashutosh Singh, Pradeep Singh,
Uttam Singh and Bhan Singh wielding weapons and firing at the jonga. The second incident is
vouchsafed by PW-1 as well as PW-2, who have reached Parma Pandit’s house as the deceased party
alighted the children Vipul and Chandan and turned the jonga towards the hospital. Having reached
Parma Pandit’s house, these accused again attacked the jonga and fired indiscriminately. It is
therefore futile to suggest that there was no common object and that the assembly was not unlawful.
In fact, PW-1 spoke of the exhortation by Ashok Kumar Chandel that “no one from the Shukla
Family should escape alive” and thereafter all other accused including the Raghuvir group started
firing. This is yet another factor which establishes the existence of a common object. The argument
that the prosecution has not proved when the unlawful assembly after the first incident was
disbanded and when it reassembled again as an unlawful assembly in front of Parma Pandit’s house
is also to be rejected for the reason that the distance between the two places is merely 50-75 meters,
and all this happened within a matter of minutes. The submissions were advanced as if there is a

42

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

requirement to prove a common intention, which is not a requirement for an unlawful assembly
under Section 149 IPC. It is apt to refer to the decision of this Court in Bhupendra Singh and ors v.
State of U.P.40, at this stage:

“14…..Where common object of an unlawful assembly is not proved, the accused
persons cannot be convicted with the help of Section 149. The crucial question to
determine is whether the assembly consisted of five or more persons and whether the
said persons entertained one or more of the common objects, as specified in Section
141. It cannot be laid down as a general proposition of law that unless an overt act is
proved against a person, who is alleged to be a member of an unlawful assembly, it
cannot be said that he is a member of an assembly. The only thing required is that he
should have understood that the assembly was unlawful and was likely to commit any
of the acts which fall within the purview of Section 141. The word ‘object’ means the
purpose or design and, in order to make it ‘common’, it must be shared by all. In
other words, the object should be common to the persons, who compose the
assembly, that is to say, they should all be aware of it and concur in it. A common
object may be formed by express agreement 40 (2009) 12 SCC 447.

after mutual consultation, but that is by no means necessary. It may be formed at any stage by all or
a few members of the assembly and the other members may just join and adopt it. Once formed, it
need not continue to be the same. It may be modified or altered or abandoned at any stage. The
expression ‘in prosecution of common object’ as appearing in Section 149 has to be strictly
construed as equivalent to ‘in order to attain the common object’. It must be immediately connected
with the common object by virtue of the nature of the object.

There must be community of object and the object may exist only up to a particular stage, and not
thereafter. Members of an unlawful assembly may have community of object up to a certain point
beyond which they may differ in their objects and the knowledge, possessed by each member of
what is likely to be committed in prosecution of their common object which may vary not only
according to the information at his command, but also according to the extent to which he shares
the community of object, and as a consequence of this the effect of Section 149 IPC may be different
on different members of the same assembly.”

146. With respect to the submission that the prosecution failed to establish any vicarious liability, it
is enough to refer to the decision of this Court in Saddik Alias Lalo Gulam Hussein Shaikh and ors v.
State of Gujarat 41, where the Court expressly rejected this argument and held:

“18. Further, once it is established that the unlawful assembly had a common object,
it is not necessary that all the persons forming the unlawful assembly must be shown
to have committed some overt act. For the purpose of incurring vicarious liability
under the provision, the liability of other members of the unlawful assembly for the
offence committed during the continuance of the occurrence, rests upon the fact
whether the other members knew beforehand that the offence actually committed
was 41 (2016) 10 SCC 663.

43

likely to be committed in prosecution of the common object.”

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

147. While concluding, we may note that there is no specific finding on unlawful assembly and the
common object under Section 149 by the Trial Court. The High Court has discussed this issue and
has also relied on the decision of this Court while dealing with the submission. Having considered
the matter in detail, we are of the opinion that the High Court has examined the issue from all
perspectives and in great detail before reversing the decision of the Trial Court. The decision of the
High Court is, therefore unexceptionable. IX. Recoveries of Weapons, Railway Manarth Card and
Arrest of Sahab Singh A. Recovery of Railway Manarth Card belonging to Ashok Chandel

148. The Appellants made two-fold submissions with respect to the recovery of the Railway Manarth
Card from the place of the incident. Firstly, the railway card had expired on 12.01.1994 and the
present incident being of 1997, it was argued that under no circumstances would a person be
carrying an expired railway card. Secondly, it is submitted that the recovery of the card from the
place of the incident is doubtful as it was sealed and stamped separately from all other material
objects that were recovered from the place of the incident. It is also submitted that the diary entry
mentions all other material objects except the Railway Manarth card.

149. With respect to the first issue, the High Court’s view is correct as it is not unimaginable that
accused Ashok Kumar Chandel carried an expired card. There is nothing unusual or uncommon
about carrying expired cards, as people do it for some reason or another. The Investigating Officer,
PW-12, found the Railway Manarth card at the scene of the offence. So far as the submission relating
to the irregularity in the recovery and the marking of the Manarth card is concerned, we are of the
opinion that there is no reason for the IO to plant the card there, as there is no past enmity between
him and Ashok Kumar Chandel. Once the presence of PW-1 and PW-2, injured eye witnesses is
accepted, then this argument will make no difference.

B. Recovery of Weapons and the Arrests

150. A little factual background is necessary before noting the argument raised by the Appellants.

151. The Investigating Officer, PW-12, deposed that after receiving information from an informant
that four accused were trying to escape from Naseem’s gun shop, he, along with Constable Aftab Ali,
PW-11 and other police officers, proceeded to the spot and arrested the four accused namely Naseem
(A6), Bhan Singh (A10), Shyam Singh (A7) and Sahab Singh (A8). Upon the arrest, one 8x60 bore
rifle was recovered from Sahab Singh (A8) along with ten brass cartridges from his belt. PW-11,
Constable Aftab Ali, deposed the same and also mentioned that attempts were made to secure public
witnesses. However, no one was ready due to the apprehension of danger. He also stated that the
recovery memo, Exb. Ka-24 was prepared, and a copy was given to Sahab Singh, who tore the same
into pieces. In his evidence, Dy. SP, Sukhram Sonkar, PW-14 stated that PW-12 had in his statement
before the CBCID stated that one rifle along with 18 bullets, ten from the belt and eight from the
butt cover of the rifle, were recovered from Sahab Singh (A8).

44

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

152. It is in the above-referred background, the learned counsels have raised two contentions.
Firstly, the recovery from Sahab Singh contradicts the contents of the fax, which mentions the
recovery of a 0.315 bore rifle and not an 8x60-bore rifle. Secondly, it is also the contention that the
prosecution has not proved the recoveries at all.

153. We have already considered and rejected the story set up by the defence on the basis of the fax
message. In fact, the contents of the fax are referred to only to contradict the nature of the weapon
recovered from Sahab Singh; that is, while the recovery mentioned in the fax refers to the weapon as
a 0.315- bore rifle, the recovery memo, Exb. Ka-24 mentions the weapon as an 8x60- bore rifle.

154. It is important to note that the Trial Court accepted this submission and held it to be a serious
contradiction which the prosecution failed to answer. The High Court has correctly reversed the
decision of the Trial Court as its conclusions are fallacious. There is no distinction between a 0.315
bore rifle and an 8x60-bore rifle except for the system of measurement, one being the British
System and another being the Continental system. The conclusions of the High Court are as under:

“We find that confusion probably occurred in the mind of the trial court that the 315
bore rifle is different rifle than 8x60 bore rifle which is fallacious. In fact, 8mm rifle
in continental system would be called to be .315 bore rifle in British system because
in British system, its measurement is in inches while in continental system, its
measurement is given in mm., therefore, this finding of the trial court that no such
recovery was made was found proved from the accused, Sahab Singh is an erroneous
finding on the basis of logic given.”

155. We are of the view that the High Court had a substantial and compelling ground to interfere
with this glaring mistake and the distorted conclusions that the Trial Court has drawn. As the
learned counsels for the Appellants raised and argued this point all over again, we had to
independently verify the conclusion and the finding of the High Court.

156. The treatise, W.H.B. Smith on Mauser Rifle and Pistols42 provides a detailed description of an
8x60 sporting rifle under the chapter ‘Mauser Sporting Rifles’. The relevant portion is extracted
hereinunder for ready reference:

42 W.H.B. Smith, Mauser Rifles and Pistols (The Stackpole Company, Pennsylvania,
United States of America, 4th edn, 1954, pg nos. 156, 157) Also see: 0.315” Sporting
Rifle, available at:

https://ddpdoo.gov.in/product/products/product-details/0-315-quot-sporting-rifle.
The website of Directorate of Ordnance (Coordination and Services) where 0.315
bore rifle is also described as an 8mm rifle.

“This design was made in Germany specifically for foreign markets. It was finished
much better than those for home consumption. Various types of sights were provided
and this design was made in both single-trigger and double trigger types.

45

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

xxx The usual barrel length of this type is 24 inches.

xxx The standard calibers of the 24-inch was as follows: 7x57mm (.276), 8x60 mm
(.315), 9x57 mm (0.355) …”

157. With respect to the second submission, about the doubt cast on the recoveries, we have the
concurrent depositions of PW-10, PW-11 and PW-12 all of whom consistently speak about the
recoveries of the rifle and the bullets. The relevant portion of their testimonies are as under:

158. Head Constable, Munna Lal Mishra, PW-10, stated in his evidence that:

“…On that day at 11.50 SHO Lalman Verma, SI R.S. Tiwari, SI Roshan Lal, Ct. 621
Kamlesh Kumar and Ct. 154 Aftab Ali along with Jeep and Driver Ram Kishan came
at the police station and produced four accused persons Naseem Ahmad, Sahab
Singh, ·Man Singh, then said Man Singh, Shyam Singh in the police station. One
sealed bundle of Rifle and one sealed bundle of cartridges and sample seal were also
filed at the police station and filed one recovery memo of rifle and cartridge. On the
basis of the Memo filed case FIR no.34/97 u/ s 25 Arms Act registered against Sahab
Singh and case FIR No.35/97 u/ s 27 Arms Act registered against Ashok Chandel. The
filed articles with sample seal kept in the malkhana….”

159. Constable Aftab Ali, PW-11 in his evidence stated that:

“…Four persons namely Sahab Singh, Naseem, Mansingh, Shyamsingh were about to
go out from the door there that we surrounded and caught them. When we asked the
name-address then one told his name as Naseem, second told his name Shyam Singh,
third one told his name as Bhansingh and fourth one told his name as Sahab Singh.
When the SHO took the personal search of all four then one rifle and green colour
cartridge belt recovered from the possession of Sahab Singh, which had 10 cartridges
and nothing recovered from any other. Ramsakal Tiwari wrote the Seizure memo at
the spot on the dictation of Lalman Verma and read out the same and our signatures
were obtained and he also signed the same. Ramfal sealed the cartridges and belt
separately. He made the sample seal. No public person got ready to give statement
due to their well- being. Copy of memo given to Sahab Singh, who had torn and threw
it….”

160. Investigating Officer, Lalman Verma, PW-12 in his evidence stated that:

“….While walking from the riverbank of Betwa when we reached before the back door
of Naseem's house then we saw that four accused came out from the back door and
on the signal of the Informant we arrested all four accused persons on dated 27.1. 97
at 6.30 PM. When we asked their name-address then first told his name as Naseem
S/ o Hameed, other told his name as Shyam Singh s / o Birbal, third told his name as
Bhan Singh s / o Man Singh and fourth one told his name as Sahab Singh s/ o

46

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

Dalgajan Singh. When personal search of above three accused persons made as per
rules then nothing recovered from the possession of · ·the accused Naseem, Shyam
Singh. But a rifle N.P. (illegible) No.20260 got recovered from the possession of
Sahab Singh R/ o Kaloli Jaar Bhag Lalpura Dist. Hamirpur and then said that 10
brass cartridges got recovered from the belt tied in the waist, which was taken into
police possession and a memo was written got written from S.S.I Sh. R.S. Tiwari in
the torch light. On inquiry accused Sahab Singh told that this is of Ex.MLA Ashok
Chandel, which was sealed. Signatures of the witnesses taken after reading out the
memo, no public witness got ready because of considering their well-being. Memo of
this is exhibited as Ex.A-24. Copy of which was given to the accused….”

161. In view of the above, we are of the opinion that the recovery of the 8x60 bore rifle from Sahab
Singh (A8) and the arrest of the rest of the accused, A6, A7 and A10, have been successfully proved
by the prosecution. The clear, consistent and categorical evidence adduced by the prosecution to
prove the recovery of the weapon, bullets as well as arrests could not have been ignored by the Trial
Court. The conclusions drawn by the Trial Court were, therefore not only wrong but glaring
mistakes. These were substantial and compelling reasons for the High Court to reverse the decision
of the Trial Court.

162. An additional argument is raised with respect to the variation in the number of bullets
recovered from the green belt worn by Sahab Singh. It is argued that while PW-12 states in his
testimony that he recovered ten bullet cartridges from the belt, PW-14 mentions in his testimony
that PW-12 stated in his statement before the CBCID that he recovered 18 bullets (10 from the belt
and eight from the butt of the rifle) from Sahab Singh.

163. We consider this to be a minor variation. In any event, PW-14 is only stating what PW-12
supposedly mentioned in the statement to the CBCID. The variation in the number of bullets
recovered cannot have a direct bearing on the recovery itself, particularly when all other witnesses
have spoken about the recovery.

164. As the prosecution has established the occurrence of the incident through the evidence of PW-1
and PW-2, and we are in agreement with the judgment of the High Court that these are credible
ocular witnesses whose statements are corroborated by other contemporaneous evidence, certain
minor variations, such as non-recovery of blood-stained clothes, certain other weapons etc. will not
be fatal to the case of the prosecution. This principle is well established in cases where there are
credible injured eye-witness testimonies. In Lakshman Singh v. State of Bihar43, this Court held:

“9. In Mansingh [State of M.P. v. Mansingh, (2003) 10 SCC 414 : (2007) 2 SCC (Cri)
390] , it is observed and held by this Court that “the evidence of injured witnesses has
greater evidentiary value and unless compelling reasons exist, their statements are
not to be discarded lightly”. It is further observed in the said decision that “minor
discrepancies do not corrode the credibility of an otherwise acceptable evidence”. It is
further observed that “mere non-mention of the name of an eyewitness does not
render the prosecution version fragile”.

47

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

9.1. A similar view has been expressed by this Court in the subsequent decision in
Abdul Sayeed [Abdul Sayeed v. State of M.P., (2010) 10 SCC 259 : (2010) 3 SCC (Cri)
1262] . It was the case of identification by witnesses in a crowd of assailants. It is held
that “in cases where there are large number of assailants, it can be difficult for
witnesses to identify each assailant and attribute specific role to him”. It is further
observed that “when incident stood concluded within few minutes, it is natural that
exact version of incident revealing every minute detail i.e. meticulous exactitude of
individual acts, cannot be given by eyewitnesses”. It is further observed that “where
witness to occurrence was himself injured in the incident, testimony of such witness
is generally considered to be very reliable, as he is a witness that comes with an
inbuilt guarantee of his presence at the scene of crime and is unlikely to spare his
actual assailant(s) in order to falsely implicate someone”. It is further observed that
“thus, deposition of injured witness should be relied upon unless there are strong
grounds for rejection of his evidence on basis of major contradictions and
discrepancies therein”.

9.2. The aforesaid principle of law has been reiterated again by this Court in Ramvilas [Ramvilas v.
State of M.P., 43 (2021) 9 SCC 191.

(2016) 16 SCC 316 : (2016) 4 SCC (Cri) 850] and it is held that “evidence of injured witnesses is
entitled to a great weight and very cogent and convincing grounds are required to discard their
evidence”. It is further observed that “being injured witnesses, their presence at the time and place
of occurrence cannot be doubted”.”

165. In the recent case of M Nageswara Reddy v. State of AP44 it was held that:

“ 1 6 .   H a v i n g   g o n e   t h r o u g h   t h e   d e p o s i t i o n   o f   t h e   r e l e v a n t   w i t n e s s e s   —
eyewitnesses/injured eyewitnesses, we are of the opinion that there are no
major/material contradictions in the deposition of the eyewitnesses and injured
eyewitnesses. All are consistent insofar as Accused 1 to 3 are concerned. As observed
hereinabove, PW 6 has identified Accused 1 to 3. The High Court has observed that
PW 1, PW 3 & PW 5 were planted witnesses merely on the ground that they were all
interested witnesses being relatives of the deceased. Merely because the witnesses
were the relatives of the deceased, their evidence cannot be discarded solely on the
aforesaid ground. Therefore, in the facts and circumstances of the case, the High
Court has materially erred in discarding the deposition/evidence of PW 1, PW 3, PW
5 & PW 6 and even PW 7.

xxx

19. Having gone through the reasoning given by the High Court, we are of the opinion
that the High Court has unnecessarily given weightage to some minor contradictions.
The contradictions, if any, are not material contradictions which can affect the case of
the prosecution as a whole. PW 6 was an injured eyewitness and therefore his

48

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

presence ought not to have been doubted and being an injured eyewitness, as per the
settled proposition of law laid down by this Court in catena of decisions, his
deposition has a greater reliability and credibility.” X. Ballistic Report 44 2022 SCC
OnLine SC 268.

166. The last submission made on behalf of the Appellants is in two parts. Firstly, it is submitted
that the ballistic report cannot be relied on as it is not authenticated and contrary to the
requirements of Section 293 Cr.P.C under which the report is to be made only by the Director/
Deputy Director/ Assistant Director and not by a Scientific Officer. Secondly, it is argued that the
prosecution only sent 8x60 bore rifle for the ballistic report but has failed to send the 0.315 bore
rifle, which is said to have been recovered from Sahab Singh.

167. The second argument must straightaway be rejected in view of our finding that 8x60 bore rifle
and 0.315 bore rifle are one and the same. On the first point, the requirement under Section 293 is
in fact complied with as the report should be treated as under the hand of the Government Scientific
Expert, being the “Director [, Deputy Director or Assistant Director] of a Central Forensic Science
Laboratory or a State Forensic Science Laboratory” as provided under Section 293(4)(e).

168. The Trial Court yet again took a super technical view of the matter and rejected the ballistic
report, in spite of the fact that the report had come from the office of the Assistant Director bearing
a seal. We may note the reasoning of the Trial Court here itself.

“….In reply to this the learned counsel for the prosecution has drawn my attention towards presence
of the seal and signature of the Assistant Director in the end of the report. In this seal is put. On this
seal it has been printed that "forwarded for further necessary ·action"

and below that after leaving some space, by this seal Assistant Director has been
imprinted and signatures are put thereupon. It is clear that this report is not a report
selfsigned by an Assistant Director but this report is of some Scientific Officer, which
has been merely forwarded by the Assistant Director. This report does not fulfil the
objectives and conditions of Section 23 Cr.P.C…”

169. After having noted that the report has emanated from the office of the Assistant Director and
also having noted the “presence of seal and signature of the Assistant director at the end of the
report”, the Trial Court could not have rejected it. It was, therefore compelling for the High Court to
have reversed the finding of the Trial Court. On this count, the High Court held as under:

“…Further he has also tried to discard the report of F.S.L. on the ground that Section
293 Cr.P.C. provides for an expert's report to be admissible only when it is signatured
by the Director/Deputy Director/ Assistant Director of the said lab and not by any
Scientific Officer. We do not subscribe to his view because it has come on record that
the same was forwarded by the one of the Director/Deputy Director/Assistant
Director of the said lab under the seal, therefore, it cannot be discarded and the same
would be treated to be admissible and in this report, it is clearly found that E.C.-12 is

49

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

found to have been fired by 8 x 60 bore rifle which could also addressed to be .315
bore rifle….”

170. The decision of this Court in State of Himachal Pradesh v. Mast Ram45 is a complete answer to
this submission. In an identical situation, this Court held that there is no illegality in the way the
prosecution has obtained the 45 (2004) 8 SCC 660.

ballistic report under Section 293. The relevant portion of the decision is as under:

“6. Secondly, the ground on which the High Court has thrown out the prosecution
story is the report of the ballistic expert. The report of the ballistic expert (Ext. P- X)
was signed by one Junior Scientific Officer. According to the High Court, a Junior
Scientific Officer (Ballistic) is not the officer enumerated under sub-section (4) of
Section 293 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and, therefore, in the absence of his
examination such report cannot be read in evidence. This reason of the High Court,
in our view, is also fallacious. Firstly, the forensic science laboratory report (Ext. P-X)
has been submitted under the signatures of a Junior Scientific Officer (Ballistic) of
the Central Forensic Science Laboratory, Chandigarh. There is no dispute that the
report was submitted under the hand of a government scientific expert. Section
293(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure enjoins that any document purporting to be
a report under the hand of a government scientific expert under the section, upon any
matter or thing duly submitted to him for examination or analysis and report in the
course of any proceeding under the Code, may be used as evidence in any inquiry,
trial or other proceeding under the Code. The High Court has completely overlooked
the provision of sub-section (1) of Section 293 and arrived at a fallacious conclusion
that a Junior Scientific Officer is not an officer enumerated under sub-section (4) of
Section 293. What sub-section (4) of Section 293 envisages is that the court is to
accept the documents issued by any of the six officers enumerated therein as valid
evidence without examining the author of the documents.

xxx

13. In our view, the consistent ocular testimony of PWs 1, 3 and 4 corroborated by the opinion of PW
2 Dr. Sanjay Kumar Mahajan and the ballistic expert report clearly established the prosecution case
beyond all reasonable doubts and the High Court fell into grave error of law and facts, resulting in
grave miscarriage of justice.”

171. In view of the fact that the ballistic report has come from the office of the Assistant Director
bearing his seal and having considered the same in the context of Section 293(4) Cr.P.C., as
explained by this Court in State of Himachal Pradesh v. Mast Ram46 we are opinion that the Trial
Court committed a serious error in rejecting the ballistic report and it was necessary and compelling
for the High Court to reverse the finding of the Trial Court on this count also.

Special Leave Petition and Writ Petition filed by the Informant (PW-1):

50

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

172. PW-1 filed a Special Leave Petition against the judgment of the High Court seeking
enhancement of the sentence awarded to the Appellants from life sentence to that of death. We quite
appreciate the grievances and anxiety of the informant whose brothers were murdered in front of his
eyes. He also saw his nephew (his brother’s son) being murdered at the same place. PW-1 also lost
two of his close friends and family associates. While we symphatise with PW- 1, for the deprivation,
we are not inclined to entertain the Special Leave Petition for enhancement of the sentence to death
as this is a faction fight and certainly not a rarest of the rare case qualifying imposition of death
sentence.

173. PW-1 also filed Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 57/2022 under Article 32 of the Constitution for a
direction to transfer accused no. 5, Ashok Kumar Chandel to a jail outside Uttar Pradesh for serving
out his sentence in view of his undue 46 Ibid.

influence in the State of Uttar Pradesh. The Writ Petition was filed when the criminal appeal of
Ashok Kumar Chandel (A5) was pending adjudication before this Court. However, in view of the
present judgment dismissing the criminal appeal and confirming the conviction and sentence of
Ashok Kumar Chandel (A5) we are of the view that no further order needs to be passed in this writ
petition. The Writ Petition is therefore dismissed. Conclusions:

174. As this is an appeal against the decision of the High Court reversing an order of
acquittal. We have examined each and every point raised by the Appellants. We have
also noted the reasoning adopted by the Trial Court on each issue and contrasted it
with the decision of the High Court to see if the reversal is based on, what this Court
mandated as, very substantial and compelling reasons or good and sufficient grounds
causing grave miscarriage of justice. Having examined the matter in detail, we are of
the opinion that:

I. The High Court was justified in exercising its appellate jurisdiction in reversing the
order of acquittal as there were certain glaring mistakes, and distorted conclusions in
the decision of the Trial Court. The High Court was duty-bound to reverse the
decision as there existed very substantial and compelling reasons to do so, failing
which it would have caused a grave miscarriage of justice.

II. Even though the prosecution has placed material to establish the existence of a
motive on the part of the accused party to murder five members of the Shukla family
and associates, the motive part is treated secondary in view of the fact that this is a
case of direct evidence of injured eye-witnesses.

III. We have found that the place of the incident is not disputed. In fact, the Trial
Court itself returned findings about the first as well as the second event of the
incident. These findings were affirmed by the High Court. Therefore, the only
question related to the persons involved and the manner of commission of the
offence.

51

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

IV. Having examined the contentions relating to (a) discrepancies in the number of
dead bodies brought to the hospital (b) improbability of the time taken to prepare the
tehreer (c) alleged omissions in the FIR (d) and the discharge timing mentioned in
the Bed Head Ticket, casting doubt on the time of lodging the FIR, we find that the
prosecution has explained all the discrepancies beyond a reasonable doubt. We are
convinced that the conclusions of the Trial Court were based on surmises and
conjectures, and therefore, the High Court is justified in reversing the judgment of
the Trial Court.

V. Having considered the four submissions in support of the contention that PW-1
and PW-2 are not the eyewitnesses to the incident, being (a) discrepancy on the
bullets marks on the jonga, (b) bullet injuries on the deceased and eyewitnesses on
the basis of PW-1 statement, (c) timing of the X-ray and Bed Head Ticket, and (d)
evidence relating to the failure of electricity at the time of the incident, we have found
that these submissions are contrary to evidence on record. The prosecution has
proved the presence of PW-1 at the place of occurrence and of him being an injured
eye-witness to the incident. We conclude that the inferences drawn by the Trial Court
were based on a misreading of the evidence, and therefore, the High Court was
obliged to reverse the finding to prevent a grave miscarriage of justice. VI. Having
examined the alternative story of the defence based on the fax, said to have been sent
from the office of the SP and introduced through the defence witness DW-3, we are of
the opinion that the facts mentioned in the fax are not supported by any evidence. On
the contrary, the facts narrated in the FIR are fully corroborated by much of the
documentary evidence and are fully in consonance with the testimony of the
prosecution witnesses. As there is no evidence to corroborate the events mentioned in
the fax and the evidence of DW-3 does not inspire confidence, to say the least. The
conclusion of the Trial Court that the prosecution could not prove the case is totally
erroneous. Such a finding is a glaring mistake as held by this Court in Chandrappa
and Ors. v. State of Karnataka47 obligating the High Court to interfere with an order
of acquittal.

VII. The legal submission that the prosecution has failed to prove that there was an
unlawful assembly based on a common object is examined by us independent of the
explanation and conclusions drawn by the High Court. We are of the opinion that the
High Court has correctly

47 Supra no. 24.

appreciated the principle and rejected the submission that the prosecution has failed to prove a
common object and the unlawful assembly. The decisions of this Court in Amzad Ali v. State of
Assam48, Bhargavan v. State of Kerela49 as well as Bhupendra Singh v. State of U.P.50 fully
support the view taken by the High Court. The decision of the High Court on this issue is
unexceptionable on fact and law. VIII. We have also found that the conclusion of the Trial Court
about the recovery of the weapon is based on a perverse finding as it misunderstood the 8x60-bore

52

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

rifle to be distinct from a 0.315 bore rifle. We have perused and extracted the technical material to
prove beyond doubt that there is no difference at all. The distinction is only in the measurement
system, one being British and the other being the Continental system. In view of such a perverse
finding, the High Court had very substantial and compelling reasons to reverse the findings of the
Trial Court.

IX. We have also found that the arrests of Naseem (A6), Bhan Singh (A10), Shyam Singh (A7) and
Sahab Singh (A8) were concurrently and consistently spoken by all the witnesses, PW-10, PW-11
and PW-12. The conclusion drawn by the Trial Court that the arrest and recovery were doubtful
were glaring mistakes. The High Court was, therefore, completely justified in reversing the decision
of the Trial Court. 48 Supra no. 38.

49 Supra no. 39.

50 Supra no. 40.

X. The rejection of the FSL (ballistic) report is another grave mistake of the Trial Court. The
conclusion of the Trial Court that the ballistic report is inadmissible as it is not in consonance with
the requirement of Section 293 Cr.P.C. is entirely wrong. We have explained this in detail. In an
identical situation this Court in State of Himachal Pradesh v. Mast Ram51 has explained how the
ballistic report is in complete compliance of the statutory provision. The High Court had to
necessarily step in to prevent a grave miscarriage of justice.

175. For the reasons stated above, we dismiss Criminal Appeal Nos. 946- 947/2019 filed by Ashok
Kumar Chandel, Criminal Appeal Nos. 1030- 1031/2019 filed by Ashutosh @ Dabbu, Criminal
Appeal Nos. 1269-1270/2019 filed by Pradeep Singh and Uttam Singh, Criminal Appeal Nos. 1804-
1805/2019 filed by Bhan Singh, Criminal Appeal Nos. 1980-1981/2019 filed by Sahab Singh,
Criminal Appeal Nos. 1279-1280/2019 filed by Naseem, and affirm the judgment of the High Court
of Judicature Allahabad in Government Appeal No. 5123/2002 dated 19.04.2019. We are informed
that Appellant Raghuvir Singh died on 15.08.2022 pending disposal of these appeals, his Criminal
Appeal No. 1046-1047/2019 stands abated. The SLP (Crl.) No. 10742/2019, filed by Rajiv Shukla,
the informant (PW-1) for enhancement of the sentence is dismissed.

51 Supra no. 45.

176. Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 57/2022, filed by the informant (PW-1), is dismissed.

177. There shall be no order as to costs.

……………………………….CJI.

[UDAY UMESH LALIT] ……………………………….J. [S. RAVINDRA BHAT] ……………………………….J.
[PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA] NEW DELHI;

53

NOVEMBER 04, 2022

Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel vs State Of U.P. on 4 November, 2022

54