Jomon K.K vs Shajimon P on 2 April, 2025

Jomon K.K vs Shajimon P on 2 April, 2025

Author: Dipankar Datta

Bench: Dipankar Datta

2025 INSC 425                                                                    REPORTABLE

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                CIVIL APPEAL NOS.             OF 2025
                            [ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NOS.7930-7931 OF 2020]

            JOMON K.K.                                                    … APPELLANT(S)

                                                      VERSUS

            SHAJIMON P. & ORS. ETC.                                       … RESPONDENT(S)

                                                  JUDGMENT

DIPANKAR DATTA, J.

THE APPEAL

1. These appeals, by special leave, take exception to the common judgment and order dated 2nd
December, 2019 of the High Court of Kerala at Ernakulam dismissing the appellant's writ petitions1.
FACTS

2. Facts giving rise to these appeals, which are not in dispute, are these:

a. An advertisement dated 17th October, 2012 was published by the Secretary of
Kerala Public Service Commission2 inviting applications from interested candidates
for filling up 12 vacant posts of “Boat Lascar” under the Kerala State Water Transport
O.P.(KAT) No. 153 of 2019 and O.P.(KAT) No. 154 of 2019 KPSC Department3. The
method of appointment was indicated as ‘direct recruitment’ and the qualifications
stipulated therein read as follows:

7. Qualifications:

(1) Literacy in Malayalam or Tamil or Kannada (2) Possession of Current Lascar's
Licence Note :- Candidates should possess current Lascar's Licence on the last date
for receipt of applications, during Practical Test and Interview also.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/129522070/

1

Jomon K.K vs Shajimon P on 2 April, 2025

b. Incidentally, in terms of the Special Rules of 19754 for the Kerala State Water Transport
Subordinate Service (Operating Wing)5, the service would consist of 3 classes of officers. While
Class I comprised 2 categories, Classes II and III comprised 3 categories, viz. Category 1, Category 2
and Category 3. Syrang, Driver and Lascar are listed at Categories 1, 2 and 3, respectively, of Class
III. In terms of the Schedule appended to the Special Rules, the post of Syrang can be filled up either
by direct recruitment or by promotion from among Lascars in the ratio of 1:1 whereas appointment
on the post of Lascar is entirely by direct recruitment. It is also provided in the Schedule that while
literacy in Malayalam or Tamil or Kannada is the common qualification required for appointment as
Syrang as well as Lascar, an individual aspiring for the post of the department the Special Rules
Subordinate Service Syrang must possess current Syrang’s licence while an individual aspiring for
appointment on the post of Lascar is similarly required to possess a current Lascar’s Licence. c. The
licence noted above is a certificate of competency that is referred to in Chapter III of the Kerala
Inland Vessels Rules, 2010. In terms thereof, any aspiring individual fulfilling the qualifications
statutorily prescribed is issued a certificate of competency upon succeeding in the “viva voce
examination” that is conducted either for a Syrang’s licence or a Lascar’s licence. Inter alia, while a
person aspiring for a Syrang’s licence is required to be 10th standard pass, it is 8th standard pass for
anyone aspiring for a Lascar’s licence. d. By a letter dated 9th October, 2012 addressed to the
Director of the Department, the Director of Ports6 conveyed to the following effect:

… This is to communicate formally that the Syrang, Master and Driver Certificate
issued by the Chief Examiner under the KIV Rules· 2010 is a certificate superior to
Lascar Certificate. Hence those who possess Syrang, Master and Driver Certificate
will be proficient in Lascar work also. Thus Syrang and Master Certificate can be
considered more than equivalent to Lascar Certificate and such persons are eligible
for the job 'lacer' (sic, lascar) also. This communication is issued based on the
representation received from a few candidates who applied to the Public Service
Commission for Lascar job in order to enable them to complete the application
process. Copy of their representation is enclosed. However the final selection may the
Director be done based on practical test, on the skills required, type of vessel and
other requirements of the organization. … e. The appellant was the holder of a
Syrang’s licence, which was valid when he noticed the advertisement.

f. Perceiving that possession of a Syrang’s licence makes him eligible to apply for the
post of Lascar which, incidentally, happens to be the feeder post for promotion to the
post of Syrang, the appellant offered his candidature and acquitted himself creditably
resulting in his name figuring at serial number 1 (OX category) in the “Ranked List”
which was circulated vide No. 257/17/ERVI and brought into force with effect from
22nd February, 2017. He had secured 45.67 marks. Based on such rank, the
Secretary, KPSC informed the appellant vide letter dated 2nd May, 2017 as follows:

… You are informed that you have been advised for recruitment as Boat Lascar on
Rs.8,960 -14,260/- in the above Department against BC Turn. The selection is
subject to Rule 3(c) and 10(b) of the Kerala State and Subordinate Service Rules,
1958.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/129522070/

2

Further instructions will be issued to you in due course by the above Department.

Jomon K.K vs Shajimon P on 2 April, 2025

… g. While the appellant was awaiting an offer of appointment, on 8th May, 2017 and
27th July, 2017, two sets of original applications under Section 19 of the
Administrative Tribunals Act, 19857 were filed before the Thiruvananthapuram and
Ernakulam Benches of the Kerala Administrative Tribunal8. h. The prayer in O.A.
No. 857 of 2017 was for a declaration that inclusion of ineligible candidates, who do
not possess the essential qualification, is oppressive, arbitrary and illegal; a direction
be issued to restructure the “Ranked List” by removing all such ineligible candidates;
and to pass incidental orders. In OA (EKM) 1566 of 2017, similarly, the Tribunal was
urged to declare candidates who did not have valid and current Lascar’s licence as on
17th October, 2012, i.e., the last date for receipt of applications, as not eligible to be
included in the “Ranked List” as well as for issuance of a direction to KPSC to recast
the “Ranked List” by excluding the candidates not possessing valid Lascar’s licence
on 17th October, 2012. i. Importantly, in OA No. 857 of 2017, no private party figured
in the array of respondents and there were only three official respondents (Director
of the department, the Director and KPSC). In OA (EKM) No. 1566 of 2017, apart
from the official respondents, only 5 of the several selected candidates were joined as
respondents. The appellant was not one among the five private respondents who
were impleaded in the said application.

O.A. No. 857 of 2017 and O.A. (EKM) No. 1566 of 2017 Tribunal j. During the pendency of the
original applications before the Tribunal, the appellant came to be appointed on 28th July, 2017 as
“Boat Lascar”.

k. The reply statement filed by the Director before the Tribunal on 20th February, 2018 is extracted
hereunder:

“2. Port Department is implementing KIV Rules 2010. Director of Ports is the
competent Authority to oversee the various regulations, under the provisions of KIV
Rules 2010. KIV Rules insist that the MASTER, DRIVER AND SYRANG certificates
will be issued only after 2 years from the date of issue of Lascar certificate by the
Chief Examiner, Department of Ports. So the persons who got competency
certificates for Master, Driver and Syrang also have sufficient eligibilities to be the
boat lascar. The above competency certificate holders are also eligible to apply for the
post of Lascar and it is stated by the Director of Ports in the letter No.B3-389/2011
dated 9.10.2012.” l. In due course, the original applications were heard by the
Tribunal. Vide its judgment and order dated 9th March, 20189, the Tribunal allowed
both the original applications and directed KPSC to recast the “Ranked List” and to
cancel the advice to appoint ineligible candidates.

m. Acting in pursuance of the Tribunal’s order, KPSC issued a show cause notice
dated 31st July, 2018 to the appellant calling upon him to explain why the advice for
his appointment be not treated as cancelled. The appellant responded thereto by his

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/129522070/

3

Jomon K.K vs Shajimon P on 2 April, 2025

reply dated 10th August, 2018. Thereafter, KPSC issued an order dated 24th October,
2018 cancelling the advice for Tribunal’s order appointment of the appellant
following which the Director cancelled the appellant's appointment as “Boat Lascar”
by his order dated 27th October, 2018.

n. On 3rd November, 2018, the appellant challenged the Tribunal’s order before the
High Court in separate writ petitions. However, a Division Bench of the High Court
by the common impugned judgment and order dismissed such writ petitions.

CONTENTIONS OF THE PARTIES

3. Mr. P. N. Ravindran, learned senior counsel for the appellant, argued that both the Tribunal in
allowing the original applications as well as the High Court in dismissing the writ petitions fell in
error in not appreciating that a higher qualification could never have been regarded as a
disqualification for appointment on the post of Lascar.

4. Mr. Ravindran relied on the decisions in Parvaiz Ahmed Parry v.

State of Jammu and Kashmir10 and Chandra Shekhar Singh and Others v. State of Jharkhand11 in
support of the contention that a candidate having a higher degree in the subject prescribed under
the advertisement cannot be disqualified by reason of ineligibility for not possessing the required
degree.

5. Mr. Ravindran further argued that by the time the Tribunal was moved by the unsuccessful
candidates, the appellant had not been (2015) 17 SCC 709 2025 SCC OnLine SC 595 appointed.
However, he did figure in the “Ranked List”. During the pendency of the original applications, the
appellant came to be appointed. Despite such appointment, he was not impleaded as a respondent
in either of the two original applications filed before the Tribunal. When the original applications
were filed, seeking exclusion of candidates holding Syrang’s licence and recasting of the “Ranked
List”, without the appellant being included as a respondent, no adverse order could have been
passed by the Tribunal qua him. Since the appellant was not impleaded as a respondent in the
original applications, the same were defective and no relief could have been granted to the
unsuccessful candidates/original applicants.

6. Mr. Ravindran also submitted that assuming this Court were not inclined to accept the claim of
the appellant that he could have been considered for selection despite not possessing a current
Lascar’s licence, it was contended that this was an eminently fit case for exercise of power by this
Court under Article 142 of the Constitution. Reliance was placed on the Constitution Bench decision
in Supreme Court Bar Association vs Union Of India and Anr.12.

7. Per contra, Mr. Nair, learned counsel for KPSC, contended that the appellant and similarly placed
candidates having Syrang’s licence were considered for selection in view of the letter of the Director
dated 9th October, 2012. However, the Tribunal having held that 1998 4 SCC 409 candidates not
possessing current Lascar’s licence could not have been considered for selection and having directed

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/129522070/

4

KPSC to recast the “Ranked List”, the same was duly complied with resulting in cancellation of the
advice for appointment of the appellant.

Jomon K.K vs Shajimon P on 2 April, 2025

8. Mr. Nair relied on the decision in District Collector & Chairman, Vizianagaram Social Welfare
Residential School Society v. M. Tripura Sundari Devi13 for the proposition that when an
advertisement mentions a particular qualification and an appointment is made in disregard of the
same, it is not a matter only between the appointing authority and the appointee concerned:

the aggrieved are all those who had similar or even better qualifications than the
appointee or appointees but who had not applied for the post because they did not
possess the qualifications mentioned in the advertisement.

9. According to him, had it been known that anyone not having a Lascar’s licence but having a
Syrang’s licence would be eligible for consideration for appointment on the post of Lascar, others
having Syrang’s certificate could also have applied thereby enlarging the zone of consideration.
However, keeping the process confined only to a select few and not extending opportunity to all
others similarly situate like the appellant would contravene Article 16 of the Constitution and also
amount to a fraud on public. (1990) 3 SCC 655

10. P.M. Latha and Anr. v. State of Kerala and ors.14 was also cited by Mr. Nair in support of his
contention that anyone holding a Syrang’s licence could not have been considered on the ground of
being more qualified than the holder of a Lascar's licence, and that whether Syrang's licence could
be considered as appropriate for recruitment of a Lascar is a question which ought to be left to be
considered by the authorities concerned. Since, in P.M. Latha (supra), this Court did not consider
candidates having B. Ed degree as qualified for the vacancies advertised, which required recruitment
to be made from candidates with TTC qualifications, he urged that dismissal of the appeal is the only
logical conclusion.

11. Mr. Nishe Rajan Shonker, learned counsel for the State of Kerala, adopted the submissions of
Mr. Nair.

QUESTION OF LAW

12. The central question of law arising for decision on this appeal is, whether the appellant who did
not hold a current Lascar's licence but was the holder of a Syrang's licence could have been
considered qualified to participate in the recruitment process as well as appointed.

13. Certain notable features having a bearing on the issue to be decided by us are these:

2003 3 SCC 541 a. The advertisement dated 15th September, 2012 did stipulate that
only those holding a current Lascar's licence are eligible to apply. At the same time, it
did not specifically say that anyone holding a Syrang’s licence or a licence higher than
a Lascar’s licence is not eligible to apply. b. According to the Director, a Syrang’s
licence is something superior to a Lascar’s licence and that holders of Syrang’s licence

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/129522070/

5

Jomon K.K vs Shajimon P on 2 April, 2025

can be considered more than equivalent to Lascar’s licence, thus, being eligible for
the job of Lascar also. c. A communication to the above effect was made by the
Director to KPSC, not on his own, but based on the representation received from a
few candidates who, presumably having Syrang’s licences, had applied for the post of
Lascar and wanted to compete with aspirants having Lascar’s licence. d. Despite the
appellant being selected, his name figuring in the “Ranked List”, he being
recommended by the Secretary, KPSC on 2nd May, 2017 for appointment as “Boat
Lascar” as well as his appointment on 28th July, 2017 during the pendency of the
original applications, he was not impleaded as respondent therein.

e. The original applicants could not have feigned ignorance as to the identity of
candidates possessing Syrang’s licence who came to be appointed; also, the Tribunal
did not take the pain of passing appropriate orders to have them impleaded. Thus,
the Tribunal’s order adverse to the interest of the appellant was effectively passed
behind his back.

f. Despite there being a reference in the show cause notice dated 31st July, 2018 to
the Tribunal’s order, the appellant chose to reply to the show cause notice instead of
challenging the such order before the High Court either under Article 226 or 227 of
the Constitution of India.

g. Once the appellant’s appointment as “Boat Lascar” was cancelled on 27th October,
2018 by the Director, such order provided him a cause of action to move an original
application before the Tribunal under Section 19 of the 1985 Act; however, instead of
moving the Tribunal, the appellant moved the High Court in its writ jurisdiction,
admittedly, when the Tribunal’s order had been acted upon.

ANALYSIS AND REASONS

14. In our considered opinion, the High Court would have been justified in dismissing the writ
petitions of the appellant at the threshold on the ground that the order of cancellation had
intervened in the meanwhile providing a cause of action for him to move the Tribunal. In such
original application, he could have even prayed for recall of the Tribunal’s order on the ground of
the same having been passed behind his back and upon such recall, to hear him on the merits of the
original applications. Such a course of action was available to the appellant in terms of the decisions
of this Court in K. Ajit Babu v. Union of India15 and Rama Rao v. M. G. Maheshwara Rao16.

However, the High Court examined the appellant’s claim on merits leading to dismissal of his writ
petitions and we too having been addressed on the merits of the appeals, it would be just and fair to
answer the question that we have formulated above without taking too technical a view.

15. First, we propose to consider the argument touching non-joinder of the appellant in the
proceedings before the Tribunal though, undoubtedly, he was a necessary party.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/129522070/

6

Jomon K.K vs Shajimon P on 2 April, 2025

16. The effect of non-joinder of a necessary party in proceedings where an order is passed adverse to
the interest of the non-party was considered by a co-ordinate bench of this Court in Ranjan Kumar
v. State of Bihar17.

17. The decision in Ranjan Kumar (supra) was followed by the decision in Kulwant Singh v.
Dayaram18, where promotion to the post of head constables in Chandigarh Police was the subject
matter of consideration. This Court held that after appearing in a competitive examination and upon
being selected, the appointees become an identified category and that if the rights of such
appointees forming part of such identified category are to be affected by any determination, the
situation commands that they should be (1997) 6 SCC 473 (2007) 14 SCC 54 (2014) 16 SCC 187 2015
3 SCC 177 impleaded in the proceedings as necessary parties. The non-joinder now permits them to
take the plea that the impugned order does not bind them.

18. The decisions in Ranjan Kumar (supra) and Kulwant Singh (supra) are authorities for the
proposition that selectees who are appointed or promoted must be arrayed as parties in the original
proceedings where their selections are challenged. Kulwant Singh (supra) has taken a step further
and ruled that mere awareness of pendency of litigation does not make the order passed by the
Court/Tribunal interfering with the selection binding upon such appointees or promotees.

19. Though there can be little quarrel with the law laid down in Ranjan Kumar (supra) and Kulwant
Singh (supra) and considering what has been argued by Mr. Ravindran as a proposition of law,
noted above, to be correct, what stands out is that the appellant did not immediately challenge the
Tribunal’s order and rested on his oars to throw a challenge till his service came to be terminated. In
fact, he took a chance of favourable consideration of his case by responding to the show cause.
Having taken a chance and not being successful, he cannot, thereafter, succeed before us on the
ground of his non- joinder as a necessary party. Having not initiated appropriate legal action that
the law permitted him to take, he can get back his service only if the primary contention raised by
Mr. Ravindran succeeds.

20. Next, turning to the crux of the issue, it is absolutely necessary to bear in mind that though the
posts of Syrang and Lascar are included in Class III of the Subordinate Service, the requisite
qualifications for appointment on such posts as ordained by the Special Rules are different.
Moreover, it is specifically ordained by Rule 6 of the Special Rules as follows:

“6. Other Qualifications. - No person shall be eligible for appointment to the
categories specified in column (1) of the Table below by the method specified in
column (2) unless he possesses the qualifications prescribed in the corresponding
entry in column (3) thereof.”

21. As noted in the factual narrative, possession of a current Lascar’s licence is an essential
qualification for anyone aspiring for the post of Lascar. This is what is laid down in column (3), i.e.,
the qualifications required; and going by what is said therein read with Rule 6, there can be no
gainsaying that apart from those having a current Lascar’s licence, none else is eligible. The word
“current” is also significant in the sense that the Rules insist on a subsisting licence, i.e., a certificate

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/129522070/

7

of competency, which is valid and operative during the time the last date for receiving applications
intervenes.

Jomon K.K vs Shajimon P on 2 April, 2025

22. The advertisement did not require anything else other than what the Special Rules require. The
absence of express mention that those holding a Syrang’s licence or a Driver’s licence which,
according to the Director, are superior to a Lascar’s licence, is insignificant, irrelevant and
immaterial having regard to the clear terms of Rule 6 (supra).

23. Viewed from a different angle, on a conjoint reading of Rule 6 of the Special Rules and the
advertisement, we find both mentioning a particular qualification, i.e., a current Lascar's licence,
which each aspirant has to possess for being considered eligible to participate in the process of
selection, thereby creating a distinct class and it is aspirants falling in such class alone who could
have applied for being considered. Thus, any aspirant, even though possessing a Syrang’s licence or
a Driver’s licence not being part of such distinct class, could not have been considered eligible. The
classification has not been shown to be and is not unreasonable.

24. True it is, from the reply statement of the Director filed before the Tribunal and also from the
2010 Rules, it does appear that the holder of a Syrang’s licence is mandatorily required to obtain
and have a Lascar’s licence for 2 years and, therefore, without having a Lascar’s licence one cannot
apply for a Syrang’s licence. By the same analogy, it could be presumed that the holder of a Syrang’s
licence is having the requisite eligibility to be a Lascar. However, what turns the tide against the
appellant is the requirement of the ‘current’ Lascar’s licence, discussed above, which the appellant
did not have on the last date for receiving applications.

25. We have further seen from the letter of the Director dated 9th October, 2010 addressed to KPSC
that it was not voluntary; rather, it was at the behest of candidates who did not possess current
Lascar’s licence. It can well be presumed that the Director buckled under pressure. However,
notwithstanding that, qualifications statutorily laid down could not have been diluted by what the
Director felt should be considered by KPSC and, therefore, it is the statutorily prescribed
qualifications that should prevail.

26. Mr. Nair is also right in referring to us the decision in M. Tripura Sundari Devi (supra).
Although in such decision it was held that it amounts to a fraud on public to appoint candidates with
qualifications inferior to the qualifications advertised, which is not precisely the case here because
the appellant has higher qualifications than what was required, yet, the other principle of law
flowing from such decision is squarely applicable. It has neither been shown that the Director’s
letter dated 9 th October, 2012 was given wide publicity nor has it been shown by the appellant that
KPSC had issued any corrigendum vide public notice whereby the zone of consideration was
enlarged permitting holders of a Syrang’s licence to participate in the process. We, thus, hold
drawing inspiration from the said decision that the aggrieved are all those who had similar or even
better qualifications than the appellant but who had not applied for the post because they were
unaware of the fact that persons not having a current Lascar’s licence would also be eligible to apply
and compete in the process. Equality of opportunity in matters of public employment being a sine
qua non for a fair and transparent selection process, such equality is conspicuously absent in the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/129522070/

8

present case.

Jomon K.K vs Shajimon P on 2 April, 2025

27. There is one other important aspect which also cannot be lightly overlooked. We shall assume
for a moment that though the process was commenced for appointment on vacant posts of Lascar,
there was no illegality in persons having Syrang’s licence being permitted to participate. Of course,
there could be aspirants holding Lascar’s licence in sufficient numbers who might not have the
higher qualifications necessary for even appearing for a viva voce to aim at possessing a certificate of
competency as Syrang. Those aspirants, holding a Lascar’s licence, might not also be so capable
and/or competent for obtaining a Syrang’s licence. After all, all individuals are not blessed with the
same level of intelligence, human abilities and intellect. The distribution of innate abilities and
intellectual prowess being far from uniform, resulting in a diverse spectrum of human potential, it is
axiomatic that aspirants having only a Lascar’s licence can never be considered for direct
recruitment on any post in Class III of the Subordinate Service other than a Lascar. It is quite but
natural that in the matter of observation, perception and memorisation of details of principles of
navigation, and skill in respect of seamanship, there would be significant differences in the faculties
of different individuals. If persons holding Syrang's licence

- who are obviously better equipped than persons holding Lascar’s licence - are allowed to apply and
participate in the process for appointment on the post of Lascar, the probability of the persons
holding Lascar's licence being outperformed by the persons holding Syrang's licence would be quite
high. It could also be a distinct possibility where all the vacant posts of Lascar are filled up by
persons having Syrang's licence but not having a current Lascar’s licence as per the statutory
requirement. That would pose a real difficulty for persons not so fortunate and lacking in higher
intelligence, abilities and intellect, for, they would cease to have a level playing field of competing
with other similarly qualified candidates, and left to compete with candidates having higher
qualifications despite the zone of consideration having been specially carved out for holders of
current Lascar’s licence. It is not that the holders of Syrang’s licence are left in the lurch. Those
having Syrang’s licence could well compete for appointment on the post of Syrang in the 50% direct
recruitment quota along with others having current Syrang’s licence. If, in case, all the vacant posts
of Lascar are filled up by persons having Syrang’s licence and such holders of Syrang’s licence do not
participate in the process for direct recruitment to the post of Syrang, it is fairly likely that the
persons holding Lascar’s licence would never secure any public employment. That could not have
been the intention of a welfare State.

28. Also, it cannot be gainsaid that not only the qualifications but the nature of duties required to be
performed and the nature of service to be rendered by a Lascar and a Syrang are different. Merely
because the post of Lascar is a feeder post for promotion to the post of Syrang does not per se make
the holder of a Syrang’s licence qualified for the job of a Lascar. Thus, nothing much turns on it.

29. Law is well-settled that an appointment made contrary to the statute/statutory rule would be
void [see: Pramod Kumar v. U.P. Secondary Education Services Commission19].

30. Based on such consideration, we are ad idem with the Division Bench of the High Court that
KPSC could not have included candidates with licences other than a Lascar's licence in the “Ranked

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/129522070/

9

List” and proceed to recommend those candidates for appointment.

Jomon K.K vs Shajimon P on 2 April, 2025

31. On merits, therefore, no legally protected right of the appellant having been affected by the
impugned action, he has no valid claim.

32. We have considered the decisions of this Court in Parvaiz Ahmed Parry (supra) and Chandra
Shekhar Singh (supra).

33. In Parvaiz Ahmed Parry (supra) the appellant therein possessed degrees in BSc with Forestry as
one of his major subjects as well as MSc (Forestry). The qualification prescribed in the
Advertisement was “BSc (Forestry) or equivalent from any university recognised by ICAR”. This
Court held that the appellant’s qualifications were equivalent to the minimum prescribed
qualifications and should be considered for the concerned post.

34. Chandra Shekhar Singh (supra) was on the question of whether ‘degree’ as mentioned in the
advertisement therein included a post- graduate degree, which the appellants therein possessed.
This Court (2008) 7 SCC 153 applying the golden rule of interpretation held that the word ‘degree’
would include within its scope and ambit all three degrees – bachelor's degree, master’s degree and
a doctorate degree – unless a specific expulsion has been made.

35. The said decisions are, thus, distinguishable on facts.

36. We hasten to add that whether or not the action of the employer to exclude an aspirant from the
process of selection (on the ground that either he is over qualified for a particular post or has
qualifications which, being over and above what is ordained by statutory rules or rules framed under
the proviso to Rule 309 of the Constitution, does not match the qualification specifically required) is
justified has to be decided considering the rules governing the selection, the qualifications
prescribed, the nature of duty to be performed, the nature of service to be rendered and a host of
other factors. It has to be remembered that, at times, the employer’s need to have the right people at
the right place, and not always the higher qualified, has to be conceded. We know of decisions
holding that over-qualification cannot be a disqualification since such an approach amounts to
discouraging the acquisition of qualifications on the one hand and on the other, such an approach
could be seen as arbitrary, discriminatory and not in national interest. However, this principle
cannot be put in a straitjacket imposing rigid or inflexible rules or norms. Lack of public
employment opportunities in sufficient numbers may force even a Master degree holder to apply for
the job of a peon but, if he is appointed upon his application being favourably considered, what
happens to the aspirants who have not had the means of pursuing study beyond the 12th standard?
Do they remain unemployed for ever, if all or majority of the posts of peon are filled up by such
degree holders? What happens if the Master degree holder, in pursuit of greener pastures, leaves the
post of Peon for a better and secured higher job commensurate with his qualifications after a couple
of years? Does it not, in such a case, burden the public exchequer by requiring the employer to
initiate a fresh selection process? Is not the State, as a model employer, obliged to ensure that the
posts of peon are filled up only by those having the basic qualification, and not by over qualified
candidates, for sub-serving the common good? Does not the State have the obligation to strive to

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/129522070/

10

Jomon K.K vs Shajimon P on 2 April, 2025

ensure that all citizens have adequate means of livelihood? These are questions which no Court can
afford to ignore. We end by saying that each case that comes before the Court has to be decided on
its own peculiar facts and the problem that it presents for resolution and that there can be no
universally accepted rule that every time, a higher qualified candidate is to be preferred to a
candidate who matches the essential qualification required for the post.

37. It is now time to consider Mr. Ravindran’s final submission that this is an eminent case for
exercising powers under Article 142 of the Constitution.

38. This Court in Ashok Kumar Sonkar v. Union of India20 held that if an appointment is illegal, it
is non-est in the eye of law and rendering the appointment a nullity and principles of equity in a case
of such nature would have no role to play; also that, sympathy should not be misplaced.

39. Exercise of power under Article 142 of the Constitution would have been warranted in the
present case if palpable injustice were demonstrated. Unfortunately for the appellant, despite the
assiduous endeavour of Mr. Ravindran, we have consciously decided to confine our role to being the
dispute-settlors.

40. We are of the considered opinion that the appellant having gained entry through a process
which was not legal and valid, this is not a fit and proper case where this Court ought, in exercise of
its power under Article 142 of the Constitution, to ignore the illegality and invalidity to come to his
rescue.

CONCLUSION

41. The appeals, accordingly, fail and are dismissed. No costs.

42. Pending application, if any, stands disposed of.

………..…………………J. (DIPANKAR DATTA) ……………………………J. (MANMOHAN) NEW DELHI;

APRIL 02, 2025.

(2007) 4 SCC 54

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/129522070/

11

