Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. vs Sandeep Choudhary on 28 April, 2022

Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. vs Sandeep Choudhary on 28 April,
2022

Author: M.R. Shah

Bench: B.V. Nagarathna, M.R. Shah

REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8717 OF 2015

Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited & Anr.                       …Appellants

Versus

Sandeep Choudhary & Ors.                                 …Respondents

J UD G M E N T

M.R. SHAH, J.

1. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment and order dated 04.08.2014
passed by the High Court of Rajasthan at Jodhpur in DBCWP No. 14714/2013, by which the High
Court has dismissed the said writ petition preferred by the appellants herein – Bharat Sanchar
Nigam Limited (hereinafter referred to as “BSNL”) and has confirmed the judgment and order
passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Jodhpur Bench, Jodhpur (hereinafter referred to
15:34:32 IST Reason:

as the “Tribunal”) in O.A. No. 159 of 2009 by which the learned Tribunal allowed the
said application preferred by the respondent No.1 herein – original applicant and
directed the appellant herein – BSNL to consider his candidature if sufficient
vacancies exist for placement of the candidates of Other Backward Class and his
candidature shall be considered against the present or future vacancies on the OBC
category after determining the vacancies as per rules, the appellant – BSNL has

1

Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. vs Sandeep Choudhary on 28 April, 2022

preferred the present appeal.

2. The facts leading to the present appeal in nutshell are as under:-

2.1 That the private respondent No.1 herein – original applicant applied for the post
of Telecom Technical Assistants (TTAs) in pursuance to the notification dated
06.10.2008 issued by BSNL for filling up of TTA posts. The appointment was to be
made by way of direct recruitment by open competitive examination in the Rajasthan
Telecom Circle. The said advertisement further provided that the unit of recruitment
shall be the respective Secondary Switching Area (SSA). The dispute in the present
case is relating to the Ajmer SSA. In the Ajmer SSA, the vacancies were as follows:-

Sr.     Name No. of     No.     OBC      SC      ST      PH      Ex-
No.     of SS Posts     UR                                       servic
rect.           posts                                    e
Units
1       Ajmer 12        5       4        2       1       0       1

The recruitment was to be made by conducting a competitive examination of eligible
candidates in an objective type paper of 200 marks. Clause 13 of the advertisement
provided that:-

(i) The minimum Qualifying marks in the paper would be 40% for the candidates of
unreserved category candidate, and

(ii) 33% for candidates of reserved category.

It so happened that in the exam which was conducted no person from general category candidate
got more than 40% marks. However, four candidates from OBC category obtained more than 33%
marks. The marks obtained by four OBC category candidates are as under:-

OBC selected candidates Name Marks (out Percentage of 200)

1. Alok Kumar Yadav 79.75 39.87

2. Dinesh Kumar 77 38.5

3. Alka Saini 72.5 36.25

4. Ved Prakash 68.5 34.25 The original applicant – respondent No.1 herein, who got
68.25 marks was placed at Waiting List No.1 in the OBC category.

2

Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. vs Sandeep Choudhary on 28 April, 2022

2.2 On 01.06.2009, BSNL issued a circular/letter to all heads of telecom circles, inter
alia, stating that there has been poor pass percentage of candidates in the TTA
examination and number of vacancies had remained unfilled. There was acute
shortage of manpower and hence it was decided to relax the qualifying marks by 10%
for all candidates. Accordingly, the qualifying marks were refixed at 30% for general
category and 23% for reserved category. Clauses (iii) &

(v) of the said letter provides as follows:-

(iii) Successful candidates, qualifying through normal standards in aggregate will
rank enblock senior to those qualifying through relaxed standard in the merit list.
However, the provisions of the Recruitment Rules will determine their inter-se
seniority in the cadre.

(v) The Circles who have already announced the result but have not got adequate
number of successful candidates, may further extend the merit/waiting list as per
above instructions.

2.3 After relaxation of minimum marks with 30% of general category candidates, the following five
candidates in general category became eligible for appointment:-

OC selected candidates Name Marks

1. Neelima Sharma 79.75

3. Ankit Goyal 76.75

4. Tapin Sharma 76.50

5. Tarun Jain 75.25 2.4 However, it so happened that one Alok Kumar Yadav and Alka Saini, who
were found to be more meritorious than the general category candidates subsequently were found
eligible to be appointed against the reserved category – OBC. Therefore, the respondent No.1 herein
– original applicant, who was wait listed No.1 in OBC category, approached the Tribunal by way of
application being O.A. No. 159 of 2009 for a direction to prepare a fresh list for all candidates based
on relaxed standard and act on the said combined merit list. It was, inter alia, pleaded that there
cannot be two cut-off marks for a single selection. It was submitted that there was an unreasonable
classification by providing another set of cut-off marks and the action was discriminatory and
violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.

2.5 It was the case on behalf of the original applicant that those two candidates belonging to OBC
category, who were having more merit were required to be adjusted against the general category
seats and consequently the seats reserved for OBC category were required to be filled in from
remaining reserved category candidates on merit. 2.6 The Tribunal, after noticing the judgment of
the Rajasthan High Court dated 09.02.2011 in S.B. Civil Writ Petition No.4948 of 2009, disposed of

3

Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. vs Sandeep Choudhary on 28 April, 2022

the O.A. and directed BSNL to consider the candidature of the original applicant – respondent No.1
herein, if sufficient vacancies exist for placement of the candidates of OBC and further his
candidature shall be considered against the present and future vacancies on OBC category.

2.7 Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the judgment and order passed by the Tribunal, BSNL
preferred the writ petition before the High Court and by the impugned judgment and order and by
relying upon the decisions of this Court in the case of Indra Sawhney Vs. Union of India, 1992 Supp
(3) SCC 217; R.K. Sabharwal Vs. State of Punjab, (2007) 8 SCC 785; and Rajesh Kumar Daria Vs.
Rajasthan Public Service Commission, (2007) 8 SCC 785 has dismissed the said writ petition by
observing that the BSNL should have given appointment to Mr. Alok Kumar Yadav and Mr. Dinesh
Kumar (candidates belonging to OBC category) against the vacancies which were not reserved
vertically in the event of shuffling the said two persons to general category (admittedly both the
aforesaid candidates have secured and/or have more merit than the general category candidates,
who were appointed). The High Court has further observed that consequently the original applicant
could have been selected against the vacancies reserved for the OBC. By observing so, the High
Court has dismissed the writ petition. Hence, BSNL has preferred the present appeal.

3. We have heard Dr. Rajeev Dhavan alongwith Shri Gaurav Agrawal, learned Amicus Curiae, Shri
Pradeep Kumar Mathur, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the BSNL and Shri Puneet Jain,
learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondent No.1.

4. Learned counsel appearing on behalf of BSNL has heavily relied upon the decision of this Court in
the case of Union of India Vs. Ramesh Ram, (2010) 7 SCC 234 and submitted that as observed and
held by this Court, in a case, where reserved category candidates are selected on merit and placed in
the list of general category candidates, they can be adjusted against reserved category vacancies in
order to get a service of higher choice at the time of service allocation. Learned counsel appearing on
behalf of BSNL has heavily relied upon paragraph 42 of the aforesaid decision.

4.1 Relying upon the above decision, it is vehemently submitted by the learned counsel appearing on
behalf of the BSNL that the aforesaid two candidates namely Mr. Alok Kumar Yadav and Mr. Dinesh
Kumar were rightly considered in the reserved category pool. 4.2 It is submitted that if the view
taken by the High Court is accepted, in that case, the two OBC candidates, who secured more marks
than the relaxed cut-off marks of general category candidates are adjusted in general category and
thereby vacancies so created in the OBC category would have to be filled in by respondent No.1
herein – original applicant which would result in shuffling of the candidates and would unsettle the
entire selection process. It is further submitted by learned counsel appearing on behalf of BSNL that
the High Court has failed to take note of the fact that vacancies in the general category were only five
and they were already filled in and therefore, insertion of two OBC candidates into the general
category select list would expel two already selected candidates of general category who had secured
undisputedly more marks than the original claimant thereby unsettling the entire selection process.

4.3 Making above submissions and relying upon the above decisions, it is prayed to allow the
present appeal.

4

Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. vs Sandeep Choudhary on 28 April, 2022

5. Dr. Rajeev Dhavan, learned Senior counsel, assisted by Shri Gaurav Agrawal, learned Amicus
Curiae and Shri Puneet Jain, learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondent No.1 have
vehemently submitted that as such the controversy in the matter is squarely covered by the decision
of this Court in the case of Indra Sawhney (supra). It is submitted that the reserved category
candidates having obtained more marks than the last candidate in general category candidates will
have to be adjusted against the general category quota and they were required to be considered in
the general category pool, thereby the remaining candidates belonging to the reserved category were
required to be appointed against the quota meant for reserved category. It is submitted that in the
present case, those two candidates, namely, Mr. Alok Kumar Yadav and Mr. Dinesh Kumar, secured
more marks than the last of the general category candidates selected and appointed and therefore
those two candidates were required to be adjusted and/or considered against the general category
pool. The BSNL considered the appointment of the aforesaid two candidates in the reserved
category and thereby caused a loss to the reserved category candidates, who could have been
appointed if the aforesaid two candidates belonging to the reserved category would have been
adjusted and/or appointed in the general pool. It is submitted therefore that the High Court has
rightly directed to consider the candidature of respondent No.1 herein – original applicant, being a
wait listed candidate in the reserved category.

6. Heard the learned counsel for the respective parties at length.

7. The short question which is posed for the consideration of this Court is:-

“Whether in a case where the reserved category candidates secured more marks than
the general category candidates, such reserved category candidates will have to be
first adjusted in the general category pool and they shall be considered for
appointment in the general category pool or against the vacancies meant for reserved
category candidates?

8. While considering the aforesaid issue, few decisions of this Court on the above point are required
to be referred to. 8.1 In the case of Indra Sawhney (supra) in paragraph 812, it is observed and held
as under:-

“812. We are also of the opinion that this rule of 50% applies only to reservations in
favour of backward classes made under Article 16(4). A little clarification is in order
at this juncture : all reservations are not of the same nature. There are two types of
reservations, which may, for the sake of convenience, be referred to as “vertical
reservations” and “horizontal reservations”. The reservations in favour of Scheduled
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes [under Article 16(4)] may be
called vertical reservations whereas reservations in favour of physically handicapped
[under clause (1) of Article 16] can be referred to as horizontal reservations.
Horizontal reservations cut across the vertical reservations — what is called
interlocking reservations. To be more precise, suppose 3% of the vacancies are
reserved in favour of physically handicapped persons; this would be a reservation
relatable to clause (1) of Article

5

Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. vs Sandeep Choudhary on 28 April, 2022

16. The persons selected against this quota will be placed in the appropriate category;
if he belongs to SC category he will be placed in that quota by making necessary
adjustments; similarly, if he belongs to open competition (OC) category, he will be
placed in that category by making necessary adjustments. Even after providing for
these horizontal reservations, the percentage of reservations in favour of backward
class of citizens remains — and should remain — the same. This is how these
reservations are worked out in several States and there is no reason not to continue
that procedure.” 8.2 In Rajesh Kumar Daria (supra), in paragraphs 8 to 11, it is
observed and held as under:-

“8. We may also refer to two related aspects before considering the facts of this case.
The first is about the description of horizontal reservation. For example, if there are
200 vacancies and 15% is the vertical reservation for SC and 30% is the horizontal
reservation for women, the proper description of the number of posts reserved for
SC, should be:“For SC : 30 posts, of which 9 posts are for women.” We find that many
a time this is wrongly described thus:“For SC : 21 posts for men and 9 posts for
women, in all 30 posts.” Obviously, there is, and there can be, no reservation category
of “male” or “men”.

9. The second relates to the difference between the nature of vertical reservation and horizontal
reservation. Social reservations in favour of SC, ST and OBC under Article 16(4) are “vertical
reservations”. Special reservations in favour of physically handicapped, women, etc. under Articles
16(1) or 15(3) are “horizontal reservations”. Where a vertical reservation is made in favour of a
Backward Class under Article 16(4), the candidates belonging to such Backward Class, may compete
for non-reserved posts and if they are appointed to the non-reserved posts on their own merit, their
number will not be counted against the quota reserved for respective Backward Class. Therefore, if
the number of SC candidates, who by their own merit, get selected to open competition vacancies,
equals or even exceeds the percentage of posts reserved for SC candidates, it cannot be said that the
reservation quota for SCs has been filled. The entire reservation quota will be intact and available in
addition to those selected under open competition category. (Vide Indra Sawhney [Indra Sawhney v.
Union of India, 1992 Supp (3) SCC 217], R.K. Sabharwal v. State of Punjab [(1995) 2 SCC 745],
Union of India v. Virpal Singh Chauhan [ (1995) 6 SCC 684] and Ritesh R. Sah v. Y.L. Yamul [(1996)
3 SCC 253]. But the aforesaid principle applicable to vertical (social) reservations will not apply to
horizontal (special) reservations. Where a special reservation for women is provided within the
social reservation for Scheduled Castes, the proper procedure is first to fill up the quota for
Scheduled Castes in order of merit and then find out the number of candidates among them who
belong to the special reservation group of “Scheduled Caste women”. If the number of women in
such list is equal to or more than the number of special reservation quota, then there is no need for
further selection towards the special reservation quota. Only if there is any shortfall, the requisite
number of Scheduled Caste women shall have to be taken by deleting the corresponding number of
candidates from the bottom of the list relating to Scheduled Castes. To this extent, horizontal
(special) reservation differs from vertical (social) reservation. Thus women selected on merit within
the vertical reservation quota will be counted against the horizontal reservation for women. Let us
illustrate by an example:

6

Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. vs Sandeep Choudhary on 28 April, 2022

If 19 posts are reserved for SCs (of which the quota for women is four), 19 SC
candidates shall have to be first listed in accordance with merit, from out of the
successful eligible candidates. If such list of 19 candidates contains four SC woman
candidates, then there is no need to disturb the list by including any further SC
woman candidate. On the other hand, if the list of 19 SC candidates contains only two
woman candidates, then the next two SC woman candidates in accordance with
merit, will have to be included in the list and corresponding number of candidates
from the bottom of such list shall have to be deleted, so as to ensure that the final 19
selected SC candidates contain four woman SC candidates. (But if the list of 19 SC
candidates contains more than four woman candidates, selected on own merit, all of
them will continue in the list and there is no question of deleting the excess woman
candidates on the ground that “SC women” have been selected in excess of the
prescribed internal quota of four.)

10. In this case, the number of candidates to be selected under general category (open competition),
were 59, out of which 11 were earmarked for women. When the first 59 from among the 261
successful candidates were taken and listed as per merit, it contained 11 woman candidates, which
was equal to the quota for “general category women”. There was thus no need for any further
selection of woman candidates under the special reservation for women. But what RPSC did was to
take only the first 48 candidates in the order of merit (which contained 11 women) and thereafter,
fill the next 11 posts under the general category with woman candidates. As a result, we find that
among 59 general category candidates in all 22 women have been selected consisting of eleven
woman candidates selected on their own merit (candidates at Sl. Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 9, 19, 21, 25, 31, 35
and 41 of the selection list) and another eleven (candidates at Sl. Nos. 54, 61, 62, 63, 66, 74, 75, 77,
78, 79 and 80 of the selection list) included under reservation quota for “general category women”.
This is clearly impermissible. The process of selections made by RPSC amounts to treating the 20%
reservation for women as a vertical reservation, instead of being a horizontal reservation within the
vertical reservation.

11. Similarly, we find that in regard to 24 posts for OBC, 19 candidates were selected by RPSC in
accordance with merit from among OBC candidates which included three woman candidates.
Thereafter, another five women were selected under the category of “OBC women”, instead of
adding only two which was the shortfall. Thus there were in all 8 women candidates among the 24
OBC candidates found in the selection list. The proper course was to list 24 OBC candidates as per
the merit and then find out number of woman candidates among them, and only fill the shortfall to
make up the quota of five for women.” (emphasis supplied)” 8.3 In the case of Uttaranchal Public
Service Commission Vs. Mamta Bisht, (2010) 12 SCC 204, the High Court took the view that the
reserved category candidate, on her own merit was entitled to be considered in the general category
and she could not have been counted against the reserved category. While upholding the judgment
of the High Court, this Court observed and held in paragraphs 3, 4, 13 and 15 as under:-

“3. Out of 42 posts, 26 were filled up by general category and 16 by reserved category
candidates. Some women candidates stood selected in the general category while
others had been given the benefit of horizontal reservation being residents of

7

Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. vs Sandeep Choudhary on 28 April, 2022

Uttaranchal. Respondent 1, being aggrieved preferred Writ Petition No. 780 of 2003
(M/B) in the High Court of Uttaranchal seeking quashment of select list dated
31-7-2003 mainly on the ground that women candidates belonging to Uttaranchal
had secured marks making them eligible to be selected in the general category and
had it been done so, Respondent 1 could have been selected in the reserved category
being a woman of Uttaranchal. It had also been pleaded in the petition that some of
the women candidates who not only claimed the benefit of horizontal reservation but
have been selected giving the said benefit, did not submit their respective certificate
of domicile at the time of filling up the application forms but they produced the said
certificate at a later stage and it was accepted.

4. The High Court accepted the first submission of Respondent 1 after examining the
record of selection and came to the conclusion that the last selected woman candidate
who was given the benefit of horizontal reservation for Uttaranchal women had
secured marks higher than the last selected candidate in the general category. Thus,
the said candidate ought to have been appointed against the general category vacancy
and Respondent 1 ought to have been offered the appointment giving her the benefit
of horizontal reservation for Uttaranchal women. Hence, these appeals.

***

13. In fact, the High Court allowed the writ petition only on the ground that the
horizontal reservation is also to be applied as vertical reservation in favour of
reserved category candidates (social) as it held as under:

‘In view of the above, Neetu Joshi (Sl. No. 9, Roll No. 12320) has wrongly been
counted by Respondent 3/Commission against five seats reserved for Uttaranchal
Women General Category as she has competed on her own merit as general candidate
and as the fifth candidate the petitioner should have been counted for Uttaranchal
Women General Category seats.’ Admittedly, the said Neetu Joshi has not been
impleaded as a respondent. It has been stated at the Bar that an application for
impleadment had been filed but there is nothing on record to show that the said
application had ever been allowed. Attempt had been made to implead some
successful candidates before this Court but those applications stood rejected by this
Court.

14. The view taken by the High Court on application of horizontal reservation is
contrary to the law laid down by this Court in Rajesh Kumar Daria v. Rajasthan
Public Service Commission [(2007) 8 SCC 785], wherein dealing with a similar issue
this Court held as under : (SCC pp.

790-91, para 9) ‘9. The second relates to the difference between the nature of vertical reservation
and horizontal reservation. Social reservations in favour of SCs, STs and OBCs under Article 16(4)
are “vertical reservations”. Special reservations in favour of physically handicapped, women, etc.

8

Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. vs Sandeep Choudhary on 28 April, 2022

under Articles 16(1) or 15(3) are “horizontal reservations”. Where a vertical reservation is made in
favour of a Backward Class under Article 16(4), the candidates belonging to such Backward Class,
may compete for non-reserved posts and if they are appointed to the non-

reserved posts on their own merit, their number will not be counted against the quota reserved for
respective Backward Class. Therefore, if the number of SC candidates, who by their own merit, get
selected to open competition vacancies, equals or even exceeds the percentage of posts reserved for
SC candidates, it cannot be said that the reservation quota for SCs has been filled. The entire
reservation quota will be intact and available in addition to those selected under open competition
category.

(Vide Indra Sawhney v. Union of India, 1992 Supp (3) SCC 217], R.K. Sabharwal v. State of Punjab
[(1995) 2 SCC 745], Union of India v. Virpal Singh Chauhan [(1995) 6 SCC 684] and Ritesh R. Sah v.
Y.L. Yamul [(1996) 3 SCC 253].) But the aforesaid principle applicable to vertical (social)
reservations will not apply to horizontal (special) reservations. Where a special reservation for
women is provided within the social reservation for Scheduled Castes, the proper procedure is first
to fill up the quota for Scheduled Castes in order of merit and then find out the number of
candidates among them who belong to the special reservation group of “Scheduled Caste women”. If
the number of women in such list is equal to or more than the number of special reservation quota,
then there is no need for further selection towards the special reservation quota. Only if there is any
shortfall, the requisite number of Scheduled Caste women shall have to be taken by deleting the
corresponding number of candidates from the bottom of the list relating to Scheduled Castes. To
this extent, horizontal (special) reservation differs from vertical (social) reservation. Thus women
selected on merit within the vertical reservation quota will be counted against the horizontal
reservation for women.’

15. In view of the above, it is evident that the judgment and order of the High Court is not in
consonance with the law laid down by this Court in Rajesh Kumar Daria [(2007) 8 SCC 785]. The
judgment and order impugned herein is liable to be set aside and all the consequential orders
become unenforceable and inconsequential. Thus, the appeals succeed and are allowed. The
judgment and order of the High Court dated 26-10-2005 passed in Mamta Bisht v. State [WPMB
No. 780 of 2003, order dated 26-10- 2005 (Utt)] is hereby set aside. No costs.” (emphasis in
original) 8.4 In Ritesh R. Sah v. Y.L. Yamul, (1996) 3 SCC 253 after noticing the Larger Bench
decision of this Court in the case of Indra Sawhney (supra) and R.K. Sabharwal (supra), it is
observed in paragraph 13 to 16 as under:

“13. There cannot be any dispute with the proposition that if a candidate is entitled to
be admitted on the basis of his own merit then such admission should not be counted
against the quota reserved for Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe or any other
reserved category since that will be against the constitutional mandate enshrined in
Article 16(4).

14. In Indra Sawhney v. Union of India [1992 Supp (3) SCC 217] commonly known as
Mandal case, this Court held thus : (SCC p. 735, para 811) ‘811. In this connection it is

9

Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. vs Sandeep Choudhary on 28 April, 2022

well to remember that the reservations under Article 16(4) do not operate like a
communal reservation. It may well happen that some members belonging to, say,
Scheduled Castes get selected in the open competition field on the basis of their own
merit; they will not be counted against the quota reserved for Scheduled Castes; they
will be treated as open competition candidates.’

15. In R.K. Sabharwal v. State of Punjab [(1995) 2 SCC 745] the Constitution Bench of
this Court considered the question of appointment and promotion and roster points
vis-à-vis reservation and held thus : (SCC p. 750, para 4) ‘4. When a percentage of
reservation is fixed in respect of a particular cadre and the roster indicates the
reserve points, it has to be taken that the posts shown at the reserve points are to be
filled from amongst the members of reserved categories and the candidates belonging
to the general category are not entitled to be considered for the reserved posts. On
the other hand the reserved category candidates can compete for the non-reserved
posts and in the event of their appointment to the said posts their number cannot be
added and taken into consideration for working out the percentage of reservation.
Article 16(4) of the Constitution of India permits the State Government to make any
provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any Backward
Class of citizens which, in the opinion of the State is not adequately represented in
the Services under the State. It is, therefore, incumbent on the State Government to
reach a conclusion that the Backward Class/Classes for which the reservation is made
is not adequately represented in the State Services. While doing so the State
Government may take the total population of a particular Backward Class and its
representation in the State Services. When the State Government after doing the
necessary exercise makes the reservation and provides the extent of percentage of
posts to be reserved for the said Backward Class then the percentage has to be
followed strictly. The prescribed percentage cannot be varied or changed simply
because some of the members of the Backward Class have already been
appointed/promoted against the general seats. As mentioned above the roster point
w h i c h   i s   r e s e r v e d   f o r   a   B a c k w a r d   C l a s s   h a s   t o   b e   f i l l e d   b y   w a y   o f
appointment/promotion of the member of the said class. No general category
candidate can be appointed against a slot in the roster which is reserved for the
Backward Class. The fact that considerable number of members of a Backward Class
have been appointed/promoted against general seats in the State Services may be a
relevant factor for the State Government to review the question of continuing
reservation for the said class but so long as the instructions/rules providing certain
percentage of reservations for the Backward Classes are operative the same have to
be followed. Despite any number of appointees/promotees belonging to the
Backward Classes against the general category posts the given percentage has to be
provided in addition.’

16. In Union of India v. Virpal Singh Chauhan [(1995) 6 SCC 684] (SCC at p. 705) it
has been held that while determining the number of posts reserved for Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes, the candidates belonging to reserved category but

10

Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. vs Sandeep Choudhary on 28 April, 2022

selected/promoted on the rule of merit (and not by virtue of rule of reservation) shall
not be counted as reserved category candidates.” 8.5 In a more recent decision this
Court in the case of Saurav Yadav Vs. State of U.P., (2021) 4 SCC 542 after referring
to all the earlier judgments on vertical reservation has observed and held that it is
well settled that candidates belonging to any of the vertical reservation categories are
entitled to be selected in “open or general” category and it is also further observed
that if such candidates belonging to reserved categories are entitled to be selected on
the basis of their own merit, their selection cannot be counted against the quota
reserved for the categories that they belong.

8.6 Similar view has been expressed by this Court in another recent decision of this
Court in the case of Sadhana Singh Dangi Vs. Pinki Asati, (2022) 1 SCALE 534. By the
said decision, it is reiterated that the reserved category candidates securing higher
marks than the last of the general category candidates are entitled to get seat/post in
unreserved categories. It is further observed and held that even while applying
horizontal reservation, merit must be given precedence and if the candidates, who
belong to SCs, STs and OBCs have secured higher marks or are more meritorious,
they must be considered against the seats meant for unreserved candidates. It is
further observed that the candidates belonging to reserved categories can as well
stake claim to seats in unreserved categories if their merit and position in the merit
list entitles them to do so.

9. Applying the law laid down by this Court in the aforesaid decisions to the facts of
the case on hand, it is noted that the aforesaid two candidates, namely, Mr. Alok
Kumar Yadav and Mr. Dinesh Kumar, belonging to OBC category, were required to
be adjusted against the general category as admittedly they were more meritorious
than the last of the general category candidates appointed and that their
appointments could not have been considered against the seats meant for reserved
category. Consequently, after considering their appointments in the general category,
the seats meant for reserved category were required to be filled in from and amongst
the other remaining reserved category candidates on merit such as respondent No.1
herein. If such a procedure would have been followed, the original applicant –
respondent No.1 would have got appointed on merit in the reserved category seats in
the vacancy caused due to the above procedure. Therefore, as such the High Court
has not committed any error in observing and holding that the aforesaid two
candidates, namely, Mr. Alok Kumar Yadav and Mr. Dinesh Kumar, will have to be
adjusted against the general category candidates and accordingly respondent No.1
being a reserved category candidate and being at Sr. No.1 in the waiting list of
reserved category was to be appointed.

However, at the same time, it cannot be disputed that by reshuffling and on insertion of two OBC
candidates into general category select list, two general category candidates already appointed shall
have to be expelled and/or shall have to be removed, who are working since long and it may unsettle
the entire selection process. Therefore, to strike a balance and to ensure that the two general

11

Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. vs Sandeep Choudhary on 28 April, 2022

category candidates, who are already appointed will not have to be removed and at the same time,
respondent No.1 – original applicant being a reserved category candidate also gets accommodated, if
he is so appointed, in exercise of the powers under Article 142 of the Constitution of India, we
propose to pass an order that on reshuffling and on respondent No.1 – original applicant being
appointed now against the reserved category seats and while the aforesaid two candidates, namely,
Mr. Alok Kumar Yadav and Mr. Dinesh Kumar, belonging to reserved category, to be treated in the
general category seats, two candidates already appointed and belonging to general category shall not
be removed. However, respondent No.1 shall get the seniority from the date the general category
candidates were appointed, who were having lesser merit than the aforesaid two reserved category
candidates, namely, Mr. Alok Kumar Yadav and Mr. Dinesh Kumar.

10. Now, so far as the decision of this Court in the case of Ramesh Ram (supra) relied upon by
learned counsel appearing on behalf of the BSNL is concerned, the aforesaid decision is not
applicable to the facts of the case on hand. The said decision is distinguishable on facts. In the said
case, this Court was considering Rule 16(2) of Civil Services Examination Rules relating to Civil
Services Examination held by the Union Public Service Commission. Rule 16(2) of the Rules reads
as under:-

“16(2) While making service allocation, the candidates belonging to the Scheduled
Castes, the Scheduled Tribes or Other Backward Classes recommended against
unreserved vacancies may be adjusted against reserved vacancies by the Government
if by this process they get a service of higher choice in the order of their preference.”
The said case was a case of Civil Services, where the selected candidates were having
different preferences and in a given case, it may happen that the general category
candidates, who are less meritorious and the reserved category candidates having
more marks than the general category candidates and consequently they are to be
adjusted against the reserved category and they can possibly secure posts in a service
of a higher preference. Therefore, option was given to such candidates belonging to
reserved category to consider their candidature against the reserved category only
despite having higher merit than General Category Candidates. However, in the
present case, there is no question of any such preference. On interpretation of Rule
16(2) in paragraph 42, it was observed and held as under:-

“42. Therefore, we are of the firm opinion that MRC candidates who avail the benefit
of Rule 16(2) and are eventually adjusted in the reserved category should be counted
as part of the reserved pool for the purpose of computing the aggregate reservation
quotas. The seats vacated by MRC candidates in the general pool will therefore be
offered to general category candidates. This is the only viable solution since allotting
these general category seats (vacated by MRC candidates) to relatively lower-ranked
reserved category candidates would result in aggregate reservations exceeding 50% of
the total number of available seats. Hence, we see no hurdle to the migration of MRC
candidates to the reserved category.” We fail to appreciate how the said decision is
applicable to facts of the case on hand and/or of any assistance to the BSNL faced
with the decisions of this Court in the case of Indra Sawhney (supra) and other

12

Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. vs Sandeep Choudhary on 28 April, 2022

decisions referred to hereinabove.

11. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the present appeal fails and the same
deserves to be dismissed and is accordingly dismissed. The High Court has rightly observed and
held that two reserved category candidates, namely, Mr. Alok Kumar Yadav and Mr. Dinesh Kumar
having more marks than the general category candidates appointed, were entitled to the
appointment in the general category and the seats reserved for OBC category were required to be
filled in from and amongst the remaining candidates belonging to the OBC category. Consequently,
respondent No.1 – original applicant was entitled to the appointment on such post. However, at the
same time in exercise of the powers under Article 142 of the Constitution of India, it is observed and
directed that on reshuffling, the two candidates belonging to general category shall not be removed
from service as they are working since long. However, at the same time, the respondent No.1 shall be
entitled to the seniority from the date, the general category candidates having lesser marks than the
aforesaid two reserved category candidates were appointed.

With this, the present appeal stands dismissed. However, in the facts and circumstances, there shall
be no order as to costs.

12. Before parting, we would like to deeply appreciate the services rendered by Dr. Rajeev Dhavan,
learned Senior Advocate and Shri Gaurav Agrawal, learned Advocate, who have assisted the Court as
Amicus Curiae and we are thankful to both of them for their valuable assistance.

…………………………………..J.
[M.R. SHAH]

NEW DELHI;                                …………………………………..J.
APRIL 28, 2022.                              [B.V. NAGARATHNA]

13