C.S. Ramaswamy vs V.K. Senthil on 30 September, 2022

C.S. Ramaswamy vs V.K. Senthil on 30 September, 2022

Author: M.R. Shah

Bench: Krishna Murari, M.R. Shah

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 500 OF 2022

C.S. Ramaswamy                                …Appellant(s)

Versus

V.K. Senthil & Ors.                           …Respondent(s)

WITH

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 504 OF 2022

C.S. Ramaswamy                                …Appellant(s)

Versus

Nanjammal & Ors.                              …Respondent(s)

WITH

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 505 OF 2022

C.S. Ramaswamy                                …Appellant(s)

Versus

Shanmugam & Ors.                              …Respondent(s)

WITH

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 506 OF 2022

C.S. Ramaswamy                                …Appellant(s)
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
SNEHA
Versus
Date: 2022.09.30
16:26:15 IST

1

Reason:

C.S. Ramaswamy vs V.K. Senthil on 30 September, 2022

Karupannan & Ors.                             …Respondent(s)
WITH

1
(cid:12)                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 502 OF 2022

C.S. Ramaswamy                                    …Appellant(s)

Versus

K. Palaniappan & Ors.                             …Respondent(s)

WITH

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 501 OF 2022

C.S. Ramaswamy                                    …Appellant(s)

Versus

N. Kalikrishnan & Ors.                            …Respondent(s)

AND

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 503 OF 2022

C.S. Ramaswamy                                    …Appellant(s)

Versus

Nanjammal & Ors.                                  …Respondent(s)

JUDGMENT

M.R. SHAH, J.

1. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned common judgment and order passed by the
High Court of Judicature at Madras in respective C.R.P. Nos. 1931, 1921, 1973, 1968, 1975, 1976 and
1922 of 2019 by which the High Court has dismissed the said civil revision petitions and has
confirmed the orders passed by the learned Trial Court rejecting the applications filed under Order
VII Rule 11 of Code of Civil Procedure (hereinafter referred to as “CPC”) to reject the respective
plaints filed by the appellant herein – original defendant, who has preferred the present appeals.

2. That the respondents herein – original plaintiffs have filed the respective suits before the learned
Trial Court for cancellation of the sale deed executed by the plaintiffs in favour of the appellant –
original defendant as null and void and also to declare that the plaintiffs are the absolute owners of

2

C.S. Ramaswamy vs V.K. Senthil on 30 September, 2022

the suit schedule property and consequently restrain the defendant from in any manner alienating
the suit schedule property. 2.1 Having been served with summons of the suit, the original defendant
– appellant herein filed applications before the learned Trial Court to reject the respective plaints in
exercise of powers under Order VII Rule 11(d) of the CPC mainly on the ground that the respective
suits were clearly barred by the law of limitation. The said applications were resisted by the plaintiffs
by submitting that the Sale Deeds dated 12.09.2005, 19.09.2005, 22.09.2005, 29.09.2005 and
30.09.2005 for which the relief to cancel the same has been prayed in the suit was obtained by
fraudulent misrepresentation and it was obtained by fraud. According to the plaintiffs, by fraudulent
misrepresentation of the character of the document, i.e., as if it is a Joint Development Project, the
defendant got the sale deeds and the plaintiffs without knowing the contents of the documents have
executed the said deeds. According to the plaintiffs, they came to know about the same only in April,
2015 and immediately thereafter they had filed the present suits. 2.2 The learned Trial Court
dismissed the applications under Order VII Rule 11 CPC by observing that the issue of limitation is a
mixed question of law and facts and therefore, the respective prayers are not required to be rejected
at this stage in exercise of powers under Order VII Rule 11(d) of the C.P.C.

2.3 Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the orders passed by the learned Trial Court rejecting the
applications under Order VII Rule 11(d) CPC and refusing to reject the plaints, the defendant filed
the revision petitions before the High court.

2.4 By the impugned judgment and order, the High Court has dismissed the said civil revision
petitions, which has given rise to the present appeals at the instance of the original defendant.

3. Shri Kapil Sibal, learned Senior Advocate has appeared on behalf of the appellant – original
defendant and Shri Sushil Kumar Jain, learned Senior Advocate has appeared on behalf of the
contesting respondents – original plaintiffs.

4. Shri Sibal, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the appellant – original defendant has
vehemently submitted that in the facts and circumstances of the case, both, the learned Trial Court
as well as the High Court have erred in not allowing the applications under Order VII Rule 11(d) CPC
and in not rejecting the respective plaints as the same were barred by limitation. It is vehemently
submitted that in the present case, the sale deeds, which are now sought to be cancelled were
executed in the year 2005 and the sale consideration was paid by demand drafts and the same were
credited into the bank accounts of the plaintiffs. It is submitted that the said sale deeds are
registered sale deeds. It is submitted that the suits have been filed in the year 2016, i.e., after a lapse
of more than 10 years and so the said suits are clearly barred by the law of limitation. The learned
Trial Court ought to have rejected the plaints in exercise of powers under Order VII Rule 11(d) CPC.

4.1 It is vehemently submitted by Shri Sibal, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the
appellant – original defendant that even on bare looking on the averments in the plaint and there
are vague averments with respect to the date of knowledge of the alleged fraud and the documents
and the respective suits have been filed after a period of 10 years from the date of execution, which is
a fit case to exercise the powers under Order VII Rule 11(d) CPC. It is vehemently submitted that
merely by making some vague averments with respect to fraud, the plaintiffs cannot be permitted to

3

C.S. Ramaswamy vs V.K. Senthil on 30 September, 2022

bring the suits within the period of limitation. It is submitted that there must be specific allegations
and averments in the suit, how the fraud has been committed. It is submitted that mere stating in
the plaint that the registered sale deeds were executed by playing the fraud is not sufficient to file
the suits after a period of 10 years.

4.2 Shri Sibal, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the appellant has vehemently
submitted that in the present case, with respect to the very sale deeds, earlier a suit was filed by the
minor to which some of the original plaintiffs were also parties and the said suits came to be
dismissed in the year 2014. It is submitted that immediately thereafter the present suits were filed in
the year 2015/2016. It is submitted that therefore, it cannot be said that the plaintiffs were not
having the knowledge of the nature of the respective sale deeds and/or the contents of the sale
deeds.

4.3 Making above submissions and relying upon the decision of this Court in the case of
Raghwendra Sharan Singh Vs. Ram Prasanna Singh (Dead) by Legal Representatives, (2020) 16
SCC 601, it is prayed to allow the present revision petitions and consequently allow the application
submitted by the appellant – original defendant and to reject the respective plaints in exercise of the
powers under Order VII Rule 11(d) of the CPC.

5. Present appeals are vehemently opposed by Shri Sushil Kumar Jain, learned Senior Advocate
appearing on behalf of the respondents - original plaintiffs.

5.1 It is submitted that there is specific cause of action pleaded in the respective plaints and there are
allegations of fraud and it is the case on behalf of the plaintiffs that the sale deeds/documents are
the result of fraud and sham and from the date of knowledge in the year 2015 thereafter
immediately the respective suits were filed, it cannot be said that the respective suits are barred by
limitation. 5.2 It is submitted that as rightly observed and held by the Trial Court as well as the High
Court that in the facts and circumstances of the case, the issue with respect to limitation is a mixed
question of law and facts and therefore, such an issue of limitation is required to be considered at
the time of trial, no error has been committed by the learned Trial Court and/or the High Court in
refusing to reject the plaints in exercise of powers under Order VII Rule 11(d) CPC.

5.3 It is submitted that as per the settled position of law, while considering and/or deciding the
application under Order VII Rule 11 CPC, only the averments and allegations in the plaint are
required to be considered. Reliance is placed on the decisions of this Court in the case of Sopan
Sukhdeo Sable & Ors. Vs. Assistant Charity Commissioner & Ors., (2004) 3 SCC 137; Srihari
Hanumandas Totala Vs. Hemant Vithal Kamat & Ors., (2021) 9 SCC 99; and Ram Prakash Gupta Vs.
Rajiv Kumar Gupta & Ors., (2007) 10 SCC 59. 5.4 It is submitted that as held by this Hon’ble Court
in the case of Church of Christ Charitable Trust and Educational Charitable Society Vs.
Ponniamman Educational Trust, (2012) 8 SCC 706, the cause of action is bundle of facts where all
the events are required to be pleaded. It is submitted that therefore on considering the necessary
averments in the plaint disclosing the cause of action and considering the averments and allegations
in the entire plaint, it cannot be said that the suits are barred by limitation.

4

C.S. Ramaswamy vs V.K. Senthil on 30 September, 2022

5.5 It is submitted that in the plaint, it is specifically averred that the plaintiffs came to know about
the contents of the sale deeds only in the year 2015 and having come to know in the year 2015 that
the Sale Deeds were got executed by the defendant by fraud and misrepresentation as the plaintiffs
had signed the said documents believing the same as Joint Development Agreement and therefore,
it cannot be said that the suits are clearly barred by the law of limitation. 5.6 It is submitted that the
question of limitation is a mixed question of fact and law. It is submitted that in the present matter,
the plaintiffs are required to prove during the trial that the facts so alleged in paras 11-19, if those
facts are established, then the plaintiffs are entitled to benefit of Section 17 of the Limitation Act.

5.7 It is submitted that considering Section 17 of the Limitation Act, the period of limitation shall
begin to run only from the date of discovery of such fraud. It is submitted that as per the averments
and allegations in the plaints, the plaintiffs came to know about the fraud in the year 2015 and
therefore, considering Section 17 of the Limitation Act, the suits cannot be said to be barred by
limitation. Reliance is placed on the decision of this Court in the case of Salim D. Agboatwala & Ors.
Vs. Shamalji Oddhavji Thakkar & Ors., 2021 SCC Online SC 735. 5.8 Shri Jain, learned Senior
Advocate appearing on behalf of the respondents - original plaintiffs vehemently submitted that in
the present case, defendant himself filed the writ petition in the name of the plaintiffs and even in
the names of the dead owners, which shows that the plaintiffs not only got the sale deeds executed in
the name of Joint Venture Agreement but even got the blank documents, which were taken and used
for filing the writ petitions.

5.9 Making above submissions and relying upon the above decisions, it is prayed to dismiss the
present appeals.

6. Heard the learned Senior Advocates appearing on behalf of the respective parties at length.

7. We have gone through in detail the averments and allegations in the plaints.

7.1 At the outset, it is required to be noted that by filing the respective suits, the original plaintiffs
have prayed to cancel the registered Sale Deeds, which were executed by the original plaintiffs. The
respective suits have been filed in the year 2015/2016, i.e., after a period of 10 years from the date of
execution of such registered sale deeds. Therefore, the defendant filed the applications and prayed
to reject the respective plaints in exercise of the powers under Order VII Rule 11(d) CPC on the
ground that the suits are clearly barred by the law of limitation. On the other hand, it is the case on
behalf of the plaintiffs that as the sale deeds/documents were got executed by fraud and
misrepresentation and the plaintiffs signed the said documents believing or treating it as Joint
Venture Agreement and the plaintiffs did not go through the contents of the said documents and as
in the year 2015, the plaintiffs came to know about such fraud and obtaining the documents/sale
deeds by misrepresentation, considering Section 17 of the Limitation Act, the said suits cannot be
said to be barred by limitation. It is the case on behalf of the plaintiffs that in any case, the question
of limitation being a mixed question of law and facts, and, therefore, in the facts and circumstances
of the case, the plaints may not be rejected in exercise of the powers under Order VII Rule 11(d)
CPC. It is the case on behalf of the plaintiffs that while considering the application under Order VII
Rule 11 CPC, the allegations and averments in the plaints are required to be considered.

5

C.S. Ramaswamy vs V.K. Senthil on 30 September, 2022

7.2 While considering the issue/question whether the plaints filed by the plaintiffs are required to be
rejected on the ground of limitation in exercise of powers under Order VII Rule 11(d) CPC, the cause
of action pleaded in the plaints is required to be referred to, which reads as under:-

“21. The cause of action for the suit arose on 19.09.2005 the date on which the
plaintiffs executed the sale deed in favour of the defendant registered as document
No. 3555/2005, on 20.09.1983 the date when Government of Tamil Nadu issued Sec.
4 (1) notice of Land Acquisition Act in respect of the plaintiff's lands, on 20.09.1983
the date when after Section 4(1) notification the Government of Tamil Nadu a
declaration under Section 6 was issued in G.O. No. 1426 by the Housing and Urban
Development Department, on subsequent dates when land acquisition proceedings
were initiated by the Government of Tamil Nadu filed a writ petition in W.P. No.
4079 of 1989 against the plaintiff and other land owners, on 07. 07 .1989 the date
when the stay order in WMP No. 5983 of 1989 was given, on 07.01.1994 the date
when stay order was vacated, on 01.04.1998 the date when the plaintiffs filed a writ
appeal questioning the said order in W.A. No. 258 of 1994, on 01.04.1998 the date
when High Court quashed the entire acquisition proceedings under the old land
acquisition act, on subsequent dates when the housing board has filed SLP (C) No.
13458 to 13462 of 1998 which was subsequently withdrawn with liberty to approach
the Honorable High Court of Madras by filing the review petition, on subsequent date
when the housing board filed a review petition before the High Court in Review No.
68 of 1999 seeking to review the order dated 01.04.1998 passed in WA No. 258 of
1994 and W.P. No. 4079 of 1989, on 04.10.2007 the date when the review petition
was allowed thereby setting aside the order dated 01.04.1998, on 05.01.2009 the date
when the M.P. 1 of 2008 was dismissed by the High Court Division Bench, on
09.07.2012 the date when the petitioners in writ petition preferred a SLP (C) No.
15932 and 15933 of 2020 before Supreme Court and an order of status quo was
granted and the same is pending on 23.06.2014 the date when the defendant
obtained a fraudulent decree by filing a writ petition before High Court Madras under
new land acquisition act, on 04.04.2015 the date when the plaintiff wrote letter to
advocate who alleged to have represented on behalf of the plaintiff, on 19.04.2015 the
date when the plaintiff received the reply admitting that plaintiffs and other land
owners, during the month of November when the plaintiffs came to know about the
fraudulent sale and on all other subsequent where the suit properties are satiated
within the jurisdiction of this Hon'ble Court at Coimbatore.“ 7.3 In paragraph 19, the
plaintiffs have made averments with respect to the date of knowledge. Paragraph 19
reads as under:-

““19. The plaintiffs humbly submit that the plaintiffs and other land owners have not
sold the properties to the defendant at all. They did not receive any consideration
from the defendant at all they did not hand over any possession also and the alleged
fraudulent sale came to the knowledge of the plaintiffs only when the plaintiffs visited
the suit properties. Hence, immediately the plaintiffs and other land owners took
steps to engage their own advocates and now the plaintiffs and other land owners are

6

C.S. Ramaswamy vs V.K. Senthil on 30 September, 2022

being represented by their own counsel at Chennai. Hence, the plaintiffs in order to
remove the could cover the title of the land have filed the suit to cancel the alleged
sale deeds executed by the plaintiffs in favour of the defendant through fraudulent
means.” 7.4 Thereafter, in paragraph 20, it is averred and alleged as under:-

“20. The plaintiffs humbly submit that the defendant has obtained the sale deed from
the plaintiffs by fraudulent means therefore the alleged sale deed executed by
plaintiffs in favour of the defendant as document No. 3555/2005 dated 19.09.2005
has to be cancelled.” 7.5 Therefore, even considering the averments and allegations in
the plaints only, it can be seen that even according to the plaintiffs, the cause of
action for the suit arose on 19.09.2005, the date on which the plaintiffs executed the
sale deed in favour of the defendant. In paragraph 21, while considering the cause of
action, it is further averred that the cause of action has arisen on:-

(i) 20.09.1983 – when Section 4 Notification was issued by the Government of Tamil
Nadu;

(ii) when the Writ Petition No. 4079 of 1989 was filed;

(iii) 07.07.1989 – the date when the said order in W.M.P. No. 5983 of 1989 was
given;

(iv) 07.01.1994 – the date when the said order was vacated;

(v) 01.04.1998 – the date when the plaintiffs filed a writ appeal;

(vi) 01.04.1998- when the High Court quashed the entire acquisition proceedings and
on subsequent dates when the Housing Board filed the special leave petitions before
this Court.

7.6 From the aforesaid, it can be seen that most of the cause of actions alleged are much prior to
/prior to the execution of the registered Sale Deeds.

7.7 Even the averments and allegations with respect to knowledge of the plaintiffs averred in
paragraph 19 can be said to be too vague. Nothing has been mentioned on which date and how the
plaintiffs had the knowledge that the document was obtained by fraud and/or misrepresentation. It
is averred that the alleged fraudulent sale came to the knowledge of the plaintiffs only when the
plaintiffs visited the suit property. Nothing has been mentioned when the plaintiffs visited the suit
property. It is not understandable how on visiting the suit property, the plaintiffs could have known
the contents of the sale deed and/or the knowledge about the alleged fraudulent sale.

7.8 Even the averments and allegations in the plaint with respect to fraud are not supported by any
further averments and allegations how the fraud has been committed/played. Mere stating in the
plaint that a fraud has been played is not enough and the allegations of fraud must be specifically

7

C.S. Ramaswamy vs V.K. Senthil on 30 September, 2022

averred in the plaint, otherwise merely by using the word “fraud”, the plaintiffs would try to get the
suits within the limitation, which otherwise may be barred by limitation. Therefore, even if the
submission on behalf of the respondents – original plaintiffs that only the averments and allegations
in the plaints are required to be considered at the time of deciding the application under Order VII
Rule 11 CPC is accepted, in that case also by such vague allegations with respect to the date of
knowledge, the plaintiffs cannot be permitted to challenge the documents after a period of 10 years.
By such a clever drafting and using the word “fraud”, the plaintiffs have tried to bring the suits
within the period of limitation invoking Section 17 of the limitation Act. The plaintiffs cannot be
permitted to bring the suits within the period of limitation by clever drafting, which otherwise is
barred by limitation. At this stage, a recent decision of this Court in the case of Raghwendra Sharan
Singh (supra) is required to be referred to. In the said decision, this Court had occasion to consider
all earlier decisions on exercise of powers under Order VII Rule 11 CPC, which are considered by this
Court in paragraphs 6.4 to 6.9 as under:-

“6.4. In T. Arivandandam [T. Arivandandam v. T.V. Satyapal, (1977) 4 SCC 467],
while considering the very same provision i.e. Order 7 Rule 11 CPC and the decree of
the trial court in considering such application, this Court in para 5 has observed and
held as under: (SCC p. 470) “5. We have not the slightest hesitation in condemning
the petitioner for the gross abuse of the process of the court repeatedly and
unrepentantly resorted to. From the statement of the facts found in the judgment of
the High Court, it is perfectly plain that the suit now pending before the First
Munsif's Court, Bangalore, is a flagrant misuse of the mercies of the law in receiving
plaints. The learned Munsif must remember that if on a meaningful — not formal —
reading of the plaint it is manifestly vexatious, and meritless, in the sense of not
disclosing a clear right to sue, he should exercise his power under Order 7 Rule 11
CPC taking care to see that the ground mentioned therein is fulfilled. And, if clever
drafting has created the illusion of a cause of action, nip it in the bud at the first
hearing by examining the party searchingly under Order 10 CPC. An activist Judge is
the answer to irresponsible law suits.” 6.5. In Church of Christ Charitable Trust &
Educational Charitable Society [Church of Christ Charitable Trust & Educational
Charitable Society v. Ponniamman Educational Trust, (2012) 8 SCC 706], this Court
in para 13 has observed and held as under: (SCC p. 715) “13. While scrutinising the
plaint averments, it is the bounden duty of the trial court to ascertain the materials
for cause of action. The cause of action is a bundle of facts which taken with the law
applicable to them gives the plaintiff the right to relief against the defendant. Every
fact which is necessary for the plaintiff to prove to enable him to get a decree should
be set out in clear terms. It is worthwhile to find out the meaning of the words “cause
of action”. A cause of action must include some act done by the defendant since in the
absence of such an act no cause of action can possibly accrue.” 6.6. In ABC Laminart
(P) Ltd. v. A.P. Agencies [(1989) 2 SCC 163], this Court explained the meaning of
“cause of action” as follows: (SCC p. 170, para 12) “12. A cause of action means every
fact, which if traversed, it would be necessary for the plaintiff to prove in order to
support his right to a judgment of the court. In other words, it is a bundle of facts
which taken with the law applicable to them gives the plaintiff a right to relief against

8

C.S. Ramaswamy vs V.K. Senthil on 30 September, 2022

the defendant. It must include some act done by the defendant since in the absence of
such an act no cause of action can possibly accrue. It is not limited to the actual
infringement of the right sued on but includes all the material facts on which it is
founded. It does not comprise evidence necessary to prove such facts, but every fact
necessary for the plaintiff to prove to enable him to obtain a decree. Everything which
if not proved would give the defendant a right to immediate judgment must be part of
the cause of action.

But it has no relation whatever to the defence which may be set up by the defendant nor does it
depend upon the character of the relief prayed for by the plaintiff.” 6.7. In Sopan Sukhdeo Sable
[Sopan Sukhdeo Sable v. Charity Commr., (2004) 3 SCC 137] in paras 11 and 12, this Court has
observed as under: (SCC p. 146) “11. In ITC Ltd. v. Debts Recovery Appellate Tribunal [ITC Ltd. v.
Debts Recovery Appellate Tribunal, (1998) 2 SCC 70] it was held that the basic question to be
decided while dealing with an application filed under Order 7 Rule 11 of the Code is whether a real
cause of action has been set out in the plaint or something purely illusory has been stated with a
view to get out of Order 7 Rule 11 of the Code.

12. The trial court must remember that if on a meaningful and not formal reading of the plaint it is
manifestly vexatious and meritless in the sense of not disclosing a clear right to sue, it should
exercise the power under Order 7 Rule 11 of the Code taking care to see that the ground mentioned
therein is fulfilled. If clever drafting has created the illusion of a cause of action, it has to be nipped
in the bud at the first hearing by examining the party searchingly under Order 10 of the Code. (See
T. Arivandandam v. T.V. Satyapal [(1977) 4 SCC 467].)” 6.8. In Madanuri Sri Rama Chandra Murthy
[Madanuri Sri Rama Chandra Murthy v. Syed Jalal, (2017) 13 SCC 174], this Court has observed and
held as under: (SCC pp. 178- 79, para 7) “7. The plaint can be rejected under Order 7 Rule 11 if
conditions enumerated in the said provision are fulfilled. It is needless to observe that the power
under Order 7 Rule 11 CPC can be exercised by the court at any stage of the suit. The relevant facts
which need to be looked into for deciding the application are the averments of the plaint only. If on
an entire and meaningful reading of the plaint, it is found that the suit is manifestly vexatious and
meritless in the sense of not disclosing any right to sue, the court should exercise power under Order
7 Rule 11 CPC. Since the power conferred on the court to terminate civil action at the threshold is
drastic, the conditions enumerated under Order 7 Rule 11 CPC to the exercise of power of rejection
of plaint have to be strictly adhered to. The averments of the plaint have to be read as a whole to find
out whether the averments disclose a cause of action or whether the suit is barred by any law. It is
needless to observe that the question as to whether the suit is barred by any law, would always
depend upon the facts and circumstances of each case. The averments in the written statement as
well as the contentions of the defendant are wholly immaterial while considering the prayer of the
defendant for rejection of the plaint. Even when the allegations made in the plaint are taken to be
correct as a whole on their face value, if they show that the suit is barred by any law, or do not
disclose cause of action, the application for rejection of plaint can be entertained and the power
under Order 7 Rule 11 CPC can be exercised. If clever drafting of the plaint has created the illusion of
a cause of action, the court will nip it in the bud at the earliest so that bogus litigation will end at the
earlier stage.” 6.9. In Ram Singh [Ram Singh v. Gram Panchayat Mehal Kalan, (1986) 4 SCC 364],
this Court has observed and held that when the suit is barred by any law, the plaintiff cannot be

9

C.S. Ramaswamy vs V.K. Senthil on 30 September, 2022

allowed to circumvent that provision by means of clever drafting so as to avoid mention of those
circumstances, by which the suit is barred by law of limitation.” 7.9 Applying the law laid down by
this Court in the aforesaid decisions on exercise of powers under Order VII Rule 11 CPC to the facts
of the case on hand and the averments in the plaints, we are of the opinion that both the Courts
below have materially erred in not rejecting the plaints in exercise of powers under Order VII Rule
11(d) CPC. The respective suits have been filed after a period of 10 years from the date of execution
of the registered sale deeds. It is to be noted that one suit was filed by the minor, which was filed in
the year 2006, in which some of the plaintiffs herein were also party to the said suit and in the said
suit, there was a specific reference to the Sale Deed dated 19.09.2005 and the said suit came to be
dismissed in the year 2014 and immediately thereafter the present suits have been filed. Thus, from
the averments in the plaint and the bundle of facts stated in the plaint, we are of the opinion that by
clever drafting, the plaintiffs have tried to bring the suits within the period of limitation, which
otherwise are barred by limitation. Therefore, considering the decisions of this Court in the case of
T. Arivandandam (supra) and other decision of Raghwendra Sharan Singh (supra), and as the
respective suits are barred by the law of limitation, the respective plaints are required to be rejected
in exercise of powers under Order VII Rule 11 CPC.

8. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, all these appeals succeed. The impugned
common judgment and order passed by the High Court rejecting the revision applications and the
orders passed by the learned Trial Court rejecting the respective applications under Order VII Rule
11 CPC and refusing to reject the plaints in exercise of powers under Order VII Rule 11 CPC are
hereby quashed and set aside. The respective applications filed by the appellant herein – original
defendant to reject the respective plaints on the ground that the same are barred by the law of
limitation are hereby allowed. The respective plaints are hereby rejected on the ground that the
same are barred by limitation.

Present appeals are accordingly allowed. However, in the facts and circumstances of the case, there
shall be no order as to costs.

………………………………….J.
[M.R. SHAH]

NEW DELHI;                              ………………………………….J.
SEPTEMBER 30, 2022.                        [KRISHNA MURARI]

10