Centrum Financial Services Limited vs State Of Nct Of Delhi on 28 January, 2022

Centrum Financial Services Limited vs State Of Nct Of Delhi on
28 January, 2022

Author: M. R. Shah

Bench: Sanjiv Khanna, M.R. Shah

[REPORTABLE]

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.94 OF 2022

Centrum Financial Services Limited            …Appellant

Versus

State of NCT of Delhi and Anr.             …Respondents

JUDGMENT

M. R. Shah, J.

1. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment and order dated 14.09.2020
passed by the High Court of Delhi at New Delhi in Bail Application No.2442 of 2020 by which the
High Court has allowed the said application preferred by the Respondent No.2 herein and Date:
2022.01.28 16:53:10 IST Reason:

has directed that he be released on bail in connection with FIR No.128 of 2019 PS
Economic Offences Wing in New Delhi for the offences under Sections 409, 420, 467,
468, 471 and 120B IPC, the original complainant has preferred the present appeal.

2. That the appellant herein a non−banking financial company (NBFC) lodged an FIR/complaint
with the Economic Offences Branch, New Delhi against the company M/s Sri Aranath Logistics
Limited (formerly known as M/s LMJ Logistics Limited), Respondent No.2 herein Jayant Kumar
Jain – Managing Director and others for the offences under Sections 409, 420, 467, 468, 471 and
120B IPC. It was alleged against the accused – Respondent No.2 herein that he is the Managing

1

Centrum Financial Services Limited vs State Of Nct Of Delhi on 28 January, 2022

Director of M/s Aranath Logistics Limited engaged in the business of multi−commodity trading of
agricultural and non−commodities agricultural. That by way of written agreement accused availed
loan credit facilities to the tune of Rs.25 crores for a term of 180 days from the complainant
company. It was alleged that the said amount of Rs.25 crores was disbursed in the year 2017. It was
alleged that the said amount of Rs.25 crores was required to be used by the company for its own
purpose. It was further alleged that for the purpose of repayment of loan, no stock statement was
submitted and mortgage was also not created as agreed between the parties. It was further alleged
that instead of using the amount for the purpose mentioned in the agreement the same was
transferred to several fake/shell companies. It was further alleged that at the time of availing the
loan the accused misrepresented to the complainant about the financial health of the company of
the accused. It was further alleged that the amount of around Rs.8 crores stated to have been
diverted into such shell companies which were created by the accused in the name of his employees
and bank account was opened for transaction of those companies by using forged and fabricated
documents of identities of those employees and the said amount was further siphoned off to other
companies which were connected to the accused. It was further alleged that Directors of those shell
entities have stated that they have not opened the bank account in the said name or said firm and
their KYC form was misused by the accused. It was further alleged that a sum of Rs.15 crores was
transferred to another company – LMJ International Ltd. and the said amount was used for the
purpose of setting off against the previous liability of the said company with the Corporation Bank,
Calcutta. That after the preliminary investigation on the complaint of the appellant herein – original
complainant, the Economic Offences Wing having found a prima facie case against Respondent
No.2 and others, FIR being FIR No.128 was registered. The Respondent No.2 came to be arrested on
03.07.2020. The Respondent No.2 filed an application before the learned Metropolitan Magistrate
seeking bail under Section 437 Cr.P.C. One another bail application for regular bail being Bail
Application No.903 of 2020 was moved on behalf of the Respondent No.2 – Accused before the
Court of Sessions Judge, Patiala House Courts, New Delhi. The said bail application was opposed by
the I.O. A status report was filed pointing out how the amount of 25 crores was siphoned off and
transferred to other shell companies and how the said amount was used by the Respondent No.2 for
other companies. Vide order dated 04.08.2020 by a detailed speaking order, the learned Sessions
Judge dismissed the bail application. That thereafter, respondent no.2 – accused filed the present
bail application before the High Court. The detailed status report was filed on behalf of the I.O. It
was also submitted that the charge−sheet has been filed against Respondent No.2 and other co−
accused. The detailed status report was filed pointing out how a sum of Rs.25 crores to be used by
M/s LMJ Logistic Limited was transferred to shell and other companies such as M/s LMJ Logistic
Limited and how a systematic fraud was committed. Despite the above, by the impugned judgment
and order, the High Court has directed to release Respondent No.2 on bail merely on the ground
that the case arises out of a commercial transaction and is based on documents already seized.

3. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment and order passed by the High
Court directing to release Respondent No.2 – accused on bail, the original complainant has
preferred the present appeal. 3.1 At the outset, it is required to be noted that after this Court
directed to issue notice to the respondents vide order dated 17.12.2020 and thereafter the matter
was adjourned from time to time, on 08.01.2022 the petitioner(appellant) moved an application
being Criminal Miscellaneous Application No.4818 of 2022 seeking permission to withdraw the

2

Centrum Financial Services Limited vs State Of Nct Of Delhi on 28 January, 2022

present Special Leave Petition submitting that during the pendency of the present Special Leave
Petition, a settlement agreement has been entered into between the petitioner(appellant) and
Respondent No.2 on 08.01.2022 and therefore, the Petitioner(appellant) is no longer interested in
pursuing the present Special Leave Petition in view of the settlement. The said application was
heard by this Court on 10.01.2022. This Court shown its disinclination to permit the
p e t i t i o n e r ( a p p e l l a n t )   t o   w i t h d r a w   t h e   S p e c i a l   L e a v e   P e t i t i o n   b y   o b s e r v i n g   t h a t   t h e
petitioner(appellant) cannot be permitted to withdraw the Special Leave Petition in view of the
serious allegations against Respondent No.2 and others. That thereafter the learned counsel
appearing on behalf of the petitioner(appellant) withdrew the said application. That thereafter the
present Special Leave Petition was adjourned to 17.01.2022, at the request of the learned counsel for
the respective parties to consider the present Special Leave Petition on merits.

4. Shri Mukul Rohatgi, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of Respondent No.2 has made
the following submissions in support of his prayer and requested not to cancel the bail granted by
the High Court. 4.1 It is vehemently submitted by Shri Rohatgi, learned Senior Advocate appearing
on behalf of Respondent No.2 that in the facts and circumstances of the case and considering the
fact that the dispute is of a civil nature arising out of commercial transactions and the investigation
is concluded and the case rests on documentary evidence already collected by the Investigating
Officer during the investigation which have been seized and that the impugned order passed by the
High Court releasing Respondent No.2 on bail is as far as back on 14.09.2020 and thereafter there
are no allegations that Respondent No.2 has misused the liberty in between and that during the
investigation Respondent No.2 has cooperated and neither the complainant nor the State are
opposing the bail application seriously, this Court may not cancel the bail. 4.2 It is further submitted
by Shri Rohatgi, learned Senior Advocate for Respondent No.2 that in the present case out of Rs.25
crores, Rs.15 crores were transferred to the sister concern LNJ International Limited and the sister
concern paid off its loan which cannot be said to be an offence. 4.3 Shri Rohatgi, learned Senior
Advocate on behalf of Respondent No.2 – accused has heavily relied upon the decisions of this Court
in the case of Dolat Ram vs. State of Haryana, (1995) 1 SCC 349; X vs. State of Telangana, (2018) 16
SCC 511; Prabhakar Tewari vs. State of U.P., (2020) 11 SCC 648 as well as the decision of this Court
in the case of Gurcharan Singh vs. State (Delhi Administration) (1978) 1 SCC 118 in support of his
submissions that once the bail has been granted by the High Court and/or the Court below the same
may not be cancelled unless it is found that the accused has violated any of the terms and conditions
of the bail order and/or has misused any liberty shown to him while releasing him on bail and/or
there are any other peculiar circumstances. 4.4. Making the above submissions it is prayed to
dismiss the present appeal.

5. Present appeal is opposed by learned Counsel on behalf of Respondent – State. A status report on
behalf of the State has been filed in which it is stated that the State had filed a status report on
09.09.2020 before the High Court and before the High Court, the State vehemently opposed the bail
of Respondent No.2. However, at that stage, further investigation was underway and a
supplementary charge−sheet was yet to be filed. The same has now been filed. The State shall abide
by the directions/order passed by this Hon’ble Court.

3

Centrum Financial Services Limited vs State Of Nct Of Delhi on 28 January, 2022

6. In the status report it has been pointed out how systematic fraud has been committed by
Respondent No.2 and others siphoning off huge amount of Rs.25 crores through other Shell
Companies who are found to be fake and non−existent. A supplementary charge−sheet is also filed
on further investigation. A detailed status report has been filed pointing out how shell entities were
used as conduit entities to transfer money to the main company of the accused i.e., LMJ Logistics
Limited.

7. We have heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respective parties at length.

8. Having gone through the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court directing to
release the Respondent No.2 on bail it appears that the High Court has directed to release the
Respondent No.2 on bail mainly on the ground that the case arises out of a commercial transaction
and is based on documents already seized. Para 16 contains the only reasoning while releasing
Respondent No.2 on bail, which reads as under:

“16. Coming to the facts of the present case, it is an admitted fact that the co−accused
namely Navin Kumar Jain and Hulash Chand Jain were the other Directors and
shareholders of SALL as well as LMJIL. They also signed/undertook personal
guarantee to the complainant company in their capacity as Directors of the SALL
against the “Working Capital Demand Loan”. Navin Jain had also signed the
Tripartite Off−take Agreement in the capacity of Director of LMJIL. Both of them
were not even arrested and the charge sheet against them was filed without arrest.
During two years of enquiry/investigation, the petitioner joined investigation on
multiple occasions. After his arrest, the EOW sought only one day PC remand.
Neither in the Status Report nor during the course of arguments, any apprehension
was shown that the petitioner is a “flight risk”. The case arises out of a commercial
transaction and is based on documents that already stand seized. The petitioner has
already approached the NCLT where a moratorium on the assets/properties has been
declared and an IRP has been appointed. The complainant has already approached
NCLT.”

9. From the aforesaid it can be seen that while releasing the Respondent No.2 on bail the High Court
has not at all adverted to and/or considered the nature of accusation and the material
found/collected during the course of investigation and the serious allegations of siphoning off the
huge amount through various shell companies. The High Court has not at all dealt with and/or
considered any of the allegations and/or material collected during the course of the investigation
which were specifically pointed out and mentioned in the status report filed by the I.O. From the
status report and even the charge−sheet/supplementary charge−sheet papers it has been found
during the course of the investigation that a sum of Rs.25 crores was disbursed by the complainant
to Respondent No.2 and its company M/s LMJ Logistics Limited. The said amount was disbursed
for its own use. During the course of the investigation, it has been found that the said amount was
debited to the various companies/entities as under:

Sr. Date Beneficiary Voucher Amount (In No. Firm No. Rs.)

4

Centrum Financial Services Limited vs State Of Nct Of Delhi on 28 January, 2022

1. 03.11.17 LMJ 860388 1500,00,000/ International − Ltd.

Corporation Bank Kolkata

2. 06.11.17 Sairam 860391 2,49,25,720/− Agrocorp Pvt.

Ltd. Bandhan Bank, Connaught Place, Delhi

3. 30.11.17 LMJ Logistics 860407 2,00,00,000/− Ltd. RBL Bank Ltd., Connaught Place, New Delhi

4. 30.11.17 Vasudev Agro 860410 2,51,30,176/− Foods Pvt.

Ltd.

ICICI Bank, Parliament Street, New Delhi

5. 30.11.17 Sairam 860405 99,98,874/− Agrocorp Pvt.

Ltd. Bandhan Bank, Connaught Place, Delhi

6. 30.11.17 Vasudev Agro 860406 99,96,387/− Foods Pvt.

Ltd., Bandhan Bank, Connaught Place, Delhi

7. 30.11.17 Sairam 860409 98,74,563/− Agrocorp Pvt.

Ltd. Bandhan Bank, Connaught Place, Delhi 9.1 During the course of the investigation, it has been
found that Rs.15 crores was transferred to another company/LMJ International Limited through
some of the fake companies and the said another company – M/s LMJ International Limited used
that amount to clear its dues of Corporation Bank, Kolkata. During the investigation it has been
found that a sum of Rs.2,49,25,720/− was transferred to one Sairam Agrocorp Pvt. Ltd. and it was
further transferred to LMJ International Limited on the same day. Similarly, the amount of
Rs.2,51,30,176/− was transferred in the account of Vasudev Agro Foods Pvt. Ltd. out of which
Rs.1.82 crores approximately was transferred into account of Aldera Traders Pvt. Limited and it was
further transferred to LMJ International Limited on the same day. During the course of the
investigation, it has been found that an amount of Rs.99,98,874/− and Rs.98,74,563/− were
transferred in the account of Sairam Agrocorp Pvt. Ltd. and consolidated amount of
Rs.1,98,72,914/− was further transferred to LMJ International Limited on the same day. It has been
further found that an amount of Rs.99,96,387/− was transferred to Vasudev Agro Foods Pvt.
Limited and it was further transferred to LMJ International Limited on the same day. Thus, it has
been found that the credit facility to the tune of Rs.25 crores availed by M/s LMJ Logistics Limited
were not used for any business purposes i.e., sale purchase of agri or non−agri products but it has
been rotated through shell entities and immediately transferred to other company M/s LMJ
International Limited to square off the liabilities through the shell companies. During the course of

5

Centrum Financial Services Limited vs State Of Nct Of Delhi on 28 January, 2022

the investigation/further investigation it has been revealed that Sairam Agrocorp Pvt. Ltd. and
Vasudev Agro Foods Pvt. Ltd. are fake and shell companies and they do not exist at the registered
address. During the course of the investigation, it has been found that some of the employees were
made directors without their knowledge and their KYC and other documents were misused without
their knowledge. As per the charge−sheet/supplementary charge− sheet it appears that the
investigation revealed that the accounts in question were created to inflate the turnover of the
company so that they could avail the credit facility from various banks. It further reveals that the
shell companies were created to misappropriate/siphoned off the money entrusted to them as a loan
to the tune of Rs.25 crores. It has been revealed that there was no genuine transaction of sale and
purchase but it was simply routing and re−routing of the amount received from the complainant to
different entities which were in actual being operated by Respondent No.2. All these aforesaid
allegations and the material collected during the course of the investigation which are being part of
the charge−sheet and supplementary charge− sheet are not taken note of by the High Court and the
High Court has just simply ignored the same and has released Respondent No.2 on bail by simply
observing that case arises out of a commercial transaction and the dispute is of a civil nature.
Therefore, the High Court has not at all taken into consideration the relevant considerations while
grant of bail. Even the High Court has not at all taken note of the reasoning given by the learned
Sessions Court while rejecting the bail application of Respondent No.2. 9.2 In the light of the above
facts, it is required to be considered whether the High Court is at all justified in releasing
Respondent No.2 on bail.

10. At this stage few decisions of this Court on the relevant considerations to be considered by the
High Court while grant of bail are required to be referred to. In the case of Prasanta Kumar Sarkar
vs. Ashis Chatterjee and Anr., (2010) 14 SCC 496, while cancelling the bail and quashing and setting
aside the order passed by the High Court granting the bail to the accused it is observed in para 9 to
12 as under:

“9. We are of the opinion that the impugned order is clearly unsustainable. It is trite
that this Court does not, normally, interfere with an order passed by the High Court
granting or rejecting bail to the accused. However, it is equally incumbent upon the
High Court to exercise its discretion judiciously, cautiously and strictly in compliance
with the basic principles laid down in a plethora of decisions of this Court on the
point. It is well settled that, among other circumstances, the factors to be borne in
mind while considering an application for bail are:

(i) whether there is any prima facie or reasonable ground to believe that the accused
had committed the offence;

(ii) nature and gravity of the accusation;

(iii) severity of the punishment in the event of conviction;

(iv) danger of the accused absconding or fleeing, if released on bail;

6

Centrum Financial Services Limited vs State Of Nct Of Delhi on 28 January, 2022

(v) character, behaviour, means, position and standing of the accused;

(vi) likelihood of the offence being repeated;

(vii) reasonable apprehension of the witnesses being influenced; and

(viii) danger, of course, of justice being thwarted by grant of bail.

[See State of U.P. v. Amarmani Tripathi [(2005) 8 SCC 21] (SCC p. 31, para 18), Prahlad Singh Bhati
v. NCT of Delhi [(2001) 4 SCC 280], and Ram Govind Upadhyay v. Sudarshan Singh [(2002) 3 SCC
598].

10. It is manifest that if the High Court does not advert to these relevant considerations and
mechanically grants bail, the said order would suffer from the vice of non−application of mind,
rendering it to be illegal. In Masroor [(2009) 14 SCC 286], a Division Bench of this Court, of which
one of us (D.K. Jain, J.) was a member, observed as follows: (SCC p. 290, para

13) “13. … Though at the stage of granting bail an elaborate examination of evidence and detailed
reasons touching the merit of the case, which may prejudice the accused, should be avoided, but
there is a need to indicate in such order reasons for prima facie concluding why bail was being
granted particularly where the accused is charged of having committed a serious offence.”

11. We are constrained to observe that in the instant case, while dealing with the application of the
accused for grant of bail, the High Court completely lost sight of the basic principles enumerated
above. The accused, in the present case, is alleged to have committed a heinous crime of killing an
old helpless lady by strangulation. He was seen coming out of the victim's house by a neighbour
around the time of the alleged occurrence, giving rise to a reasonable belief that he had committed
the murder. We feel that under the given circumstances, it was not the stage at which bail under
Section 439 of the Code should have been granted to the accused, more so, when even charges have
not yet been framed.

12. It is also pertinent to note that, as stated above, the Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate had
rejected three bail applications of the accused but the High Court did not find it worthwhile to even
make a reference to these orders. In this regard, it would be useful to refer to the following
observations echoed in Kalyan Chandra Sarkar v. Rajesh Ranjan [(2004) 7 SCC 528]: (SCC p. 536,
para 12) “12. In regard to cases where earlier bail applications have been rejected there is a further
onus on the court to consider the subsequent application for grant of bail by noticing the grounds on
which earlier bail applications have been rejected and after such consideration if the court is of the
opinion that bail has to be granted then the said court will have to give specific reasons why in spite
of such earlier rejection the subsequent application for bail should be granted.” 10.1 In the case of
Neeru Yadav vs. State of UP & Anr., (2016) 15 SCC 422, it is held by this Court in para 11 as under:

“11. It is a well−settled principle of law that while dealing with an application for
grant of bail, it is the duty of the Court to take into consideration certain factors and

7

Centrum Financial Services Limited vs State Of Nct Of Delhi on 28 January, 2022

they basically are: (i) the nature of accusation and the severity of punishment in cases
of conviction and the nature of supporting evidence, (ii) reasonable apprehension of
tampering with the witnesses for apprehension of threat to the complainant, and (iii)
prima facie satisfaction of the Court in support of the charge. (See Chaman Lal v.
State of U.P., (2004) 7 SCC 525)” 10.2 In Anil Kumar vs. State (NCT of Delhi), (2018)
12 SCC 129, it is observed and held by this Court that while granting bail, the relevant
considerations are, (i) nature of seriousness of the offence; (ii) character of the
evidence and circumstances which are peculiar to the accused; and (iii) likelihood of
the accused fleeing from justice; (iv) the impact that his release may make on the
prosecution witnesses, its impact on the society; and (v) likelihood of his tampering.

10.3 In the case of Prahlad Singh Bhati vs. NCT of Delhi & Ors., (2001) 4 SCC 280, it
is observed and held by this Court that the jurisdiction to grant bail has to be
exercised on the basis of well settled principles having regard to the circumstances of
each case and not in an arbitrary manner.

It is observed and held as under:

“The jurisdiction to grant bail has to be exercised on the basis of well settled
principles having regard to the circumstances of each case and not in an arbitrary
manner. While granting the bail, the court has to keep in mind the nature of
accusations, the nature of evidence in support thereof, the severity of the punishment
which conviction will entail, the character, behaviour, means and standing of the
accused, circumstances which are peculiar to the accused, reasonable possibility of
securing the presence of the accused at the trial, reasonable apprehension of the
witnesses being tampered with, the larger interests of the public or State and similar
other considerations. It has also to be kept in mind that for the purposes of granting
the bail the Legislature has used the words ‘reasonable grounds for believing’ instead
of “the evidence” which means the court dealing with the grant of bail can only satisfy
it as to whether there is a genuine case against the accused and that the prosecution
will be able to produce prima facie evidence in support of the charge.”

11. Applying the law laid down by this Court in the aforesaid decisions to the facts of the case on
hand and the grounds on which the High Court has released the Respondent No.2 on bail, we are
constraint to observe that in the instant case while dealing with the application of the accused for
grant of bail, the High Court has completely lost sight of the basic principles enumerated above. The
High Court has not at all considered the modus operandi adopted by the accused in commission of
serious offence of siphoning and/or transferring the huge sum to another company through shell
companies. The High Court has also not taken into consideration the status report filed by the I.O.
in which in detail it has been pointed out how systematically the accused have committed the
offence and misappropriated/siphoned off the huge sum through shell companies. Thus, it appears
that the High Court has not adverted to the relevant considerations and has granted the bail
mechanically by observing that the case arises out of a commercial transaction.

8

Centrum Financial Services Limited vs State Of Nct Of Delhi on 28 January, 2022

12. Now so far as the submission on behalf of the accused that as the accused has been released on
bail as far as back on 14.09.2020 and that thereafter there are no allegations of misusing the liberty
and therefore the bail may not be cancelled and reliance placed upon the decisions of this Court
referred to hereinabove more particularly in the case of X (Supra) are concerned at the outset it is
required to be noted that this is a case where it is found that the order passed by the High Court
releasing the accused – Respondent No.2 on bail has been passed mechanically and without
adverting to the relevant facts and without considering the nature of accusation and allegations and
the nature of the gravity of the accusation. Even in the decisions which are relied upon by Shri
Rohatgi, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of Respondent No.2, there is no absolute
proposition of law laid down by this Court in the aforesaid decisions that once the bail is granted by
the High Court, though the High Court could not have granted the bail, in absence of any allegation
of misuse of liberty and/or breach of any of the conditions of the bail, the bail cannot be set aside
when grant of bail is itself subject matter of challenge in appeal/revision. 12.1 What is observed and
held is that the rejection of bail in a non−bailable case at an initial stage and cancellation of bail so
granted has to be dealt with and considered on different basis and that very cogent and
overwhelming circumstances are necessary for an order directing the cancellation of the bail already
granted. Therefore, on very cogent and overwhelming circumstances the bail can be cancelled. At
this stage the decision of this Court in the case of Mahipal vs. Rajesh Kumar alias Polia and Another,
(2020) 2 SCC 118 is required to be referred to. In the said decision, it is observed and held by this
Court that though this Court does not ordinarily interfere with the order of the High Court granting
bail, however, where the discretion of the High Court to grant bail has been exercised without due
application of mind and in contravention of the directions of this Court, such an order of granting
bail is liable to be set aside. Thereafter after drawing the distinction between the power of an
appellate court in assessing the correctness of an order granting bail and an application for the
cancellation of the bail, in paragraph 16 it is observed and held as under:

“16. The considerations that guide the power of an appellate court in assessing the
correctness of an order granting bail stand on a different footing from an assessment
of an application for the cancellation of bail. The correctness of an order granting bail
is tested on the anvil of whether there was an improper or arbitrary exercise of the
discretion in the grant of bail. The test is whether the order granting bail is perverse,
illegal or unjustified. On the other hand, an application for cancellation of bail is
generally examined on the anvil of the existence of supervening circumstances or
violations of the conditions of bail by a person to whom bail has been granted.

In Neeru Yadav v. State of U.P., (2014) 16 SCC 508], the accused was granted bail by
the High Court [Mitthan Yadav v. State of U.P., 2014 SCC OnLine All 16031]. In an
appeal against the order [Mitthan Yadav v. State of U.P., 2014 SCC OnLine All 16031]
of the High Court, a two−Judge Bench of this Court surveyed the precedent on the
principles that guide the grant of bail. Dipak Misra, J. (as the learned Chief Justice
then was) held: (Neeru Yadav case [Neeru Yadav v. State of U.P., (2014) 16 SCC 508],
SCC p. 513, para 12) “12. … It is well settled in law that cancellation of bail after it is
granted because the accused has misconducted himself or of some supervening
circumstances warranting such cancellation have occurred is in a different

9

Centrum Financial Services Limited vs State Of Nct Of Delhi on 28 January, 2022

compartment altogether than an order granting bail which is unjustified, illegal and
perverse. If in a case, the relevant factors which should have been taken into
consideration while dealing with the application for bail have not been taken note of,
or bail is founded on irrelevant considerations, indisputably the superior court can
set aside the order of such a grant of bail. Such a case belongs to a different category
and is in a separate realm. While dealing with a case of second nature, the Court does
not dwell upon the violation of conditions by the accused or the supervening
circumstances that have happened subsequently. It, on the contrary, delves into the
justifiability and the soundness of the order passed by the Court.” 12.2 Thus, as per
the law laid down by this Court where a Court while considering an application for
bail fails to consider the relevant factors, an Appellate Court may justifiably set aside
the order granting bail. Appellate Court is thus required to consider whether the
order granting bail suffers from a non−application of mind or a prima facie view from
the evidence available on record.

13. From the aforesaid it emerges that while releasing Respondent no.2 on bail, the
High Court has not at all considered the relevant factors including the nature and
gravity of accusation; the modus operandi and the manner in which the offences have
been committed through shell companies and creating the false/forged documents
and/or misusing the PAN Cards, Aadhar Cards and KYCs of the employees and
showing them as Directors of the fake and shell companies. As observed hereinabove,
the High Court has not at all considered and taken into consideration the status
report and the evidence collected during the course of the investigation. Therefore,
the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court releasing Respondent
No.2 on bail is unsustainable as the High Court while releasing Respondent No.2 on
bail has not exercised the jurisdiction judiciously and has not considered the relevant
factors which are required to be considered while grant of bail.

14. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the impugned judgment
and order passed by the High Court releasing Respondent No.2 on bail deserves to be
quashed and set aside and is accordingly quashed and set aside.

Now on quashing and setting aside the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court
releasing Respondent No.2 on bail and consequently the bail being set aside, the Respondent no.2 –
accused to surrender before the concerned Court/Jail Authority forthwith. Present Appeal is
accordingly allowed.

However, it is made clear that any observations by this Court in the present order shall not affect the
trial and the observations made in the present order be treated to be confined to the impugned
judgment granting bail. It is further observed that after surrender it will be open for Respondent
No.2 to move an appropriate application for bail before the High Court afresh after a period of three
months, which shall be considered by the High Court in accordance with law and on its own merits
and after taking into consideration the relevant material collected during the course of the
investigation which is part of the charge− sheet/further charge−sheet and taking into consideration

10

Centrum Financial Services Limited vs State Of Nct Of Delhi on 28 January, 2022

the relevant factors to be considered while grant of bail.

……………………………….J.
[M.R. SHAH]

NEW DELHI;                         ……………………………….J.
JANUARY 28, 2022.                    [SANJIV KHANNA]

11