Debananda Tamuli vs Smti Kakumoni Kataky on 15 February, 2022

Debananda Tamuli vs Smti Kakumoni Kataky on 15 February,
2022

Author: Abhay S. Oka

Bench: Abhay S. Oka, Ajay Rastogi

1

NON-REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1339      OF 2022
[@ SLP(C) No.22667 of 2019]

DEBANANDA TAMULI                          ……     APPELLANT

v.

SMTI KAKUMONI KATAKY                      ……     RESPONDENT

J U D G M E N T

ABHAY S. OKA, J.

Leave granted.

1. This appeal arises from a matrimonial dispute between the appellant-husband and the
respondent-wife. The petition filed by the appellant-husband on the grounds of cruelty and
desertion set out in clauses (ia) and (ib) of sub-section (1) of Section 13 of the Hindu Marriage Act,
1955 ( for short “HM Act”) was dismissed by the District Court. By the impugned order, the appeal
preferred by the appellant against the decree of the District Court has been dismissed by the Gauhati
High Court.

2. The marriage between the appellant and the respondent was solemnized on 17th June 2009 at
Tezpur in Assam. According to the appellant’s case, from 30th June 2009, the respondent left the
matrimonial home with all her personal belongings. According to the appellant’s case, from 30th
June 2009, the respondent deserted him.

3. On 9th September 2011, the appellant filed the petition for seeking a decree of divorce in the
District Court at Tezpur on the grounds of cruelty and desertion. The ground of cruelty was based on
an allegation that the respondent consistently refused to consummate the marriage, thereby causing
mental agony to the appellant. The appellant did not succeed before both the Courts. As can be seen
from the Orders passed by this Court from time to time, an effort was made to bring about an

1

Debananda Tamuli vs Smti Kakumoni Kataky on 15 February, 2022

amicable settlement in the matrimonial dispute. The case was referred to mediation which
eventually failed. After that, we interacted with the parties on video conference. However, an
amicable settlement could not be arrived at.

4. Shri Manish Goswami, the learned counsel appearing for the appellant submitted that it is an
admitted position that the marriage was not consummated. His submission is that the refusal by the
respondent to consummate marriage caused mental cruelty to the appellant. He submitted that after
30 th June 2009, the respondent never showed any inclination to return to the matrimonial home.

She never had any intention to start cohabiting with the appellant. He submitted that though on 21st
December 2009, the respondent visited the matrimonial home for a day, it was for the reason of the
death of the appellant’s mother. Therefore, it cannot amount to the resumption of matrimonial
relationship. He placed reliance on the decision of this Court in the case of Lachman Utamchand
Kirpalani v. Meena @ Mota1 on the concept of desertion. He submitted that the law laid down by
this Court in the said decision has been consistently followed till date. He submitted that both the
Courts committed an error by holding that the ground of desertion was not made out. The learned
counsel lastly urged that in view of the irretrievable breakdown of marriage, this Court should
exercise its plenary jurisdiction under Article 142 of the Constitution of India to pass a decree of
divorce.

5. Ms. Nidhi, the learned counsel appearing for the respondent submitted that the appellant has not
established that there was no consummation of marriage. She submitted that the evidence is to the
contrary. She invited our attention to the explanation to sub- section (1) of Section 13, which defines
desertion. She urged that even the factum of desertion has not been established by the appellant, as
rightly held by the District Court and the High Court. 1 (1964) 4 SCR 331 She invited our attention to
the deposition of the respondent recorded by the District Court. She submitted that there was no
intention on the part of the respondent to desert the appellant. On the contrary, the appellant has
made no efforts to resume cohabitation. She relied upon a decision of this Court in the case of
Darshan Gupta v. Radhika Gupta2. She submitted that merely because husband and wife are staying
separately, an inference regarding desertion on the wife’s part cannot be drawn. Her submission is
that as a case for grant of divorce on any of the grounds specified in sub-section (1) of Section 13 of
HM Act is not made out, this Court should not exercise its jurisdiction under Article 142 of the
Constitution of India for dissolving the marriage. She urged that issue whether such a power can be
exercised under Article 142 to dissolve a marriage on account of a long separation has been referred
to the consideration of the Constitution Bench.

6. The learned counsel for the appellant urged that if this Court is not satisfied that grounds of
divorce as pleaded by the appellant are made out, this is a fit case to put an end to the prolonged
agony of the parties by dissolving the marriage by exercising the plenary powers of this Court under
Article 142 of the Constitution. 2 (2013) 9 SCC 1

7. We have given careful consideration to her submissions. Firstly, we deal with the issue of
desertion. The learned counsel appearing for the appellant relied upon the decision of this Court in
the case of Lachman Utamchand Kirpalani (supra) which has been consistently followed in several

2

Debananda Tamuli vs Smti Kakumoni Kataky on 15 February, 2022

decisions of this Court. The law consistently laid down by this Court is that desertion means the
intentional abandonment of one spouse by the other without the consent of the other and without a
reasonable cause. The deserted spouse must prove that there is a factum of separation and there is
an intention on the part of deserting spouse to bring the cohabitation to a permanent end. In other
words, there should be animus deserendi on the part of the deserting spouse. There must be an
absence of consent on the part of the deserted spouse and the conduct of the deserted spouse should
not give a reasonable cause to the deserting spouse to leave the matrimonial home. The view taken
by this Court has been incorporated in the Explanation added to sub-section (1) of Section 13 by Act
No.68 of 1976. The said Explanation reads thus:

“13. Divorce.— (1) ………… 3 [Explanation.—In this sub-section, the expression
“desertion” means the desertion of the petitioner by the other party to the
_____________ 3 Substituted by Act 68 of 1976 (w e f 27-05-1976) marriage
without reasonable cause and without the consent or against the wish of such party,
and includes the wilful neglect of the petitioner by the other party to the marriage,
and its grammatical variations and cognate expressions shall be construed
accordingly.]”

8. The reasons for a dispute between husband and wife are always very complex. Every matrimonial
dispute is different from another. Whether a case of desertion is established or not will depend on
the peculiar facts of each case. It is a matter of drawing an inference based on the facts brought on
record by way of evidence.

9. Now, coming to the facts of the case, there is no dispute that the marriage between the parties was
solemnized on 17 th June 2009 and that they stayed together only till 30 th June 2009. The petition
for divorce was filed on 9th September 2011. As per clause (ib) of sub-section (1) of Section 13 of HM
Act, the desertion must be for a continuous period of not less than two years immediately preceding
the institution of the petition. In her affidavit in lieu of examination-in-chief filed on 24th June
2015, the respondent stated that after she became aware of the serious illness of the appellant’s
mother, she came to Tezpur on 19th December 2009. She stayed with her sister-in-law. According to
the respondent, on 20 th December 2009, the appellant told her to leave Tezpur. Therefore, she left
Tezpur. After she was informed about the death of the appellant’s mother, she came back to Tezpur
and visited the appellant’s house on 21st December 2019, and left on the next day. In the affidavit in
lieu of examination-in-chief, it is not even the case made out by the respondent that she came to
Tezpur intending to resume the matrimonial relationship.

10. The perusal of the respondent’s evidence does not disclose any effort made by her to resume the
matrimonial relationship. She has not filed a petition for restitution of conjugal rights. As can be
seen from the evidence on record, the appellant is carrying on business at Tezpur. The respondent is
working as a Lecturer in University Law College at Gauhati. There is no dispute that from 1 st July
2009 till date, they are staying separately.

11. Merely because on account of the death of the appellant’s mother, the respondent visited her
matrimonial home in December 2009 and stayed there only for one day, it cannot be said that there

3

Debananda Tamuli vs Smti Kakumoni Kataky on 15 February, 2022

was a resumption of cohabitation. She has not stated that she came to her matrimonial home on 21st
December 2009 with the intention to resume cohabitation. The intention on the part of the
respondent to resume cohabitation is not established. Thus, in the facts of the case, the factum of
separation has been proved. From the evidence on record, an inference can be drawn that there was
animus deserendi on the part of the respondent. She has not pleaded and established any reasonable
cause for remaining away from her matrimonial home.

12. Thus, in our considered view, the ground of desertion under clause (ib) of sub-section (1) of
Section 13 of HM Act has been made out as the desertion for a continuous period of more than two
years before the institution of the petition was established in the facts of the case. But, after having
carefully perused the evidence on record, we find that no case is made out to disturb the findings
recorded by the Courts on the issue of cruelty.

13. Earlier, when this Court made an effort for bringing about an amicable settlement, the appellant
had offered to pay a lump sum amount of Rs.10,00,000/- (Rupees ten lakhs) to the respondent. In
the facts of the case, we propose to direct the appellant to pay a sum of Rs.15,00,000/- (Rupees
fifteen lakhs) to the respondent.

14. Hence, the impugned judgments are set aside. The Civil Appeal is allowed in part. The marriage
solemnized between the parties on 17th June 2009 shall stand dissolved by a decree of divorce
under clause (ib) of sub-section (1) of Section 13 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.

15. We direct the appellant-husband to deposit a sum of Rs.15,00,000/- (Rupees fifteen lakh only)
in this Court within a period of 8 weeks from today.

16. It will be open to the respondent to withdraw the said amount of Rs.15,00,000/- (Rupees fifteen
lakh). It will also be open to her to withdraw a sum of Rs.50,000/- (Rupees fifty thousand) already
deposited by the appellant.

17. In the event, the amounts deposited by the appellant in this Court are not withdrawn by the
respondent within a period of two months from the date on which the sum of Rs.15,00,000/-
(Rupees fifteen lakh) is deposited, the Registry shall place the appeal before this Court for issuing
necessary directions.

18. All the pending applications, if any, also stand disposed of. There shall be no orders as to costs.

…………..…………………J (AJAY RASTOGI) …………..…………………J (ABHAY S. OKA) New Delhi;

February 15, 2022.

4