Deepak Yadav vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

Deepak Yadav vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

Author: Krishna Murari

Bench: Hima Kohli, Krishna Murari, N.V. Ramana

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 861 OF 2022
(arising out of S.L.P (Crl.) No. 9655 of 2021)

DEEPAK YADAV                                               … APPELLANT (S)

VERSUS

STATE OF U.P. & ANR.                                       …    RESPONDENT (S)

JUDGMENT

KRISHNA MURARI, J.

Leave granted

2. The present appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated 22.10.2021 passed by the
High Court of Judicature at Allahabad, Lucknow Bench (hereinafter referred to as “High Court”) in
Bail No. 11848 of 2021 filed by Respondent No.2 - Accused with a prayer to release him on bail in
Case Crime No. 16 of 2021 registered at PS Para, Lucknow under Sections 302 and 34 of the Indian
Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as “IPC”) during pendency of trial. By the said judgment,
the High Court granted bail to Respondent No.2/Accused on furnishing a personal bond and two
sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the trial court subject to certain conditions.

3. Briefly, the facts relevant for the purpose of this appeal are that the Appellant/Informant Deepak
Yadav lodged an FIR being Crime Case No. 16/2021 on 09.01.2021 at PS Para, Lucknow under
Section 307 IPC against Respondent No. 2/Accused Harjeet Yadav, co-accused Sushil Kumar Yadav
and two unknown persons. The allegations against the said accused persons were that on the night
of 08.01.2021, at around 8.30 PM, Appellant’s father Mr. Virendera Yadav (deceased) was on way to
his home from the lawn located near Jaipuria School and at the same time, the accused persons took
position on Kulhad Katta Bridge and fired at him with the common intention to kill the deceased.

1

Deepak Yadav vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

The bullet shot hit his right cheek and made its exit through the other side leaving him severely
injured. In view of his serious condition, the people present on the spot informed the local police
s t a t i o n   a n d   a d m i t t e d   h i m   a t   t h e   T r a u m a   C e n t r e ,   M e d i c a l   C o l l e g e ,   L u c k n o w .   T h e
Appellant/Informant, on receiving the information about his injured father rushed to the Trauma
Centre with his mother Smt. Sunita Yadav and elder sister Ms. Jyoti Yadav. The Appellant’s mother
asked her husband about the incident to which he replied that he was shot by Respondent
No.2/Accused Harjeet Yadav and one, Sushil Yadav and that they were accompanied by two other
persons as well. The statement given by the deceased was noted down by Sri Mahesh Kumar
Chaurasia, DSP/ACP Chowk, Lucknow and Sri. Ashok Kumar Singh, SI/First Investigating Officer.

4. Respondent No. 2/Accused was arrested by the police on 13.01.2021 and one country made pistol
with two live cartages were recovered from him. The Appellant/Informant’s father passed away on
14.01.2021 on account of which the case was converted to one under Section 302 IPC. The
co-accused, Sushil Kumar Yadav surrendered before the Judicial Magistrate, Lucknow on
16.01.2021.

5. After completion of investigation and upon finding sufficient evidence, charge sheet was filed
before the trial Court on 06.04.2021 against Respondent No.2/Accused and co-accused Sushil
Kumar Yadav under Sections 302 and 34 IPC. Furthermore, investigation against two unknown
accused persons is pending

6. Respondent No.2/Accused filed Bail Application No. 3340/2021 before the Sessions Judge,
Lucknow and the same was rejected vide order dated 28.06.2021 on the ground that he has been
named on the basis of the information provided by the deceased himself and that the same has been
clarified after the perusal of the documents/forms that the bullet was shot by Respondent No.
2/Accused himself.

7. Respondent No. 2/Accused then moved the High Court for grant of regular bail vide Bail No.
11848/2021 wherein Counsel for the Respondent No.2/Accused contended that the co-accused,
Sushil Kumar Yadav has been granted bail by the High Court on 18.10.2021 in Bail No. 8501 of 2021
and that the case of the Respondent No. 2 stands on identical footing making him entitled for bail
on the ground of parity. The said bail application was allowed vide impugned judgment/order dated
22.10.2021. The operative portion of the judgment reads as under : -

“Keeping in view the nature of the offence, arguments advanced on behalf of the
parties, evidence on record regarding complicity of the accused, larger mandate of the
Article 21 of the Constitution of India and the dictum of Apex Court in the case of
Dataram Singh Vs. State of U.P. & Anr 1 and without expressing any opinion on the
merits of the case, the Court is of the view that the applicant has made out a case for
bail. The bail application is allowed.

Let the applicant be released on bail on his furnishing a personal bond and two
sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the court concerned subject to
following conditions. Further, before issuing the release order, the sureties be

2

Deepak Yadav vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

verified.

1 (2018) 3 SCC 22

1. The applicant shall not tamper with the prosecution evidence by intimidating/
pressurizing the witnesses, during the investigation or trial;

2. The applicant shall cooperate in the trial sincerely without seeking any
adjournment;

3. The applicant shall not indulge in any criminal activity or commission of any crime
after being released on bail;

4. That the applicant shall not, directly or indirectly, make any inducement, threat or
promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him
from disclosing such facts to the Court or to any police officer;

5. The applicant shall file an undertaking to the effect that he shall not seek any
adjournment on the dates fixed for evidence and the witnesses are present in court.
In case of default of this condition, it shall be open for the trial court to treat it as
abuse of liberty of bail and pass orders in accordance with law to ensure presence of
the applicant;

6. The applicant shall remain present, in person, before the trial court on the dates
fixed for (i) opening of the case, (ii) framing of charge and (iii) recording of statement
under Section 313 Cr.P.C. If in the opinion of the trial court, default of this condition
is deliberate or without sufficient cause, then it shall be open for the trial court to
treat such default as abuse of liberty of his bail and proceed against him in
accordance with law;

7. The party shall file computer generated copy of such order downloaded from the
official website of High Court Allahabad;

8. The concerned court/authority/official shall verify the authenticity of such
computerized copy of the order from the official website of High Court Allahabad and
shall make a declaration of such verification in writing.

In case of breach of any of the above conditions, it shall be a ground for cancellation of bail.”

8. We have heard Mr. Awanish Sinha, learned counsel appearing for the Appellant and Mr.
Siddharth Dave, learned Senior Counsel appearing for Respondent No. 2.

9. Mr. Awanish Sinha, learned counsel appearing for the Appellant vehemently submitted that the
High Court has granted bail to the Respondent No. 2/Accused, who is a known criminal with

3

Deepak Yadav vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

criminal antecedents in a very casual manner only on the ground of parity without any focus on the
role of the accused. It was further submitted that the arrest of the Respondent No.2/Accused was
made on the statement of the deceased made to his wife in the presence of IO. It was further pointed
out that the Respondent No.2/Accused has been named in the FIR as the person who had fired at
the deceased leading to his untimely death and on commission of such a heinous crime, bail cannot
be granted.

10. It was further submitted that the High Court has erred in granting bail to the Respondent No.
2/Accused on the very first day of being listed without granting any opportunity to the
Appellant/Informant or the State to respond and that the State was not even given any opportunity
to file a counter or even the present status of the case.

11. Heavy reliance was placed on the decisions of this Court in Ramesh Bhavan Rathod Vs.
Vishanbhai Hirabhai Makwana(Koli) & Another 2, Kalyan Chandra Sarkar Vs. Rajesh Ranjan @
Pappu Yadav and Another3.

12. Mr. Siddharth Dave, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the Respondent
No.2/Accused submitted that the Respondent No.2/Accused was a young student, pursuing the
course of D.Pharma from Himalayan Garhwal University, Uttarakhand having no criminal
antecedents and the case registered against him under Sections 3 and 25 of the Arms Act, 1959 is an
off-shoot of the instant case and has been lodged on the basis of erroneous recovery in the instant
case.

13. It was further submitted that no particular role has been attributed to the Respondent
No.2/Accused, nor has he been expressly mentioned by the deceased in his statement, which simply
states that Ratilal’s younger son shot the deceased. Furthermore, granting bail on the first day of
hearing does not violate any established legal concept, statutory requirement or precedent.

14. It was further submitted that while granting bail to the Respondent No.2/Accused, the High
Court has weighed all relevant factors, including the 2 (2021) 6 SCC 230 3 (2004) 7 SCC 528 nature
of the charge, the gravity of the offence and penalty, the nature of evidence and the criminal history
of the accused.

15. Heavy reliance was placed on the decisions of this Court in Babu Singh & Ors. Vs. State of U.P.4
and Dataram Singh Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh and Another5.

16. We have carefully considered the submissions made at the Bar and perused the materials placed
on record.

17. The main issue arising in this appeal for our consideration is whether the High Court was
justified in exercising jurisdiction under Section 439(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure (for short
“Cr.P.C”) for grant of regular bail in the facts of the present case.

4

Deepak Yadav vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

18. Before adverting to the facts of the case, it is important to understand the extent of the power of
the High Court to grant bail and the factors determining nature and gravity of the crime in order to
grant bail to accuse concerned. As rightly stated by Justice V.R. Krishna Iyer “the issue of bail is one
of liberty, justice, public safety and burden of the public treasury, all of which insist that a 4 (1978) 1
SCC 579 5 (2018) 3 SCC 22 developed jurisprudence of bail is integral to a socially sensitized judicial
process”.

ANALYSIS A. Principles governing grant of bail

19. Section 439 of the Cr.P.C is the guiding principle for adjudicating a Regular Bail Application
wherein Court takes into consideration several aspects. The jurisdiction to grant bail has to be
exercised cautiously on the basis of well- settled principles having regard to the facts and
circumstances of each case.

20. In Prahlad Singh Bhati Vs. NCT of Delhi And Another 6, a two-Judge Bench of this Court stated
the principles which are to be considered while granting bail which are as follows : -

“8. The jurisdiction to grant bail has to be exercised on the basis of well-settled
principles having regard to the circumstances of each case and not in an arbitrary
manner. While granting the bail, the court has to keep in mind the nature of
accusations, the nature of evidence in support thereof, the severity of the punishment
which conviction will entail, the character, behaviour, means and standing of the
accused, circumstances which are peculiar to the accused, reasonable possibility of
securing the presence of the accused at the trial, reasonable apprehension of the
witnesses being tampered with, the larger interests of the public or State and similar
other considerations. It has also to be kept in mind that for the purposes of granting
the bail 6 (2001) 4 SCC 280 the Legislature has used the words "reasonable grounds
for believing" instead of "the evidence" which means the court dealing with the grant
of bail can only satisfy it as to whether there is a genuine case against the accused and
that the prosecution will be able to produce prima facie evidence in support of the
charge. It is not excepted, at this stage, to have the evidence establishing the guilt of
the accused beyond reasonable doubt.”

21. As reiterated by the two-Judge Bench of this Court in Prasanta Kumar Sarkar Vs. Ashish
Chatterjee And Another7, it is well-settled that the factors to be borne in mind while considering an
application for bail are:

(i) whether there is any prima facie or reasonable ground to believe that the accused
had committed the offence;

(ii)      nature and gravity of the accusation;

(iii)     severity of the punishment in the event of conviction;

(iv)      danger of the accused absconding or fleeing, if released on bail;

5

Deepak Yadav vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

(v)       character, behaviour, means, position and standing of the accused;

(vi)      likelihood of the offence being repeated;

(vii)     reasonable apprehension of the witnesses being influenced; and

(viii)    danger, of course, of justice being thwarted by grant of bail.

22. The decision in Prasanta(Supra) has been consistently followed by this Court in
Ash Mohammad Vs. Shiv Raj Singh alias Lalla Babu And 7 (2010) 14 SCC 496
Another8, Ranjit Singh Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh And Others 9, Neeru Yadav Vs.
State of Uttar Pradesh And Another 10, Virupakshappa Gouda And Another Vs. State
of Karnataka And Another 11, State of Orissa Vs. Mahimananda Mishra12.

23. In a recent pronouncement of this Court in the case of ‘Y’ Vs. State of Rajasthan & Anr.13
authored by one of us (Hon’ble N.V. Ramana, CJI), it has been observed as under :-

“22. The impugned order passed by the High Court is cryptic, and does not suggest
any application of mind. There is a recent trend of passing such orders granting or
refusing to grant bail, where the Courts make a general observation that “the facts
and the circumstances” have been considered. No specific reasons are indicated
which precipitated the passing of the order by the Court.

23. Such a situation continues despite various judgments of this Court wherein this
Court has disapproved of such a practice. In the case of Mahipal (Supra), this Court
observed as follows:-

25. Merely recording “having perused the record” and “on the facts and
circumstances of the case” does not subserve the purpose of a reasoned judicial order.
It is a fundamental premise of open justice, to which our judicial system is
committed, that factors which have 8 (2012) 9 SCC 446 9 (2013) 16 SCC 797 10
(2014) 16 SCC 508 11 (2017) 5 SCC 406 12 (2018) 10 SCC 516 13 Criminal Appeal No.
649 of 2022 decided on 19.04.2022 weighed in the mind of the Judge in the rejection
or the grant of bail are recorded in the order passed.

Open justice is premised on the notion that justice should not only be done, but should manifestly
and undoubtedly be seen to be done. The duty of Judges to give reasoned decisions lies at the heart
of this commitment. Questions of the grant of bail concern both liberty of individuals undergoing
criminal prosecution as well as the interests of the criminal justice system in ensuring that those
who commit crimes are not afforded the opportunity to obstruct justice. Judges are duty-bound to
explain the basis on which they have arrived at a conclusion.” (emphasis supplied)

6

Deepak Yadav vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

24. For grant or denial of bail, the “nature of crime” has a huge relevancy. The key consideration
which govern the grant of bail were elucidated in the judgment of this Court in Ram Govind
Upadhyay Vs. Sudarshan Singh14, wherein it has been observed as under: -

“4. Apart from the above, certain other which may be attributed to be relevant
considerations may also be noticed at this juncture, though however, the same are
only illustrative and not exhaustive, neither there can be any. The considerations
being:

(a) While granting bail the court has to keep in mind not only the nature of the
accusations, but the severity of the punishment, if the accusation entails a conviction
and the nature of evidence in support of the accusations.

14 (2002) 3 SCC 598

(b) Reasonable apprehensions of the witnesses being tampered with or the apprehension of there
being a threat for the complainant should also weigh with the court in the matter of grant of bail.

(c) While it is not expected to have the entire evidence establishing the guilt of the accused beyond
reasonable doubt but there ought always to be a prima facie satisfaction of the court in support of
the charge.

(d) Frivolity in prosecution should always be considered and it is only the element of genuineness
that shall have to be considered in the matter of grant of bail, and in the event of there being some
doubt as to the genuineness of the prosecution, in the normal course of events, the accused is
entitled to an order of bail.”

25. Similarly, the parameters to be taken into consideration for grant of bail by the courts has been
described in Kalyan Chandra Sarkar Vs. Rajesh Ranjan alias Pappu Yadav And Another15 as under :
-

“11. The law in regard to grant or refusal of bail is very well-settled. The Court
granting bail should exercise its discretion in a judicious manner and not as a matter
of course. Though at the stage of granting bail a detailed examination of evidence and
elaborate documentation of the merit of the case need not be undertaken, there is a
need to indicate in such orders reasons for prima facie concluding why bail was being
granted particularly where the accused is charged of having committed a serious
offence. Any order devoid of such reasons would suffer from non-application of mind.
It is also necessary for the court granting bail to consider among other circumstances,
the following factors also before granting bail; they are:

15 (2004) 7 SCC 528

7

Deepak Yadav vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

(a) the nature of accusation and the severity of punishment in case of conviction and
the nature of supporting evidence.

(b) reasonable apprehension of tampering with the witness or apprehension of threat to the
complainant.

(c) prima facie satisfaction of the court in support of the charge.” B. Recording of reasons for grant
of bail by the High Court of the Sessions Court

26. The importance of assigning reasoning for grant or denial of bail can never be undermined.
There is prima facie need to indicate reasons particularly in cases of grant or denial of bail where the
accused is charged with a serious offence. The sound reasoning in a particular case is a reassurance
that discretion has been exercised by the decision maker after considering all the relevant grounds
and by disregarding extraneous considerations.

27. A two-Judge Bench of this Court in Ramesh Bhavan Rathod (Supra) held that the duty to record
reasons is a significant safeguard which ensures that the discretion which is entrusted to the court,
is exercised in a judicious manner. The operative portion of the judgment reads as under : -

“35. We disapprove of the observations of the High Court in a succession of orders in
the present case recording that the Counsel for the parties “do not press for a further
reasoned order”. The grant of bail is a matter which implicates the liberty of the
accused, the interest of the State and the victims of crime in the proper
administration of criminal justice. It is a well-settled principle that in determining as
to whether bail should be granted, the High Court, or for that matter, the Sessions
Court deciding an application under Section 439 of Cr.P.C would not launch upon a
detailed evaluation of the facts on merits since a criminal trial is still to take place.
These observations while adjudicating upon bail would also not be binding on the
outcome of the trial. But the Court granting bail cannot obviate its duty to apply a
judicial mind and to record reasons, brief as they may be, for the purpose of deciding
whether or not to grant bail. The consent of parties cannot obviate the duty of the
High Court to indicate its reasons why it has either granted or refused bail. This is for
the reason that the outcome of the application has a significant bearing on the liberty
of the accused on one hand as well as the public interest in the due enforcement of
criminal justice on the other. The rights of the victims and their families are at stake
as well. These are not matters involving the private rights of two individual parties, as
in a civil proceeding. The proper enforcement of criminal law is a matter of public
interest. We must, therefore, disapprove of the manner in which a succession of
orders in the present batch of cases has recorded that counsel for the "respective
parties do not press for further reasoned order". If this is a euphemism for not
recording adequate reasons, this kind of a formula cannot shield the order from
judicial scrutiny.

8

Deepak Yadav vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

36. Grant of bail under Section 439 of the Cr.P.C is a matter involving the exercise of
judicial discretion.

Judicial discretion in granting or refusing bail – as in the case of any other discretion which is vested
in a court as a judicial institution – is not unstructured. The duty to record reasons is a significant
safeguard which ensures that the discretion which is entrusted to the court is exercised in a
judicious manner. The recording of reasons in a judicial order ensures that the thought process
underlying the order is subject to scrutiny and that it meets objective standards of reason and
justice.”

28. Similarly, this Court in Ram Govind Upadhyay (Supra), observed that :-

“3. Grant of bail though being a discretionary order but, however, calls for exercise of
such a discretion in a judicious manner and not as a matter of course. Order for Bail
bereft of any cogent reason cannot be sustained. Needless to record, however, that
the grant of bail is dependent upon the contextual facts of the matter being dealt with
by the Court and facts however do always vary from case to case. While placement of
the accused in the society, though may be considered but that by itself cannot be a
guiding factor in the matter of grant of bail and the same should and ought always be
coupled with other circumstances warranting the grant of bail. The nature of the
offence is one of the basic consideration for the grant of bail more heinous is a crime,
the greater is the chance of rejection of the bail, though, however, dependent on the
factual matrix of the matter.”

29. A two-Judge Bench of this Court in Mahipal Vs. Rajesh Kumar Alias Polia And Another16
observed :-

“14. The provision for an accused to be released on bail touches upon the liberty of an
individual. It is for this reason that this Court does not ordinarily interfere with an
order of the High Court granting bail. However, where the discretion of the High
Court to grant bail has been exercised without the due application of mind or in
contravention of the directions of this Court, such an order granting bail is liable to
be set aside. The Court is required to factor, amongst other things, a prima facie view
that the accused had committed the offence, the nature and gravity of the offence and
the likelihood of the accused obstructing 16 (2020) 2 SCC 118 the proceedings of the
trial in any manner or evading the course of justice. The provision for being released
on bail draws an appropriate balance between public interest in the administration of
justice and the protection of individual liberty pending adjudication of the case.

However, the grant of bail is to be secured within the bounds of the law and in compliance with the
conditions laid down by this Court. It is for this reason that a court must balance numerous factors
that guide the exercise of the discretionary power to grant bail on a case by case basis. Inherent in
this determination is whether, on an analysis of the record, it appears that there is a prima facie or
reasonable cause to believe that the accused had committed the crime. It is not relevant at this stage

9

Deepak Yadav vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

for the court to examine in detail the evidence on record to come to a conclusive finding.” C.
Cancellation of Bail

30. This Court has reiterated in several instances that bail once granted, should not be cancelled in a
mechanical manner without considering whether any supervening circumstances have rendered it
no longer conducive to a fair trial to allow the accused to retain his freedom by enjoying the
concession of bail during trial. Having said that, in case of cancellation of bail, very cogent and
overwhelming circumstances are necessary for an order directing cancellation of bail (which was
already granted). A two-Judge Bench of this Court in Dolat Ram And Others Vs. State of Haryana 17
laid down the grounds for cancellation of bail which are :-

17 (1995) 1 SCC 349

(i) interference or attempt to interfere with the due course of administration of
Justice

(ii) evasion or attempt to evade the due course of justice

(iii) abuse of the concession granted to the accused in any manner

(iv) Possibility of accused absconding

(v) Likelihood of/actual misuse of bail

(vi) Likelihood of the accused tampering with the evidence or threatening witnesses.

31. It is no doubt true that cancellation of bail cannot be limited to the occurrence of supervening
circumstances. This Court certainly has the inherent powers and discretion to cancel the bail of an
accused even in the absence of supervening circumstances. Following are the illustrative
circumstances where the bail can be cancelled :-

a) Where the court granting bail takes into account irrelevant material of substantial
nature and not trivial nature while ignoring relevant material on record.

b) Where the court granting bail overlooks the influential position of the accused in
comparison to the victim of abuse or the witnesses especially when there is prima
facie misuse of position and power over the victim.

c) Where the past criminal record and conduct of the accused is completely ignored
while granting bail.

d) Where bail has been granted on untenable grounds.

10

Deepak Yadav vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

e) Where serious discrepancies are found in the order granting bail thereby causing
prejudice to justice.

f) Where the grant of bail was not appropriate in the first place given the very serious
nature of the charges against the accused which disentitles him for bail and thus
cannot be justified.

g) When the order granting bail is apparently whimsical, capricious and perverse in
the facts of the given case.

32. In Neeru Yadav Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh And Another 18, the accused was granted bail by the
High Court. In an appeal against the order of the High Court, a two-Judge Bench of this Court
examined the precedents on the principles that guide grant of bail and observed as under :-

“12…It is well settled in law that cancellation of bail after it is granted because the
accused has misconducted himself or of some supervening circumstances warranting
such cancellation have occurred is in a different compartment altogether than an
order granting bail which is unjustified, illegal and perverse. If in a case, the relevant
factors which should have been taken into consideration while dealing with the
application for bail and have not been 18 (2014) 16 SCC 508 taken note of bail or it is
founded on irrelevant considerations, indisputably the superior court can set aside
the order of such a grant of bail. Such a case belongs to a different category and is in a
separate realm.

While dealing with a case of second nature, the Court does not dwell upon the violation of
conditions by the accused or the supervening circumstances that have happened subsequently. It, on
the contrary, delves into the justifiability and the soundness of the order passed by the Court”

33. This Court in Mahipal (Supra) held that: -

“17. Where a court considering an application for bail fails to consider relevant
factors, an appellate court may justifiably set aside the order granting bail. An
appellate court is thus required to consider whether the order granting bail suffers
from a non-application of mind or is not borne out from a prima facie view of the
evidence on record. It is thus necessary for this Court to assess whether, on the basis
of the evidentiary record, there existed a prima facie or reasonable ground to believe
that the accused had committed the crime, also taking into account the seriousness of
the crime and the severity of the punishment.”

34. A two-Judge Bench of this Court in Prakash Kadam And Others Vs. Ram Prasad Vishwanath
Gupta And Another19 held that:-

“18. In considering whether to cancel the bail, the court has also to consider the
gravity and nature of the offence, prima facie case against the accused, the position

11

Deepak Yadav vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

and standing of the accused, etc. if there are serious allegations against the accused,
his bail may be cancelled even if he has not misused the bail granted to him.

19 (2011) 6 SCC 189

19. In our opinion, there is no absolute rule that once bail is granted to the accused
then it can only be cancelled if there is likelihood of misuse of bail. that factor, though
no doubt important, is not the only factor. There are several other factors also which
may be seen while deciding to cancel the bail.”

35. Coming to the present case at hand, the Respondent No.2/Accused was arrested on 13.01.2021
subsequent to which, he had applied for regular bail before the Sessions Court which was rejected on
the ground that he is named in the FIR on the basis of the information provided by the deceased
himself and that the same has been clarified after perusal of the documents/forms that the bullet
was shot by the Respondent No. 2/Accused himself. Being aggrieved by the same, Respondent
No.2/Accused filed an application under Section 439 Cr.P.C before the High Court seeking regular
bail. The High Court vide its impugned order granted bail to the Respondent No.2/Accused without
considering the relevant facts and circumstances.

36. A bare perusal of the impugned order reveals that the High Court has failed to take into
consideration the following:-

(cid:134) Respondent No.2/Accused has been named in the FIR bearing Crime Case No.
16/2021 lodged under Sections 302 and 34 IPC and was the main assailant who had a
weapon in his hand.

(cid:134) The main role of Respondent No.2/Accused was that he opened fire at the deceased
due to which the bullet hit his right cheek and made its exit through the other side.

(cid:134) The deceased succumbed to his injuries on 14.01.2021 (cid:134) Respondent No.2/Accused
had the intention to murder the deceased as there was previous enmity between him
and the deceased with regard to some land which Respondent No.2 threatened to
grab.

(cid:134) On being asked about the incident by the Appellant/Informant’s mother, the
deceased replied “Ratipal ka dusra number ka ladka aur ram asre ka putra Sushil
Yadav ne pull par gaadi rukwakar goli maar di hai or unke sath 2 ladke aur the”. On
re-clarifying, the deceased replied “Ratipal ka dusra number ka ladka matlab Harjeet
Yadav”.

(cid:134) Respondent No.2/accused has clearly been named by the deceased and he was
actively involved in opening fire which caused the death of the deceased.

12

Deepak Yadav vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

(cid:134) Respondent No. 2/Accused’s statement was recorded by the then IO under Section
161 Cr.P.C in which he admitted to having committed the offence.

(cid:134) Respondent No. 2 has a criminal history and several criminal matters have been
lodged against him:

(1) Case Crime no. 016/2021 u/s 302/34 IPC (2) Case Crime no. 020/2021 u/s 25 of
the Arms Act (3) Proceedings of 110G on 05.11.2021 (4) Beat Information (G.D No.
33) dated 18.12.2021 (5) Beat Information (G.D. No. 44) dated 19.12.2021

37. There is certainly no straight jacket formula which exists for courts to assess an application for
grant or rejection of bail but the determination of whether a case is fit for the grant of bail involves
balancing of numerous factors, among which the nature of the offence, the severity of the
punishment and a prima facie view of the involvement of the accused are important. This Court does
not, normally interfere with an order passed by the High Court granting or rejecting bail to the
accused. However, it is equally incumbent upon the High Court to exercise its discretion judiciously,
cautiously and strictly in compliance with basic principles laid down in a catena of judgments by this
Court.

38. However having said that, in the case at hand, it is manifestly incorrect on the part of the High
Court to have granted bail to the Respondent No.2/Accused without taking into consideration the
relevant facts and circumstances and appropriate evidence which proves that the Respondent
No.2/Accused has been charged with a serious offence.

39. Grant of bail to the Respondent No.2/Accused only on the basis of parity shows that the
impugned order passed by the High Court suffers from the vice of non-application of mind
rendering it unsustainable. The High Court has not taken into consideration the criminal history of
the Respondent No.2/Accused, nature of crime, material evidences available, involvement of
Respondent No.2/Accused in the said crime and recovery of weapon from his possession.

40. Having considered the aforesaid facts of the present case in juxtaposition with the judgments
referred to above, we are of the opinion that the impugned order passed by the High Court is not
liable to be sustained and is hereby set aside. The bail bonds of Respondent No.2/Accused stand
cancelled and he is hereby directed to surrender within one week from the date of passing of this
order, failing which, the concerned police authorities shall take him into custody.

41. It is however clarified that observations made hereinabove are limited to our consideration of the
issue of cancellation of bail, as raised by the appellant. They shall not come in the way of final
adjudication before the trial Court. At the cost of repetition, it is stated that the trial Court is to
consider the matter pending before it, uninfluenced by any of the observations made, strictly on the
basis of evidence that shall be brought on record. This order shall also not preclude the Respondent
No. 2/Accused from applying afresh for bail at a later stage, if any, new circumstances are brought
to light.

13

Deepak Yadav vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

42. As a result, appeal stands allowed.

….............................CJI.

(N.V. RAMANA) …....…..........................J. (KRISHNA MURARI) ….....….........................J. (HIMA
KOHLI) NEW DELHI;

20th MAY, 2022

14