Dental Council Of India vs Biyani Shikshan Samiti on 12 April, 2022

Dental Council Of India vs Biyani Shikshan Samiti on 12 April,
2022

Author: B.R. Gavai

Bench: B.R. Gavai, L. Nageswara Rao

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2912 OF 2022
[Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) No.26855 of
2018]

DENTAL COUNCIL OF INDIA                     ...APPELLANT(S)

VERSUS
BIYANI SHIKSHAN SAMITI & ANR.                ...RESPONDENT(S)

JUDGMENT

B.R. GAVAI, J.

1. Leave granted.

2. The present appeal challenges the judgment and order of the Division Bench of the High Court of
Judicature for Rajasthan, Bench at Jaipur, dated 24th April, 2018, passed in D.B. Civil Writ Petition
No. 3260 of 2017, thereby allowing the writ petition filed on behalf of the respondent No.1−Biyani
Shikshan Samiti (hereinafter referred to as “the respondent No.1”) and striking down the
Notification dated 21 st May, 2012 (hereinafter referred to as “the impugned Notification”), vide
which the appellant−Dental Council of India (hereinafter referred to as “the Council”), had
substituted Regulation 6(2)(h) of the Dental Council of India (Establishment of New Dental
Colleges, Opening of New or Higher Course of Studies or Training and Increase of Admission
Capacity in Dental Colleges) Regulations, 2006 (hereinafter referred to as “the Regulations”), on the
ground of the same being inconsistent with the provisions of the Dentists Act, 1948 (hereinafter
referred to as “the said Act”) and also being violative of Articles 14 and 19(1)

(g) of the Constitution of India.

3. The facts in the present case are not in dispute.

1

Dental Council Of India vs Biyani Shikshan Samiti on 12 April, 2022

4. The respondent No. 1 had submitted an application to the Government of India for grant of
permission for establishment of dental college from academic year 2012−2013 on 24 th September,
2011. This was after the Letter of Intent was issued by the State Government on 23rd September,
2011. The respondent No. 2 – Union of India, through Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare (Dental Education Section) [hereinafter referred to as “the respondent No.2”), noticed
certain deficiencies in the proposal of the respondent No.1 and vide its letter dated 7th October,
2011, required the respondent No.1 to cure the said deficiencies.

5. After exchange of certain communications, on 6 th January, 2012, the respondent No.2, returned
the application of the respondent No.1 along with demand draft of Rs.6 lakh, on the ground that
deficiencies pointed out were not cured prior to 31 st December, 2011, i.e., the last date for curing
the deficiencies.

6. In the meantime, the Government of Rajasthan issued Essentiality Certificate to the respondent
No.1 on 11 th January, 2012. However, on 17th February, 2012, the respondent No.2 declined to
reconsider the application/request of the respondent No.1, on the grounds stated in its earlier letter,
dated 6th January, 2012. As such, the request of the respondent No.1 for reconsideration of its
proposal came to be rejected by the respondent No.2, vide its communication dated 17th February,
2012.

7. In the meantime, vide the impugned Notification, existing Regulation 6(2)(h) of the Regulations
was substituted by amended Regulation 6(2)(h) on 21st May, 2012. Respondent No.1 again
submitted its fresh application on 28 th September, 2012 for academic year 2013−2014. The same
was returned by the respondent No.2 vide its order dated 31 st December, 2012, on the ground that
the proposal/application was not in compliance with the amended Regulation 6(2)(h) of the
Regulations. On 23rd January, 2013, the respondent No.1 thereafter wrote a letter to the respondent
No.2, stating therein that since Essentiality Certificate was issued to it on 11 th January, 2012, the
impugned Notification was not applicable to it and requested for reconsideration of its application
under the unamended Regulation 6(2)(h) of the Regulations. The respondent No.2 rejected the
application of the respondent No.1 vide its order dated 5th March, 2013.

8. The respondent No.1 challenged the order passed by the respondent No.2 rejecting the request for
reconsideration of its application before the learned single judge of the High Court of Judicature for
Rajasthan, Bench at Jaipur, by way of S.B. Civil Writ Petition No.15090 of 2016. The respondent
No.1 further sought a direction to reconsider the application submitted by it on 24th September,
2011 for establishment of a new dental college for academic session 2017−2018. The learned single
judge of the High Court, vide judgment and order dated 3 rd November, 2016, finding no merit in
the writ petition, dismissed the same. The respondent No.1 thereafter filed a writ petition before the
Division Bench being D.B. Civil Writ Petition No. 3260 of 2017, challenging the impugned
Notification amending Regulation 6(2)(h) of the Regulations. The respondent No.1 also sought a
prayer for direction to the respondent No.2, for reconsidering its application, dated 28 th
September, 2012, for establishment of a new Dental College for academic session 2018−2019 and for
subsequent academic sessions. By the impugned judgment and order dated 24 th April, 2018, the
Division Bench of the High Court allowed the said writ petition by striking down the impugned

2

Dental Council Of India vs Biyani Shikshan Samiti on 12 April, 2022

Notification and directed the respondent No. 2 to reconsider the case of the respondent No.1 in the
light of the observations made in the impugned judgment and order. Being aggrieved thereby, the
present appeal has been preferred by the Council.

9. We have heard Shri Gaurav Sharma, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the Council, Ms.
Aishwarya Bhati, learned Additional Solicitor General (“ASG” for short) appearing on behalf of the
respondent No.2 and Ms. Shobha Gupta, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent
No.1.

10. Shri Gaurav Sharma, learned counsel, would submit that the Division Bench of the High Court
has grossly erred in allowing the writ petition. He submits that the Council is an expert statutory
body duly constituted under the said Act. He submits that the said Act empowers the Council to
make Regulations for various aspects concerned with Dental Education, including prescribing
requirement of minimum standards. He submits that the Council, after examining various aspects,
had found it necessary to amend Regulation 6(2)(h) of the Regulations. He submits that this was
done for providing better teaching facilities to the students and for improving the standards of
education. He submits that the Division Bench has grossly erred in holding that it was beyond the
powers of the Council to make delegated legislation. He submits that, in any case, the finding of the
High Court that the impugned Notification was violative of Articles 14 and 19(1)

(g) of the Constitution of India, is totally erroneous.

11. Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, learned ASG also supports the submission made on behalf of the Council.
Relying on the judgment of this Court in the case of Dental Council of India vs. Subharti K.K.B.
Charitable Trust and Another1, she submits that the High Court ought not to have interfered with
the impugned Notification, since the Regulations were made by the expert body in accordance with
the provisions of the said Act.

12. Ms. Shobha Gupta, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent No.1, on the contrary,
would submit that the High Court has rightly quashed the impugned Notification. She submits that
the impugned Notification has no nexus with the object sought to be achieved. She submits that
there is a huge shortage of Dentists in the country and therefore, the object of the legislation should
be to encourage establishment of more Dental Colleges rather than providing a requirement which
will 1 (2001) 5 SCC 486 restrict the number of new Dental Colleges. On facts, she submits that there
is no medical college within the vicinity of 100 kms. from the place at which the respondent No.1
proposes to start a new Dental College. She submits that the impugned Notification, therefore,
violates the fundamental rights of the students to take dental education as well as the fundamental
right of the respondent No.1 to establish an educational institution under Article 19(1)(g) of the
Constitution of India.

13. For considering the rival submissions, it will be appropriate to refer to certain provisions of the
said Act. Section 3 of the said Act requires the Central Government to constitute a Council
consisting of members named therein. Section 10 of the said Act deals with recognition of dental
qualifications. Section 10A of the said Act deals with permission for establishment of new dental

3

Dental Council Of India vs Biyani Shikshan Samiti on 12 April, 2022

college, new courses of study, etc. Sub−section (1) of Section 10A of the said Act puts restriction on
the establishment of an authority or institution for a course of study or training which would enable
a student of such course or training to qualify himself for the grant of recognized dental
qualification; it also imposes a restriction on opening a new or higher course of study or training, or
increase the admission capacity in any course of study or training, including a post−graduate course
of study or training. It is provided that no person can establish an authority or institution for dental
education and that no authority or institution can open a new or higher course of study or training,
including a post−graduate course of study or training, or increase its admission capacity without the
prior permission of the Central Government. Sub−sections (2) to (4) of Section 10A of the said Act
deal with the procedure to be followed for making an application for permission to start a new or
higher course of study or training or increase of intake capacity in any course of study or training.
Sub−section (5) of Section 10A of the said Act is a deeming provision, which provides that if the
Central Government fails to pass an order on the scheme/application submitted by the applicant
within a period of one year from the date of submitting the scheme/application, such
scheme/application shall be deemed to have been approved by the Central Government in the form
in which it was submitted. It also provides that the permission of the Central Government required
under sub−section (1) shall also be deemed to have been granted. Sub−section (6) of Section 10A of
the said Act provides for extension of the period provided in sub−section (5) by entitling an
applicant for the extension of the period for furnishing the particulars called for by the Council or by
the Central Government.

14. It will be apposite to reproduce sub−section (7) of Section 10A of the said Act, since the same fell
for consideration before the Division Bench of the High Court while allowing the writ petition. It
reads thus:

“10A. Permission for establishment of new dental college, new courses of study,
etc.—(1) ………………………… (2)……………………………………………… xxx (7) The Council,
while making its recommendations under clause (b) of sub−section (3) and the
Central Government, while passing an order either approving or disapproving the
scheme under sub−section (4), shall have due regard to the following factors,
namely:—

(a) whether the proposed authority or institution for grant of recognised dental
qualification or the existing authority or institution seeking to open a new or higher
course of study or training, would be in a position to offer the minimum standards of
dental education in conformity with the requirements referred to in Section 16−A and
the regulations made under sub− section (1) of Section 20;

(b) whether the person seeking to establish an authority or institution or the existing
authority or institution seeking to open a new or higher course of study or training or
to increase its admission capacity has adequate resources;

(c) whether necessary facilities in respect of staff, equipment, accommodation,
training and other facilities to ensure proper functioning of the authority or

4

Dental Council Of India vs Biyani Shikshan Samiti on 12 April, 2022

institution or conducting the new course of study or training or accommodating the
increased admission capacity have been provided or would be provided within the
time−limit specified in the scheme;

(d) whether adequate hospital facilities, having regard to the number of students
likely to attend such authority or institution or course of study or training or as a
result of the increased admission capacity have been provided or would be provided
within the time−limit specified in the scheme;

(e) whether any arrangement has been made or programme drawn to impart proper
training to students likely to attend such authority or institution or course of study or
training by persons having the recognised dental qualifications;

(f) the requirement of manpower in the field of practice of dentistry; and

(g) any other factors as may be prescribed.”

15. It could thus be seen that the Council, while making its recommendations and the
Central Government, while passing an order, are required to take into consideration
various factors as are enumerated in clauses (a) to (g) of sub−section (7) of Section
10A of the said Act.

16. Section 20 of the said Act empowers the Council, with the approval of the Central
Government, to make Regulations. It will be apposite to refer to the relevant part of
Section 20 of the said Act, which reads thus:

“20. Power to make regulations.−(1) The Council may, with the approval of the
Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act to carry out the purposes of this Chapter.

(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power such
regulations may−

(a) ……………………………………………

(b) …………………………………………… xxx xxx xxx (fb) prescribe any other factors under
clause (g) of sub−section (7) of section 10A”

17. It could thus be seen from the conjoint reading of clause

(g) of sub−section (7) of Section 10A and clause (fb) of sub− section (2) of Section 20
of the said Act that the Council is also empowered to take into consideration any
other factors as may be prescribed and also entitled to make Regulations for
prescribing any other factor under clause (g) of sub−section (7) of Section 10A.

5

Dental Council Of India vs Biyani Shikshan Samiti on 12 April, 2022

18. It will also be relevant to refer to the provision of Regulation 6(2)(h) as it existed
prior to the impugned Notification and the amended provision after the impugned
Notification was given effect to. They read thus:

“Regulation 6(2)(h) prior to impugned Notification dated 21st May, 2012

6. Eligibility and qualifying criteria.− (1) …………………………………………..

(2) The organizations under sub− regulation (1) shall qualify to apply for permission to establish a
dental college if the following conditions are fulfilled:−

(a) …………………………………………..

(b) …………………………………………..

xxx

(h) the applicant owns and manages a General Hospital of not less than 100 beds as per Annexure I
with necessary infrastructure facilities including teaching pre−clinical, para−clinical and allied
medical sciences in the campus of the proposed dental college, or the proposed dental college is
located in the proximity of a Government Medical College or a Medical College recognised by the
Medical Council of India and an undertaking of the said Medical College to the effect that it would
facilitate training to the students of the proposed dental college in the subjects of Medicine, Surgery
and Allied Medical Sciences has been obtained, or where no Medical College is available in the
proximity of the proposed dental college, the proposed dental college gets itself tied up at least for 5
years with a Government General Hospital having a provision of at least 100 beds and located within
a radius of 10 K.M. of the proposed dental college and the tie−up is extendable till it has its own 100
bedded hospital in the same premises. In such cases, the applicant shall produce evidence that
necessary infrastructure facilities including teaching pre−clinical, para−clinical and allied medical
sciences are owned by the proposed dental college itself;

Regulation 6(2)(h) after the impugned Notification dated 21st May, 2012

6. Eligibility and qualifying criteria.− (1) …………………………………………..

(2) The organizations under sub− regulation (1) shall qualify to apply for permission to establish a
dental college if the following conditions are fulfilled:−

(a) …………………………………………..

(b) …………………………………………..

xxx

6

Dental Council Of India vs Biyani Shikshan Samiti on 12 April, 2022

(h) the applicant shall attach its proposed dental college with a Government/Private Medical College
approved/recognised by the Medical Council of India which is located at the distance of 10 kms. by
road from the proposed dental college and produce evidence of the said Medical College to the effect
that it would facilitate training to the students of the proposed dental college as per syllabus/course
curriculum prescribed in respective undergraduate and post graduate dental course regulations as
amended from time to time:− Provided that not more than one dental college shall be attached with
the medical college.”

19. It could thus be seen that the change that has been brought by the impugned Notification is that,
though under the unamended Regulation 6(2)(h), an applicant was entitled to apply if he/she/it
owned and managed a General Hospital of not less than 100 beds; by the impugned Notification, it
has been made mandatory that the applicant has to attach its proposed Dental College with the
Government/Private Medical College, approved/recognized by the Medical Council of India, which
is located at a distance of 10 kilometers by road from the proposed Dental College. The distance of
10 kilometers has now been increased to 30 kilometers, vide amendment dated 5 th July, 2017.

20. The Division Bench of the High Court vide the impugned judgment and order dated 24th April,
2018, has allowed the writ petition and quashed the impugned Notification on three grounds, viz.,

(i) that it is violative of Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution of India;

(ii) that it is beyond the scope of the powers of the Council to make delegated legislation as provided
under sub− section (7) of Section 10A of the said Act; and

(iii) that it is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India, inasmuch as the Dental Colleges
established prior to impugned Notification would be permitted to run without attachment with
Medical Colleges, whereas, the Dental Colleges established after the impugned Notification will be
compelled to have such an attachment with the Medical Colleges.

21. We find that the learned judges of the Division Bench have erred on all counts.

22. It will be relevant to refer to the following observations of this Court in the case of Indian
Express Newspapers (Bombay) Private Ltd. and others vs. Union of India and others2.

“75. A piece of subordinate legislation does not carry the same degree of immunity which is enjoyed
by a statute passed by a competent Legislature. Subordinate legislation may be questioned on any of
the grounds on which plenary legislation is questioned. In addition it may also be questioned on the
ground that it does not conform to the statute under which it 2 (1985) 1 SCC 641 is made. It may
further be questioned on the ground that it is contrary to some other statute. That is because
subordinate legislation must yield to plenary legislation. It may also be questioned on the ground
that it is unreasonable, unreasonable not in the sense of not being reasonable, but in the sense that
it is manifestly arbitrary.”

7

Dental Council Of India vs Biyani Shikshan Samiti on 12 April, 2022

23. It could thus be seen that this Court has held that the subordinate legislation may be questioned
on any of the grounds on which plenary legislation is questioned. In addition, it may also be
questioned on the ground that it does not conform to the statute under which it is made. It may
further be questioned on the ground that it is contrary to some other statute. Though it may also be
questioned on the ground of unreasonableness, such unreasonableness should not be in the sense of
not being reasonable, but should be in the sense that it is manifestly arbitrary.

24. It has further been held by this Court in the said case that for challenging the subordinate
legislation on the ground of arbitrariness, it can only be done when it is found that it is not in
conformity with the statute or that it offends Article 14 of the Constitution. It has further been held
that it cannot be done merely on the ground that it is not reasonable or that it has not taken into
account relevant circumstances which the Court considers relevant.

25. The judgment of this Court in the case of Indian Express Newspapers (Bombay) Private Ltd.
(supra) has been followed by a three−judge Bench of this Court in the case of Khoday Distilleries
Ltd. and others vs. State of Karnataka and others3. It will be apposite to refer to the following
observations of this Court in the said case:

“13. It is next submitted before us that the amended Rules are arbitrary,
unreasonable and cause undue hardship and, therefore, violate Article 14 of the
Constitution. Although the protection of Article 19(1)(g) may not be available to the
appellants, the rules must, undoubtedly, satisfy the test of Article 14, 3 (1996) 10 SCC
304 which is a guarantee against arbitrary action. However, one must bear in mind
that what is being challenged here under Article 14 is not executive action but
delegated legislation. The tests of arbitrary action which apply to executive actions do
not necessarily apply to delegated legislation. In order that delegated legislation can
be struck down, such legislation must be manifestly arbitrary; a law which could not
be reasonably expected to emanate from an authority delegated with the law−making
power. In the case of Indian Express Newspapers (Bombay) (P) Ltd. v. Union of India
[(1985) 1 SCC 641 : 1985 SCC (Tax) 121 : (1985) 2 SCR 287] (SCR at p. 243) this Court
said that a piece of subordinate legislation does not carry the same degree of
immunity which is enjoyed by a statute passed by a competent legislature. A
subordinate legislation may be questioned under Article 14 on the ground that it is
unreasonable; “unreasonable not in the sense of not being reasonable, but in the
sense that it is manifestly arbitrary”.

Drawing a comparison between the law in England and in India, the Court further observed that in
England the Judges would say, “Parliament never intended the authority to make such Rules; they
are unreasonable and ultra vires”. In India, arbitrariness is not a separate ground since it will come
within the embargo of Article 14 of the Constitution. But subordinate legislation must be so arbitrary
that it could not be said to be in conformity with the statute or that it offends Article 14 of the
Constitution.”

8

Dental Council Of India vs Biyani Shikshan Samiti on 12 April, 2022

26. In the case of State of T.N. and another vs. P. Krishnamurthy and others4 after considering the
law laid down by this Court earlier in the cases of Indian Express Newspapers (Bombay) Private Ltd.
(supra), Supreme Court Employees’ Welfare Association. vs. Union of India and another5, Shri
Sitaram Sugar Company Limited and another vs. Union of India and others6, St. Johns Teachers
Training Institute vs. Regional Director, National Council for Teacher Education and another7,
Rameshchandra Kachardas Porwal and others vs. State of Maharashtra 4 (2006) 4 SCC 517 5 (1989)
4 SCC 187 6 (1990) 3 SCC 223 7 (2003) 3 SCC 321 and others 8, Union of India and another vs.
Cynamide India Ltd. and another9 and State of Haryana vs. Ram Kishan and others10, this Court
has laid down certain grounds, on which the subordinate legislation can be challenged, which are as
under:

“Whether the rule is valid in its entirety?

15. There is a presumption in favour of constitutionality or validity of a subordinate
legislation and the burden is upon him who attacks it to show that it is invalid. It is
also well recognised that a subordinate legislation can be challenged under any of the
following grounds:

(a) Lack of legislative competence to make the subordinate legislation.

(b) Violation of fundamental rights guaranteed under the Constitution of India.

(c) Violation of any provision of the Constitution of India.

(d) Failure to conform to the statute under which it is made or exceeding the limits of
authority conferred by the enabling Act.

8 (1981) 2 SCC 722 9 (1987) 2 SCC 720 10 (1988) 3 SCC 416

(e) Repugnancy to the laws of the land, that is, any enactment.

(f) Manifest arbitrariness/ unreasonableness (to an extent where the court might well say that the
legislature never intended to give authority to make such rules).”

27. In the light of these guiding principles, we will have to examine the correctness of the findings of
the learned judges of the Division Bench in the impugned judgment and order.

28. One of the grounds on which the impugned Notification has been struck down is that it is
beyond the scope of powers of the Council under Section 10A(7)(d) of the said Act. The Division
Bench of the High Court has relied on clause (d) of sub−section (7) of Section 10A of the said Act to
come to a conclusion that clause (d) refers to adequate hospital facilities, having regard to the
number of students likely to attend the institution. It has held that a requirement of hospital was
already fulfilled in the pre−amended Regulation 6(2)(h) of the Regulations. It has further held that
clause (d) does not refer to Medical College. It was therefore held that the impugned Notification

9

Dental Council Of India vs Biyani Shikshan Samiti on 12 April, 2022

requiring the Dental Colleges to be attached with the Government/Private Medical College was
beyond the scope of sub−section (7) of Section 10A of the said Act and, therefore, inconsistent with
the said Act.

29. We find that the Division Bench has failed to take into consideration clause (g) of sub−section
(7) of Section 10A of the said Act. It is to be noted that whereas clauses (a) to (f) of sub− section (7)
of Section 10A of the said Act deal with various factors, clause (g) thereof, which can be said to be a
residual clause, enables the Council to take into consideration also any other factor as may be
prescribed.

30. We further find that the Division Bench of the High Court has also failed to take into
consideration clause (fb) of sub− section (2) of Section 20 of the said Act. A conjoint reading of these
provisions would reveal that the Council is also empowered to take into consideration any other
factor as may be prescribed and also to make a Regulation with regard to any other factor under
clause (g) of sub−section (7) of Section 10A of the said Act. It could thus be seen that it is within the
competence of the Council to make Regulations prescribing any other conditions, which are
otherwise not found in clauses (a) to (f) of sub−section (7) of Section 10A of the said Act. Challenge
to the same would be permissible only on the ground of manifest arbitrariness. It is also equally
settled that the presumption is always with regard to the validity of a provision. The burden is on the
party who challenges the validity of such provision. We find that the respondent No.1 has failed to
discharge the burden to show that the impugned Notification suffers from manifest arbitrariness.

31. Secondly, the Division Bench of the High Court found the impugned Notification dated 21st May,
2012 to be violative of Article 14 of the Constitution, on the ground that the Dental Colleges
established prior to impugned Notification would not be required to be attached with the Medical
Colleges, whereas, the Dental Colleges, established after the impugned Notification, will be
compelled to be attached to such Medical Colleges. We are of the considered view that the Colleges
established prior to the impugned Notification and the Colleges established/to be established after
the impugned Notification would form two separate classes. The differential treatment for different
classes would not be hit by Article 14 of the Constitution of India. The only requirement would be, as
to whether such a classification has a nexus with the object sought to be achieved by the Act. For the
reasons given hereinafter, we find that the factors taken into consideration by the Council, while
amending Regulation 6(2)(h) of the Regulations are relevant factors. The factors have a nexus with
the object sought to be achieved. It has been submitted on behalf of the Council that the existing
recognized Medical College already has a facility to impart education to about 500− 700 students.
Such Medical Colleges have a full−fledged teaching faculty. Such a faculty would enable providing a
proper education to the students of the Dental colleges on various aspects of pre−clinical, para−
clinical and allied medicine, etc. The Council has also taken into consideration the fact that the
General Hospitals having bed−capacity of 100 beds or more do not have experts on full−time basis.
They usually engage the services of consultant doctors, who visit the Hospital for a very limited
period. The Council has also taken into consideration the fact that the private hospitals do not have
adequate clinical facilities and/or clinical material and therefore, it is unlikely that they will be able
to impart education and training to students. It has been submitted on behalf of the Council that the
amended Regulation 6(2)(h) of the Regulations was brought into effect so that it would facilitate

10

Dental Council Of India vs Biyani Shikshan Samiti on 12 April, 2022

training to the students of the proposed Dental Colleges as per the syllabus/course curriculum
prescribed. It, therefore, cannot be said that the Council has taken into consideration the factors,
which are not relevant or germane for the purpose to be achieved. The object to be achieved is to
provide adequate teaching and training facilities to the students. If in the wisdom of the expert body,
this can be done by attaching a Dental College to the already existing Medical College, it cannot be
faulted with.

32. The reason given for not permitting more than one Dental College to be attached to the existing
recognized Medical College is that if one Dental College is permitted to be attached to a recognized
Medical College, which is already having 500−750 students in different semesters of their 5−year
MBBS course, the additional students of the Dental College may very well be absorbed in the
facilities that are already available in the recognized Medical College. However, if more than one
Dental College is permitted to be attached, it will lead to overcrowding of students in the Medical
College.

33. We are, therefore, of the considered view that the amended Regulation cannot be said to be one,
which is manifestly arbitrary, so as to permit the Court to interfere with it. On the contrary, we find
that the amended Regulation 6(2)(h) has a direct nexus with the object to be achieved, i.e.,
providing adequate teaching and training facilities to the students.

34. It will be apposite to refer to the following observations of the Division Bench of the High Court
in the impugned judgment:

“We fail to understand as to how the earlier provisions, in any manner, were not
sufficient for the object sought to be achieved. A careful reading of the unamended
Regulation 6(2)(h) shows requirement of attachment with General Hospital owned
and managed by the applicant in the campus of the proposed Dental College. It was
with infrastructure facilities including teaching pre−clinical, para−clinical and allied
medical sciences.

If we talk about practical training, it would be more in the hospital, therefore, the
unamended provision of Regulation 6(2)(h) provided both i.e. attachment with
General Hospital or with a Medical College with required facilities of teaching.”

35. In this respect, we would gainfully refer to the following observations of this Court in the case of
Maharashtra State Board of Secondary and Higher Secondary Education and another vs. Paritosh
Bhupeshkumar Sheth and others11:

“14. ….. whether a rule or regulation or other type of statutory instrument — is in
excess of the power of subordinate legislation conferred on the delegate has to be
determined with reference only to the specific provisions contained in the relevant
statute conferring the power to make the rule, regulation, etc. and also the object and
purpose of the Act as can be gathered from the various provisions of the enactment. It
would be wholly wrong for the Court to substitute its own opinion for that of the

11

Dental Council Of India vs Biyani Shikshan Samiti on 12 April, 2022

Legislature or its delegate as to what principle or policy would best serve the objects
and purposes of the Act and to sit in judgment over the wisdom and effectiveness or
otherwise of the policy 11 (1984) 4 SCC 27 laid down by the regulation−making body
and declare a regulation to be ultra vires merely on the ground that, in the view of the
Court, the impugned provisions will not help to serve the object and purpose of the
Act. So long as the body entrusted with the task of framing the rules or regulations
acts within the scope of the authority conferred on it, in the sense that the rules or
regulations made by it have a rational nexus with the object and purpose of the
statute, the court should not concern itself with the wisdom or efficaciousness of such
rules or regulations.”

36. This Court in unequivocal terms has held that it would be wholly wrong for the Court to
substitute its own opinion for that of the Legislature or its delegate as to what principle or policy
would best serve the objects and purposes of the Act. It has been held that it is not permissible for
the Court to sit in judgment over the wisdom and effectiveness or otherwise of the policy laid down
by the regulation−making body and declare a regulation to be ultra vires merely on the ground that,
in the view of the Court, the impugned provisions will not help to serve the object and purpose of the
Act.

37. We find that the observations quoted herein above of the Division Bench of the High Court are
totally contrary to the view expressed by this Court in the case of Maharashtra State Board of
Secondary and Higher Secondary Education and another (supra).

38. The Division Bench of the High Court has erred in substituting its wisdom with that of the rule−
making body, which is an expert body. In this respect, it will also be apposite to refer to the
observations of this Court in the case of All India Council for Technical Education vs. Surinder
Kumar Dhawan and others12. After considering various judgments on the issue, this Court observed
thus:

“16. The courts are neither equipped nor have the academic or technical 12 (2009) 11
SCC 726 background to substitute themselves in place of statutory professional
technical bodies and take decisions in academic matters involving standards and
quality of technical education. If the courts start entertaining petitions from
individual institutions or students to permit courses of their choice, either for their
convenience or to alleviate hardship or to provide better opportunities, or because
they think that one course is equal to another, without realising the repercussions on
the field of technical education in general, it will lead to chaos in education and
deterioration in standards of education.

17. The role of statutory expert bodies on education and the role of courts are well
defined by a simple rule. If it is a question of educational policy or an issue involving
academic matter, the courts keep their hands off.”

12

Dental Council Of India vs Biyani Shikshan Samiti on 12 April, 2022

39. We are, therefore, of the considered view that it was not permissible for the Division Bench of
the High Court to enter into an area of experts and hold that the unamended provisions ought to
have been preferred over the amended provisions.

40. That leaves us with the finding of the Division Bench of the High Court that the amended
Regulation is violative of Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution. Reliance in this respect is placed on the
Eleven−Judge Constitution Bench judgment of this Court in the case of T.M.A. Pai Foundation and
others vs. State of Karnataka and others13. In this respect, it will be relevant to refer to the following
observations of the Eleven− Judge Constitution Bench of this Court in the said case:

“54. The right to establish an educational institution can be regulated; but such
regulatory measures must, in general, be to ensure the maintenance of proper
academic standards, atmosphere and infrastructure (including qualified staff) and
the prevention of maladministration by those in charge of management. The fixing of
a rigid fee structure, dictating the formation and composition of a governing body,
compulsory nomination of teachers and staff for appointment or nominating
students for admissions would be unacceptable restrictions.” 13 (2002) 8 SCC 481

41. It can thus clearly be seen that the Constitution Bench itself has held that the right to establish
an educational institution can be regulated. However, such regulatory measures must, in general, be
to ensure the maintenance of proper academic standards, atmosphere and infrastructure and the
prevention of maladministration.

42. The impugned Notification, undoubtedly, is made in order to ensure the maintenance of proper
academic standards and infrastructure and as such, the judgment of the Constitution Bench of this
Court in the case of T.M.A. Pai Foundation and others (supra), rather than supporting the case of
the respondent No.1, would support the case of the Council.

43. We further find that the impugned judgment of the Division Bench of the High Court is also not
sustainable on the ground of judicial propriety. The respondent No.1 had already filed a writ petition
being S.B. Civil Writ Petition No. 15090 of 2016, challenging the action of the Council and the
respondent No.2 in returning the application of the respondent No.1 for grant of recognition to new
Dental College and for a direction to reconsider its application submitted on 24 th September, 2011.
The said writ petition was filed in the year 2016. The said writ petition was dismissed by the learned
single judge of the High Court by the judgment and order dated 3 rd November, 2016. After the said
writ petition was rejected on 3 rd November, 2016, the respondent No.1 filed the present writ
petition being D.B. Civil Writ Petition No.3260 of 2017 before the Division Bench of the High Court
on 1st March, 2017. In the said writ petition, the prayer was for challenging the validity of the
impugned Notification and for a direction to reconsider the proposal of the respondent No.1. The
impugned Notification could have very well been challenged in the earlier writ petition, which was
filed in the year 2016 before the learned single judge of the High Court. However, having failed in
that writ petition before the learned single judge, the respondent No.1 filed another writ petition
before the Division Bench of the High Court. Though one of the prayers challenges the validity of the
impugned Notification, another prayer claims for reconsideration of its proposal. The said prayer

13

Dental Council Of India vs Biyani Shikshan Samiti on 12 April, 2022

has been granted by the Division Bench of the High Court by its impugned judgment and order
dated 24th April, 2018. It could thus be seen that the prayer for reconsideration of the proposal
submitted by the respondent No.1, which was already rejected by the learned single judge of the
High Court vide order dated 3 rd November, 2016 in S.B. Civil Writ Petition No.15090 of 2016, has
been renewed in the fresh writ petition filed in the year 2017 and granted by the Division Bench of
the High Court.

44. We, therefore, find that on the ground of judicial propriety also the Division Bench of the High
Court ought not to have entertained the writ petition for a prayer, which already stood rejected. In
that view of the matter, the impugned judgment and order dated 24th April, 2018 passed by the
Division Bench of the High Court is not sustainable.

45. In the result, the appeal is allowed. The impugned judgment and order dated 24th April, 2018
passed by the Division Bench of the High Court is quashed and set aside. The D.B. Civil Writ
Petition No.3260 of 2017 filed by the respondent No.1 before the Division Bench of the High Court
stands dismissed. No order as to costs.

46. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.

…..….......................J. [L. NAGESWARA RAO] …….........................J. [B.R. GAVAI] NEW DELHI;

APRIL 12, 2022

14