Devendra Nath Singh vs The State Of Bihar on 12 October, 2022

Devendra Nath Singh vs The State Of Bihar on 12 October, 2022

Author: Dinesh Maheshwari

Bench: Aniruddha Bose, Dinesh Maheshwari

REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1768 OF 2022
(ARISING OUT OF SLP (CRL.) NO. 9609 OF 2022
@ DIARY NO. 22814 OF 2019)

DEVENDRA NATH SINGH                                  ..……. APPELLANT(S)

VERSUS

STATE OF BIHAR & ORS.                                ……. RESPONDENT(S)

JUDGMENT

DINESH MAHESHWARI, J.

Delay condoned. Leave granted.

2. The challenge in this appeal is to the order dated 10.09.2018, as passed by the High Court of
Judicature at Patna in Criminal Miscellaneous No. 649 of 2016.

2.1. The said petition under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 19731 was filed by
respondent No. 3 of the present appeal, against the order dated 21.06.2014, as passed by the ACJM,
Barh, District Patna2 in Barh Police Station Case No. 115 of 2012 whereby, the learned Magistrate
had taken cognizance of the offences under Sections 409, 467, 468 and 420 of the Indian Penal
Code, 1860 3 on the allegations 17:49:20 IST Reason:

1 ‘CrPC’, for short.

2 Hereinafter referred to as ‘the Magistrate’.

3 ‘IPC’, for short.

against the respondent No. 3 of misappropriation of stocks worth Rs. 16,99,648/- from the godown
of the Bihar State Food and Civil Supplies Corporation4 during the years 2010-11 and 2011-12.

1

Devendra Nath Singh vs The State Of Bihar on 12 October, 2022

3. The main plank of the submissions before the High Court in the aforesaid petition by the
respondent No. 3 had been that he was only a Class IV employee of the Corporation and that the
‘entire game was played’ by the present appellant, who was holding the position of the District
Manager. In that regard, the contents of audit report forming part of the First Information Report5
were extensively relied upon.

4. The High Court, after taking note of the submissions made on behalf of the present respondent
No. 3, expressed surprise that the then District Manager of the Corporation (i.e., the present
appellant), who was ultimately responsible for the illegalities, was given a clean chit by the
informant, i.e., the Senior Dy. Collector-cum-District Manager (in-charge of the godown). It was
also observed that the present respondent No. 3, a Class IV employee, could not have been posted at
the godown; and that he was made an accused in the case ‘as scapegoat to save the skin’ of the
present appellant.

4.1. Having said so, the High Court proceeded to direct the Magistrate to give directions to the police
to further investigate the case in terms of Section 173(8) CrPC regarding the allegations against the
appellant and to seek the report within a period of three months. The Court, however, 4 Hereinafter
referred to as ‘the Corporation’.

5 ‘FIR’, for short.

expressed its disinclination to interfere with the impugned order taking cognizance against the
present respondent No. 3 and disposed of the petition while giving liberty to the respondent No. 3 to
raise all the points at the time of framing the charge which, as per the directions of the High Court,
were to be decided by the learned Magistrate after taking into consideration the material emerging
in further investigation against the appellant.

5. The impugned order dated 10.09.2018 could be usefully reproduced, in extenso, as under: -

“This petition under Section 482 Cr. P. C. has been filed for quashing the order dated
21.6.2014 passed by the A.C.J.M. Barh, Patna in Barh P.S. case no. 115 of 2012 by
which learned Magistrate has taken cognizance for the offence under Sections
409,467, 468 and 420 of the I.P.C. against the petitioner.

Heard learned counsel for the petitioner and State. Learned counsel for the petitioner
has submitted that petitioner was only a class IV employee in the Bihar State Food
and Civil Supply Corporation Ltd. for short ‘the Corporation”. The entire game was
played by D.N Singh who was District Manager which has also come in the Audit
Report which is part of the FIR and annexed as Annexure-2. The informant who was
Senior Dy. Collector-cum-District Manager (Incharge) of the Godown has not lodged
any case against said D.N.Singh the then District Manager who had played entire
game in committing misappropriation. The F.I.R. has been lodged only against the
petitioner who was class IV employee and was made In-charge of the Godown by
D.N. Singh against the Circular and Government policy, which had also come in

2

Devendra Nath Singh vs The State Of Bihar on 12 October, 2022

detail in Audit Report submitted by the Auditor. The police submitted charge sheet
against this petitioner on the basis of aforesaid FIR and cognizance has been taken
against the petitioner on the basis of the charge sheet.

This Court is really surprised to find that the then District Manager of the
Corporation, who was ultimately responsible for all such illegalities, had been given
clean chit by the informant. He was not made accused in the case. The petitioner
being the IV grade employee, was posted by the then District Manager, namely, D.N.
Singh, as Incharge Assistant Godown Manager although he was not entitled to be
posted as such. He has been made accused in the case as scapegoat to save the skin of
D.N.Singh, the then District Manager of Godown.

Learned ACJM, Barh, Patna is directed to give direction to the police to further
reinvestigate the case in terms of provision of Section 173(8) of the Cr. P.C. with
regard to allegation against D.N.Singh the then District Manager with regard to
allegation of misappropriation of money and appointing the petitioner who was class
IV employee as In-charge Assistant Godown Manager against the circulars and
directions of the Government. The Magistrate will direct the police to complete the
re-investigation with regard to role of then District Manager Sri D. N.Singh in the
entire game of the misappropriation of the money as mentioned in detail in the audit
report in accordance with law and submit report before him within a period of three
months from the date of passing of the order by the learned Magistrate.

This Court, at present, is not inclined to interfere with the impugned order with
regard to the petitioner by which cognizance has been taken against him on the basis
of charge sheet submitted by the police.

This Cr. Misc. petition is, accordingly, disposed off. The petitioner is given liberty to
raise all the points, as raised in the present application, at the time of framing of
charge, which shall be considered and disposed off by the learned Court below in
accordance with law after taking into consideration the materials which will come
during further investigation with regard to allegation against D. N. Singh the then
District Manager.”

6. The order aforesaid is questioned by the appellant in whose relation the directions have been
issued for further investigation, inter alia, on the ground that investigation is the prerogative of the
investigating agency/officer and no mandate could be issued to the Magistrate so as to usurp such
powers to investigate. It is also submitted that the impugned order has been directly in violation of
the principles of natural justice inasmuch as no opportunity of hearing was extended by the High
Court to the appellant.

6.1. While elaborating, learned counsel for the appellant has contended that the High Court, while
exercising its powers under Section 482 CrPC, could not have issued a specific direction to the
Magistrate to direct the police to investigate the role of the appellant, who was neither named in the

3

Devendra Nath Singh vs The State Of Bihar on 12 October, 2022

FIR nor was charge-sheeted and was not even a party before the High Court. With reference to the
Constitution Bench decision in the case of Dharam Pal and Ors. v. State of Haryana and Anr.:

(2014) 3 SCC 306 and the other decisions in Abhinandan Jha & Ors. v.

Dinesh Mishra: (1967) 3 SCR 668 and Vinubhai Haribhai Malaviya and Ors. v. State of Gujarat and
Anr.: (2019) 17 SCC 1, the learned counsel has submitted that the principles remain settled by this
Court that as per the scheme of CrPC, formation of an opinion as to whether a person is to be put on
trial has been left to the officers in charge of a police station; and this Court has further held that in
a case where the Magistrate is of the opinion that the final report submitted by the police is
unsatisfactory, he could exercise his powers under Section 156(3) CrPC and direct the police to make
a further investigation or straightaway take cognizance under section 190(1)(c) CrPC,
notwithstanding the contrary opinion of the police. However, according to the learned counsel,
directions for exercising such power in a particular manner could not have been issued by the High
Court while dealing with the petition filed by the respondent No. 3. The learned counsel has also
referred to the decision in Madan Mohan v. State of Rajasthan and Ors.: (2018) 12 SCC 30, wherein
this Court has observed that a superior Court could not issue directions to any subordinate Court
commanding them to pass a particular order on any application filed by a party. 6.2. Learned
counsel for the appellant has also relied upon the decision in Popular Muthiah v. State: (2006) 7
SCC 296 to submit that while dealing with a similar issue where the High Court, in an appeal against
conviction under Section 302 IPC, had issued directions to the investigating agency to investigate
the appellant who had not been sent up for trial, this Court held that the High Court could not have
issued such a direction in exercise of its inherent powers, as the investigation of an offence was a
statutory power of the police and it was for the State to decide whether it wanted to proceed against
an accused or not. It was observed that the High Court could not issue directions to investigate the
case from a particular angle or by a particular agency and hence, it went beyond its jurisdiction in
directing the prosecution of the appellant. Therein, the impugned judgment was set aside, and the
matter was remanded to the High Court for fresh consideration after hearing the appellant.

6.3. In the second limb of submissions, learned counsel for the appellant has contended that the
High Court ought to have given an opportunity of hearing to the appellant before issuing the
impugned directions. The learned counsel would argue that the test as to whether a person is
entitled to an opportunity of being heard in challenge to an order passed by a Magistrate is not
dependant on whether such person had a right to be heard by the Magistrate in the first instance;
the entitlement to hearing has to be assessed independently by considering the consequences of the
proceedings in which a hearing is sought; and a hearing could be claimed where a substantial right
of a person would be affected. The learned counsel has referred to the decision in Divine Retreat
Centre v. State of Kerala and Ors.: (2008) 3 SCC 542 wherein, while dealing with the issue whether
the High Court could have passed a judicial order directing an investigation against the appellant
therein without hearing it, this Court held that no judicial order could be passed by any Court
without providing a reasonable opportunity of being heard to the person who was likely to be
affected by such order while distinguishing the decision in the case of Union of India and Anr. v.
W.N. Chadha: 1993 Supp (4) SCC 260 by observing that the dictum in the said judgment would not
apply where a challenge was to a judicial order directing an inquiry or investigation against a person

4

Devendra Nath Singh vs The State Of Bihar on 12 October, 2022

or institution. The learned counsel has also relied upon a 3-Judge Bench decision of this Court in
Manharibhai Muljibhai Kakadia and Anr. v. Shaileshbhai Mohanbhai Patel and Ors.: (2012) 10 SCC
517, wherein it was observed that an accused or a person suspected to have committed a crime has a
right to be heard in a criminal revision preferred before the High Court or Sessions Judge against an
order of dismissal of a complaint under Section 203 CrPC, as an order passed by the superior Court
in revision, overturning the order of dismissal of the complaint would, in effect, restore the
complaint and hence, cause prejudice to the accused.

6.3.1. It has been contended that in the absence of the appellant, the High Court had no occasion to
take note of the fact that he had already been exonerated of all charges after detailed departmental
proceedings and hence, the directions for further investigation were wholly unwarranted in this
case.

6.4. Learned counsel for the appellant has also argued that the High Court could not have directed
for further investigation or reinvestigation in this the matter in view of the dictum of this Court in
Vinay Tyagi v. Irshad Ali and Ors.: (2013) 5 SCC 762, wherein it was held that fresh/de novo
investigation ought to be directed sparingly and in exceptional circumstances, like where the
investigation already conducted is tainted by malafides.

6.5. Learned counsel for the appellant would submit that the Magistrate himself, while taking
cognizance, could have proceeded against the present appellant, if he had been satisfied that the
materials on record implicated the appellant to any extent but, when the Magistrate opted not to
proceed against the appellant, the High Court could not have issued directions to further
reinvestigate the matter qua the appellant, though it is always open for a Court to proceed against a
person not sent up for trial at the stage of Section 319 CrPC, if the evidence is forthcoming in that
regard.

7. Learned counsel for the respondent No. 3 has supported the impugned order with the
submissions that the appellant was a high- ranking officer and he appears to have influenced the
other officers in the internal inquiry so as to give him a clean chit. A copy of the audit report dated
31.05.2012 forming the basis of the FIR in question has been placed on record and has been
exhaustively referred to during the course of submissions.

7.1. The learned counsel has underscored the observations of this Court in the case of Vinubhai
Haribhai Malaviya (supra) that the ultimate aim of investigation and inquiry, whether by the police
or by the Magistrate, is to ensure that those who have actually committed the crime are booked and
those who have not, are not arraigned to face trial. With reference to these and other observations
that such requirements pertain to the spirit of Article 21 of the Constitution of India, learned counsel
has argued that the offences in question, relating to defalcation of foodgrains which caused hardship
to the economically weaker sections of the society, need to be properly investigated not only to book
the actual culprits but also to check the recurrence of such a crime. 7.2. The learned counsel would
argue that in the peculiar circumstances of this case, when it was found that no proper investigation
was carried out against the appellant, who was the District Manager and overall in-charge of the
godowns, the High Court has rightly exercised its inherent powers to issue the directions so as to

5

Devendra Nath Singh vs The State Of Bihar on 12 October, 2022

ensure further and proper investigation in the matter. While relying on the decision of this Court in
the case of State of Punjab v. Central Bureau of Investigation and Ors.: (2011) 9 SCC 182, the learned
counsel has contended that under Section 482 CrPC, the High Court has the power to order further
investigation as also reinvestigation; and that no illegality or jurisdictional error could be imputed
on the order impugned. The learned counsel has further submitted that when the High Court has
the power to direct further investigation or reinvestigation directly, it also could do so by issuing
directions to the learned Magistrate, who is in seisin of the matter. 7.3. The learned counsel has
further contended that the Magistrate, before whom a final report is submitted, has the power and
authority to differ with the report and to order further investigation. However, the existence of this
power with the Magistrate does not ipso facto imply that the High Court, even in exercise of its
inherent jurisdiction, cannot direct further investigation in an appropriate case, when it comes to its
notice that the investigation in a case has not been conducted properly. 7.4. It has further been
argued that although the inherent powers cannot be used by the High Court in a routine manner and
can be exercised only in extreme cases but in the present case, when offence in question has the
consequences for the society at large, the High Court cannot be faulted in exercising its inherent
powers, which are, nevertheless, exercised ex debito justitiae. The learned counsel has particularly
referred to paragraph 30 of the aforesaid decision in Popular Muthiah; and has further relied upon
the case of Neetu Kumar Nagaich v. State of Rajasthan and Ors.: (2020) 16 SCC 777 wherein this
Court has held that when a constitutional Court is satisfied that the investigation has not been
conducted in an objective manner or conducted in a manner as to help someone escaping the law, it
could direct de novo investigation so as to prevent miscarriage of criminal justice.

7.5. As regards the contention that no notice was issued to the appellant before passing of the
impugned order, the learned counsel has argued, with reference to the decision of this Court in W.N.
Chadha (supra) that, at the stage of investigation, no such notice is required to be issued to the
accused. Learned counsel has also referred to various other decisions and has submitted that the
said decision in W.N. Chadha has been consistently followed by this Court. The learned counsel
would also submit that though the referred judgments were rendered in the applications filed by the
victim and not by the co-accused but the underlying principle remains the same that an accused is
not required to be heard at the stage of investigation. Learned counsel would also submit that if
upon receiving the final report, the learned Magistrate could have ordered further investigation
without prior notice to the accused, so could the High Court have, in exercise of its inherent
jurisdiction, which is, if anything, much wider.

7.6. In the last leg of contentions, learned counsel for respondent No. 1 has also submitted that
before granting of interim stay by this Court, the requisite investigation had commenced and was
transferred to the Economic Offences Unit, where the allegations against the appellant have been
found to be prima facie correct but further action was deferred in view of the stay order of this
Court. However, the investigation hitherto carried out makes it clear that the doubts expressed by
the High Court have been found to be completely justified. Hence, the learned counsel would submit
in the alternative that, in any case, the investigation already carried out deserves to be protected so
that the real culprits like the appellant do not escape the process of law.

6

Devendra Nath Singh vs The State Of Bihar on 12 October, 2022

8. Apart from the submissions aforesaid, it is noteworthy that though, on behalf of the respondent
No. 2 - Corporation, the reply submissions are essentially to the effect that in the departmental
proceedings, charges were not proved against the present appellant but then, in the counter affidavit
on behalf of the respondent No. 1 - State, detailed submissions have been made, essentially refuting
the case of the appellant. 8.1. It has, inter alia, been submitted on behalf of the respondent-State
that apart from the present matter, being Barh P.S. Case No. 115 of 2012, there had also been
another matter, being Bikram P.S. Case No. 129 of 2012 against the respondent No. 3 as also the
present appellant; and after the order passed by the High Court, the investigation in the present case
was also carried out by the Economic Offences Unit, Bihar along with the aforesaid Bikram P.S. Case
No. 129 of 2012. While indicating prima facie complicity of the appellant, it has also been pointed
out that in the said Bikram P.S. Case No. 129 of 2012, instituted for offences under Sections 409,
420, 468, 471 and 474 IPC, after finding prima facie case against the present appellant, prosecution
sanction has also been obtained. That case relates to misappropriation of the goods worth Rs. 7.69
crores. It is submitted that in the present case, prosecution sanction has not been obtained for the
appellant having been given interim protection by this Court. A few passages of the counter affidavit
filed on behalf of the State could be usefully reproduced as under: -

“13. In fact, the successor in office District Manager had also observed for holding a
departmental proceeding against this petitioner and the petitioner was found to have
given change of the go downs to Pramod Ranjan Kumar Sinha even without of the
permission of the Headquarter of the Corporation.

14. Even the petitioner was found to be silent with respect to the affairs of the go
down change whereof was handed over by this petitioner a Class Iv employee namely
Pramod Ranjan Sinha inasmuch as on 11.02.2010 on truck bearing Registration No.
BR 1G 1051 carrying 104.61.650 Quintals of Wheat from Mokama Depot left Barh
Go-down, however, on 12.02.2010 this truck was apprehended and it was found to be
black marketing, but, this petitioner despite Knowledge did not take any steps against
the employee in charge of the go down by removing him from the post and only value
of the wheat was recovered from the salary of the employee. In fact, the district office
has repeateadly informed about the irregularities at the procurement centers,
however, the petitioner did not take any steps, nor did he remove the in change from
the procurement center / go down.

15. In fact it has also been reported that despite various irregularities and Knowledge
of such irregularities the petitioner did not take any pain to atop the some and take
corrective measures.

16. It is stated that being a District Manager it was the responsibility and prime duty
of this petitioner to get the lifting of food grains, store the same and ensure proper
distribution from the go downs, However, the petitioner failed to do so leading to
such huge misappropriation. In fact, as per the report of the SFC, it was found that
there is no proof that this petitioner carried out inspections / visits to the Go downs.

7

Devendra Nath Singh vs The State Of Bihar on 12 October, 2022

17. During investigation, when statement of the witnesses were recorded, namely,
Radhakant Paswan, Ramashankar Prasad and Brajkishore Srivastave, the then
Assistants, they deposed that the petitioner was responsible and that he did not
discharge his duties properly.

18. In fact, besides the present criminal case the petitioner has also been arraigned as
a non-FIR accused in connection with Bikram Police Station Case No. 129 of 2012
dated 12.06.2012 instituted under Sections 409/420/468/471/474 of IPC which is
also a case of identical nature. In fact, in this case the prosecution sanction has also
been received from the Corporation against this petitioner on 13.01.2012.

19. It is stated that in the present case also there is material against him as stated
above, however, prosecution sanction has not been obtained as the petitioner has
been granted interim protection.

20. That in the above background, the statement made in Para 1 is opposed and
contested and it is prayed that the order impugned may be upheld.”

9. We have given anxious consideration to the rival submissions and have scanned
through the material placed on record.

10. As could be readily noticed, the present case carries the peculiarities of its own
i n a s m u c h   a s   o n l y   t h e   r e s p o n d e n t   N o .   3   w a s   n a m e d   i n   t h e   F I R   a n d   w a s
charge-sheeted on the allegations of defalcation of foodgrains in the godown of
Corporation. No investigation whatsoever was carried out in relation to the role of the
appellant in the matter. When the respondent No. 3 attempted to question the order
passed by the learned Magistrate taking cognizance of the offences under Sections
409, 467, 468 and 420 IPC, the High Court, though, remained disinclined to interfere
with the order so passed by the learned Magistrate but, on the other hand, expressed
surprise that the appellant, the then District Manager, was given a clean chit by the
informant, another officer of the Corporation; and only the respondent No. 3, a Class
IV employee, was named as an accused. The High Court even proceeded to observe
that the respondent No. 3 had been made accused in the case ‘as scapegoat to save
the skin’ of the appellant. Therefore, the High Court directed the learned Magistrate
to give directions for further investigation in terms of Section 173(8) CrPC with
regard to the allegations against the appellant, of misappropriation of money and of
appointing the respondent No. 3 as in-charge Assistant Godown Manager against the
circulars and directions of the Government. The High Court further observed that the
directions shall be to complete the investigation with regard to the role of the
appellant in ‘the entire game of the misappropriation of the money as mentioned in
detail in the audit report’.

Indisputably, the order impugned came to be passed by the High Court without the appellant being
a party before it and in the exercise of its inherent powers under Section 482 CrPC.

8

Devendra Nath Singh vs The State Of Bihar on 12 October, 2022

10.1. Thus, and in view of the submissions made before us, two principal questions arise for
determination in this appeal: one, as to whether the High Court, in the exercise of its inherent
powers under Section 482 CrPC, was justified in issuing directions to the Magistrate to order further
investigation though, the Magistrate before whom the charge-sheet had been filed and who had
taken cognizance, did not adopt any such process; and second, as to whether the High Court was
justified in passing the order impugned without affording an opportunity of hearing to the
appellant?

11. While dealing with the first question as to the High Court’s exercise of its inherent powers under
Section 482 CrPC in the manner the same have been exercised in this matter, we may usefully refer
to the relevant provisions of law, which would be of bearing in the forthcoming discussion.

11.1. Section 482 CrPC, saving the inherent powers of the High Court, whereunder and whereby the
order impugned has been passed in this matter, reads as under: -

“482. Saving of inherent power of High Court.- Nothing in this Code shall be deemed
to limit or affect the inherent powers of the High Court to make such orders as may
be necessary to give effect to any order under this Code, or to prevent abuse of the
process of any Court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice.” 11.2. It is indisputable
that as per the scheme of CrPC, formation of an opinion as to whether the person is to
be put on trial has been left to the officer in-charge of a police station; and where the
Magistrate is of the opinion that the result of investigation in the form of report filed
before him is not satisfactory, he may also order investigation in terms of Sections
156(3) and/or 173(8) CrPC or he may straightway take cognizance under Section
190(1)(c).

11.2.1. Section 156, the relevant parts of Section 173 and Section 190 CrPC read as
under: -

“156. Police officer's power to investigate cognizable case.- (1) Any officer in charge of
a police station may, without the order of a Magistrate, investigate any cognizable
case which a Court having jurisdiction over the local area within the limits of such
station would have power to inquire into or try under the provisions of Chapter XIII.

(2) No proceeding of a police officer in any such case shall at any stage be called in
question on the ground that the case was one which such officer was not empowered
under this section to investigate. (3) Any Magistrate empowered under section 190
may order such an investigation as above-mentioned.” *** *** *** “173. Report of
police officer on completion of investigation.- (1) Every investigation under this
Chapter shall be completed without unnecessary delay.

*** *** *** (2) (i) As soon as it is completed, the officer in charge of the police station
shall forward to a Magistrate empowered to take cognizance of the offence on a police
report, a report in the form prescribed by the State Government, stating –

9

Devendra Nath Singh vs The State Of Bihar on 12 October, 2022

(a) the names of the parties;

(b) the nature of the information;

(c) the names of the persons who appear to be acquainted with the circumstances of
the case;

(d) whether any offence appears to have been committed and, if so, by whom;

(e) whether the accused has been arrested;

(f) whether he has been released on his bond and, if so, whether with or without
sureties;

(g) whether he has been forwarded in custody under section 170;

(h) whether the report of medical examination of the woman has been attached
where investigation relates to an offence under Sections 376, 376A, 376AB, 376B,
376C, 376D, 376DA, 376DB or section 376E of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).

(ii) The officer shall also communicate, in such manner as may be prescribed by the
State Government, the action taken by him, to the person, if any, by whom the
information relating to the commission of the offence was first given.

*** *** *** (8) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude further
investigation in respect of an offence after a report under sub-section (2) has been
forwarded to the Magistrate and, where upon such investigation, the officer in charge
of the police station obtains further evidence, oral or documentary, he shall forward
to the Magistrate a further report or reports regarding such evidence in the form
prescribed; and the provisions of sub-

sections (2) to (6) shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to such report or reports as they apply in
relation to a report forwarded under sub-section (2).” *** *** *** “190. Cognizance of offences by
Magistrates.- (1) Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, any Magistrate of the first class, and any
Magistrate of the second class specially empowered in this behalf under sub-section (2), may take
cognizance of any offence-

(a) upon receiving a complaint of facts which constitute such offence;

(b) upon a police report of such facts;

(c) upon information received from any person other than a police officer, or upon his own
knowledge, that such offence has been committed.

10

Devendra Nath Singh vs The State Of Bihar on 12 October, 2022

(2) The Chief Judicial Magistrate may empower any Magistrate of the second class to take
cognizance under sub-section (1) of such offences as are within his competence to inquire into or
try.” 11.3. It is hardly a matter of dispute that the Code of Criminal Procedure contemplates various
stages and vests various powers in the Magistrate to proceed against the persons not named in the
charge-sheet like the provision contained in Section 190(1)(c). These aspects, essentially of ordinary
operation of the general scheme of the Code of Criminal Procedure, as also underscored in the
Constitution Bench decision of this Court in Dharam Pal (supra) and in another decision in
Abhinandan Jha (supra) do not require much elaboration for the purpose of the present case.

12. As noticed, the present case carries its unique features that the learned Magistrate had not
exercised any such powers in terms of Section 156(3) or Section 173(8) or Section 190(1)(c) CrPC
but, the High Court has, while dealing with a petition under Section 482 CrPC, directed him to
direct the police to investigate further, particularly as regards the role of the appellant; and such
exercise of power by the High Court is in question. In this regard, we may usefully refer to the
relevant of the decisions cited by the learned counsel for the parties. 12.1. In the case of Vinay Tyagi
(supra), this Court dealt with the wide range of issues relating to the powers of the High Court under
Section 482 CrPC as also the powers of the Magistrate under Section 173 CrPC; and different vistas
of the processes of conducting ‘fresh investigation’ and/or ‘further investigation’. This Court
observed and held as under: -

“43. At this stage, we may also state another well-settled canon of the criminal
jurisprudence that the superior courts have the jurisdiction under Section 482 of the
Code or even Article 226 of the Constitution of India to direct “further investigation”,
“fresh” or “de novo” and even “reinvestigation”. “Fresh”, “de novo” and
“reinvestigation” are synonymous expressions and their result in law would be the
same. The superior courts are even vested with the power of transferring
investigation from one agency to another, provided the ends of justice so demand
such action. Of course, it is also a settled principle that this power has to be exercised
by the superior courts very sparingly and with great circumspection.

44. We have deliberated at some length on the issue that the powers of the High
Court under Section 482 of the Code do not control or limit, directly or impliedly, the
width of the power of the Magistrate under Section 228 of the Code. Wherever a
charge-

sheet has been submitted to the court, even this Court ordinarily would not reopen the investigation,
especially by entrusting the same to a specialised agency. It can safely be stated and concluded that
in an appropriate case, when the Court feels that the investigation by the police authorities is not in
the proper direction and that in order to do complete justice and where the facts of the case demand,
it is always open to the Court to hand over the investigation to a specialised agency. These principles
have been reiterated with approval in the judgments of this Court in Disha v. State of Gujarat6,
Vineet Narain v. Union of 6 (2011) 13 SCC 337: (2012) 2 SCC (Cri) 628.

India7, Union of India v. Sushil Kumar Modi8 and Rubabbuddin Sheikh v. State of Gujarat9 .

11

Devendra Nath Singh vs The State Of Bihar on 12 October, 2022

45. The power to order/direct “reinvestigation” or “de novo” investigation falls in the domain of
higher courts, that too in exceptional cases. If one examines the provisions of the Code, there is no
specific provision for cancellation of the reports, except that the investigating agency can file a
closure report (where according to the investigating agency, no offence is made out). Even such a
report is subject to acceptance by the learned Magistrate who, in his wisdom, may or may not accept
such a report. For valid reasons, the court may, by declining to accept such a report, direct “further
investigation”, or even on the basis of the record of the case and the documents annexed thereto,
summon the accused.

*** *** ***

48. What ultimately is the aim or significance of the expression “fair and proper investigation” in
criminal jurisprudence? It has a twin purpose: Firstly, the investigation must be unbiased, honest,
just and in accordance with law; secondly, the entire emphasis on a fair investigation has to be to
bring out the truth of the case before the court of competent jurisdiction. Once these twin paradigms
of fair investigation are satisfied, there will be the least requirement for the court of law to interfere
with the investigation, much less quash the same, or transfer it to another agency. Bringing out the
truth by fair and investigative means in accordance with law would essentially repel the very basis of
an unfair, tainted investigation or cases of false implication. Thus, it is inevitable for a court of law to
pass a specific order as to the fate of the investigation, which in its opinion is unfair, tainted and in
violation of the settled principles of investigative canons.

49. Now, we may examine another significant aspect which is how the provisions of Section 173(8)
have been understood and applied by the courts and investigating agencies. It is true that though
there is no specific requirement in the provisions of Section 173(8) of the Code to conduct “further
investigation” or file supplementary report with the leave of the court, the investigating agencies
have not only understood but also adopted it as a legal practice to seek permission of the courts to
conduct “further investigation” and file “supplementary report” with the leave of the court. The
courts, in some of the decisions, have also taken a similar view. The requirement of seeking prior
leave of the court to conduct “further investigation” and/or to file a “supplementary report” will
have to be read into, and is a necessary implication of the provisions of Section 173(8) of the Code.
The doctrine of 7 (1998) 1 SCC 226: 1998 SCC (Cri) 307.

8 (1996) 6 SCC 500.

9 (2010) 2 SCC 200: (2010) 2 SCC (Cri) 1006.

contemporanea expositio will fully come to the aid of such interpretation as the matters which are
understood and implemented for a long time, and such practice that is supported by law should be
accepted as part of the interpretative process.” (emphasis supplied) 12.2. In the case of State of
Punjab v. CBI (supra), this Court had the occasion to deal with a petition challenging the High
Court’s directions for entrusting investigation relating to multiple FIRs to CBI, where the FIRs had
their genesis in the allegations of rape by the respondent No. 3 against her husband and several
other persons. While dismissing the petition and declining leave to appeal under Article 136 of the

12

Devendra Nath Singh vs The State Of Bihar on 12 October, 2022

Constitution of India, this Court exposited on the magnitude of power of the High Court under
Section 482 CrPC for securing the ends of justice in the following passages: -

“22. Section 482 CrPC, however, states that nothing in CrPC shall be deemed to limit
or affect the inherent powers of the High Court to make such orders as is necessary to
give effect to any order under CrPC or to prevent the abuse of the process of any court
or otherwise to secure the ends of justice. Thus, the provisions of CrPC do not limit or
affect the inherent powers of the High Court to make such orders as may be necessary
to give effect to any order of the court or to prevent the abuse of any process of the
court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice. The language of sub-section (8) of
Section 173 CrPC, therefore, cannot limit or affect the inherent powers of the High
Court to pass an order under Section 482 CrPC for fresh investigation or
reinvestigation if the High Court is satisfied that such fresh investigation or
reinvestigation is necessary to secure the ends of justice.

23. We find support for this conclusion in the following observations of this Court in
Mithabhai Pashabhai Patel v. State of Gujarat10 cited by Mr Dhavan:

“13. It is, however, beyond any cavil that ‘further investigation’ and ‘reinvestigation’
stand on different footing. It may be that in a given situation a superior court in
exercise of its constitutional power, namely, under Articles 226 and 32 of the
Constitution of India 10 (2009) 6 SCC 332: (2009) 2 SCC (Cri) 1047.

could direct a ‘State’ to get an offence investigated and/or further investigated by a different agency.
Direction of a reinvestigation, however, being forbidden in law, no superior court would ordinarily
issue such a direction. Pasayat, J. in Ramachandran v. R. Udhayakumar opined as under:

‘7. At this juncture it would be necessary to take note of Section 173 of the Code. From
a plain reading of the above section it is evident that even after completion of
investigation under sub-section (2) of Section 173 of the Code, the police has right to
further investigate under sub-

section (8), but not fresh investigation or reinvestigation.’ A distinction, therefore,
exists between a reinvestigation and further investigation.

***

15. The investigating agency and/or a court exercise their jurisdiction conferred on
them only in terms of the provisions of the Code. The courts subordinate to the High
Court even do not have any inherent power under Section 482 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure or otherwise. The precognizance jurisdiction to remand vested in
the subordinate courts, therefore, must be exercised within the four corners of the
Code.”

13

Devendra Nath Singh vs The State Of Bihar on 12 October, 2022

24. It is clear from the aforesaid observations of this Court that the investigating
agency or the court subordinate to the High Court exercising powers under CrPC
have to exercise the powers within the four corners of CrPC and this would mean that
the investigating agency may undertake further investigation and the subordinate
court may direct further investigation into the case where charge-sheet has been filed
under sub-section (2) of Section 173 CrPC and such further investigation will not
mean fresh investigation or reinvestigation. But these limitations in sub-

section (8) of Section 173 CrPC in a case where charge-sheet has been filed will not apply to the
exercise of inherent powers of the High Court under Section 482 CrPC for securing the ends of
justice.” (emphasis supplied) 12.3. The decision of this Court in the case of Popular Muthiah (supra)
has been referred to by the learned counsel for the contesting parties in support of their respective
contentions. Therein, the High Court, while 11 (2008) 5 SCC 413: (2008) 2 SCC (Cri) 631.

exercising its appellate jurisdiction against the judgment and order convicting and sentencing an
accused of the offence under Section 302 IPC, opined that no case was made out to interfere with
judgment of the Trial Court in regard to the conviction of the charged accused but then, there was
evidence at every stage implicating the other persons too in the crime; and the action on the part of
the investigating officers leaving them from the array of accused was not simply a bona fide error.
The High Court felt that the Sessions Judge ought to have exercised his jurisdiction under Section
319 CrPC and while making adverse comments as regards conduct of the case, the High Court
directed that the prosecution of such other accused persons be launched. The High Court further
directed that the State shall take the advice of the Public Prosecutor as to under what Section they
were to be charged and tried; and CB, CID shall take over the matter, reinvestigate, and prosecute
such other accused persons. The question before this Court was about legality and propriety of the
directions so issued by the High Court while exercising appellate jurisdiction and without extending
an opportunity of hearing to the persons proposed to be prosecuted. In this backdrop, this Court
exposited on the amplitude as also on the limitation of such powers of the High Court and remitted
the matter to the High Court, for consideration afresh and after notice to the parties concerned,
while observing and holding as under: -

“29. The High Court while, thus, exercising its revisional or appellate power, may
exercise its inherent powers. Inherent power of the High Court can be exercised, it is
trite, both in relation to substantive as also procedural matters.

30. In respect of the incidental or supplemental power, evidently, the High Court can
exercise its inherent jurisdiction irrespective of the nature of the proceedings. It is
not trammelled by procedural restrictions in that:

(i) Power can be exercised suo motu in the interest of justice. If such a power is not
conceded, it may even lead to injustice to an accused.

(ii) Such a power can be exercised concurrently with the appellate or revisional
jurisdiction and no formal application is required to be filed therefor.

14

Devendra Nath Singh vs The State Of Bihar on 12 October, 2022

(iii) It is, however, beyond any doubt that the power under Section 482 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure is not unlimited. It can inter alia be exercised where the Code is
silent, where the power of the court is not treated as exhaustive, or there is a specific
provision in the Code; or the statute does not fall within the purview of the Code
because it involves application of a special law. It acts ex debito justitiae. It can, thus,
do real and substantial justice for which alone it exists.

*** *** ***

46. The High Court, however, was not correct in issuing a direction to the State to
take advice of the State Public Prosecutor as to under what section the appellant has
to be charged and tried or directing CB, CID to take up the matter and reinvestigate
and prosecute the appellant herein. Such a power does not come within the purview
of Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. Investigation of an offence is a
statutory power of the police. The State in its discretion may get the investigation
done by any agency unless there exists an extraordinary situation.

*** *** ***

48. The High Court while passing the impugned judgment did not bear the said
principles in mind. It went beyond its jurisdiction in directing the prosecution of the
appellant before us. In a case of this nature, where a superior court exercises its
inherent jurisdiction, it indisputably should remind itself about the inherent danger
in taking away the right of an accused. The High Court should have been circumspect
in exercising the said jurisdiction.

When a power under sub-section (8) of Section 173 of the Code of Criminal Procedure is exercised,
the court ordinarily should not interfere with the statutory power of the investigating agency. It
cannot issue directions to investigate the case from a particular angle or by a particular agency. In
the instant case, not only the High Court had asked reinvestigation into the matter, but also directed
examination of the witnesses who had not been cited as prosecution witnesses. It furthermore
directed prosecution of the appellant which was unwarranted in law.

*** *** ***

56. So far as inherent power of the High Court is concerned, indisputably the same is required to be
exercised sparingly. The High Court may or may not in a given situation, particularly having regard
to lapse of time, exercise its discretionary jurisdiction. For the said purpose, it was not only required
to apply its mind to the materials on record but was also required to consider as to whether any
purpose would be served thereby.

57. Having regard to the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, we are of the opinion that
before issuing the impugned directions, the High Court should have given an opportunity of hearing
to the appellants herein.

15

Devendra Nath Singh vs The State Of Bihar on 12 October, 2022

58. For the reasons aforementioned, the impugned judgment is set aside and the matter is remitted
to the High Court for consideration of the matter afresh. The High Court shall issue notice to the
appellants herein as also the State and pass appropriate orders as it may deem fit and proper and in
accordance with law. The appeals are allowed with the aforementioned observations and directions.”
(emphasis supplied) 12.4. The 3-Judge Bench decision of this Court in the case of Vinubhai Haribhai
Malaviya (supra) has also been referred to by the learned counsel for the parties in support of their
respective contentions. Therein, this Court did not approve the impugned judgment of the High
Court insofar it was stated that post-cognizance, the Magistrate was denuded of power to order
further investigation. However, this Court took note of the basic facts of the case that the FIR dated
22.12.2009 was concerned with two criminal acts, namely, preparing of fake and bogus Satakhat
and power of attorney in respect of the agricultural land in question, and demanding of an amount
of Rs. 2.5 crores as an attempt to extort money by the accused persons. It was also noticed that the
facts alleged in the application for further investigation were pertaining to the revenue entries made
in favour of R and S, and alleging as to how their claim over the same land was false and bogus. This
Court found that the facts alleged in the application for further investigation were in the nature of a
cross-FIR, which had never been registered. A communication of the Commissioner of Revenue,
Gujarat dated 15.03.2011 to the Collector, Surat was also referred to in this regard. In an overall
comprehension of the matter, and in view of the said communication of the Commissioner of
Revenue, Gujarat dated 15.03.2011, this Court held that no case for further investigation into the
facts alleged in the FIR dated 22.12.2009 was made out. However, having regard to what was stated
by the Commissioner, this Court directed the police to register an FIR qua those facts, to be inquired
into by a senior police officer; and this Court issued further directions for appropriate steps on the
basis of the police report. In the course of this decision, this Court exposited on the theory and
philosophy related with the aim of investigation and inquiry as also on the wide range of powers of
the police and the Magistrate as regards investigation and further investigation, inter alia, in the
following passages: -

“18. It is clear that a fair trial must kick off only after an investigation is itself fair and
just. The ultimate aim of all investigation and inquiry, whether by the police or by the
Magistrate, is to ensure that those who have actually committed a crime are correctly
booked, and those who have not are not arraigned to stand trial. That this is the
minimal procedural requirement that is the fundamental requirement of Article 21 of
the Constitution of India cannot be doubted. It is the hovering omnipresence of
Article 21 over CrPC that must needs inform the interpretation of all the provisions of
CrPC, so as to ensure that Article 21 is followed both in letter and in spirit.

*** *** ***

25. It is thus clear that the Magistrate's power under Section 156(3) CrPC is very
wide, for it is this judicial authority that must be satisfied that a proper investigation
by the police takes place.

To ensure that a “proper investigation” takes place in the sense of a fair and just investigation by the
police—which such Magistrate is to supervise—Article 21 of the Constitution of India mandates that

16

Devendra Nath Singh vs The State Of Bihar on 12 October, 2022

all powers necessary, which may also be incidental or implied, are available to the Magistrate to
ensure a proper investigation which, without doubt, would include the ordering of further
investigation after a report is received by him under Section 173(2); and which power would
continue to enure in such Magistrate at all stages of the criminal proceedings until the trial itself
commences. Indeed, even textually, the “investigation” referred to in Section 156(1) CrPC would, as
per the definition of “investigation” under Section 2(h), include all proceedings for collection of
evidence conducted by a police officer; which would undoubtedly include proceedings by way of
further investigation under Section 173(8) CrPC.

*** *** ***

42. ……To say that a fair and just investigation would lead to the conclusion that the police retain the
power, subject, of course, to the Magistrate's nod under Section 173(8) to further investigate an
offence till charges are framed, but that the supervisory jurisdiction of the Magistrate suddenly
ceases midway through the pre-trial proceedings, would amount to a travesty of justice, as certain
cases may cry out for further investigation so that an innocent person is not wrongly arraigned as an
accused or that a prima facie guilty person is not so left out. There is no warrant for such a narrow
and restrictive view of the powers of the Magistrate, particularly when such powers are traceable to
Section 156(3) read with Section 156(1), Section 2(h) and Section 173(8) CrPC, as has been noticed
hereinabove, and would be available at all stages of the progress of a criminal case before the trial
actually commences. It would also be in the interest of justice that this power be exercised suo motu
by the Magistrate himself, depending on the facts of each case. Whether further investigation should
or should not be ordered is within the discretion of the learned Magistrate who will exercise such
discretion on the facts of each case and in accordance with law. If, for example, fresh facts come to
light which would lead to inculpating or exculpating certain persons, arriving at the truth and doing
substantial justice in a criminal case are more important than avoiding further delay being caused in
concluding the criminal proceeding…….” 12.5. The case of Divine Retreat Centre (supra) has had the
peculiarity of its own. Therein, the Criminal Case bearing No. 381 of 2005 had been registered at
Koratty Police Station on the allegations made by a female remand prisoner that while taking shelter
in the appellant-Centre, she was subjected to molestation and exploitation and she became
pregnant; and thereafter, when she came out of the Centre to attend her sister’s marriage, she was
implicated in a false theft case and lodged in jail. Parallel to these proceedings, an anonymous
petition as also other petitions were received in the High Court, which were registered as a suo motu
criminal case. In that case, the High Court, while exercising powers under Section 482 CrPC,
directed that the said Criminal Case No. 381 of 2005 be taken away from the investigating officer
and be entrusted to the Special Investigating Team (‘SIT’). The High Court also directed the said SIT
to investigate/inquire into other allegations levelled in the anonymous petition filed against the
appellant-Centre. However, this Court did not approve the order so passed by the High Court and in
that context, while observing that no unlimited and arbitrary jurisdiction was conferred on the High
Court under Section 482 CrPC, explained the circumstances under which the inherent jurisdiction
may be exercised as also the responsibilities of the investigating officers, inter alia, in the following
words: -

17

Devendra Nath Singh vs The State Of Bihar on 12 October, 2022

“27. In our view, there is nothing like unlimited arbitrary jurisdiction conferred on
the High Court under Section 482 of the Code. The power has to be exercised
sparingly, carefully and with caution only where such exercise is justified by the tests
laid down in the section itself. It is well settled that Section 482 does not confer any
new power on the High Court but only saves the inherent power which the Court
possessed before the enactment of the Code. There are three circumstances under
which the inherent jurisdiction may be exercised, namely, ( i) to give effect to an
order under the Code, (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of court, and ( iii) to
otherwise secure the ends of justice.

*** *** ***

39. The sum and substance of the above deliberation and analysis of the law cited
leads us to an irresistible conclusion that the investigation of an offence is the field
exclusively reserved for the police officers whose powers in that field are unfettered
so long as the power to investigate into the cognizable offences is legitimately
exercised in strict compliance with the provisions under Chapter XII of the Code.
However, we may hasten to add that unfettered discretion does not mean any
unaccountable or unlimited discretion and act according to one's own choice. The
power to investigate must be exercised strictly on the condition of which that power
is granted by the Code itself.

40. In our view, the High Court in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction cannot change
the investigating officer in the midstream and appoint any agency of its own choice to
investigate into a crime on whatsoever basis and more particularly on the basis of
c o m p l a i n t s   o r   a n o n y m o u s   p e t i t i o n s   a d d r e s s e d   t o   a   n a m e d   J u d g e .   S u c h
communications cannot be converted into suo motu proceedings for setting the law
in motion. Neither are the accused nor the complainant or informant entitled to
choose their own investigating agency to investigate a crime in which they may be
interested.

41. It is altogether a different matter that the High Court in exercise of its power
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India can always issue appropriate directions
at the instance of an aggrieved person if the High Court is convinced that the power
of investigation has been exercised by an investigating officer mala fide. That power
is to be exercised in the rarest of the rare case where a clear case of abuse of power
and non-

compliance with the provisions falling under Chapter XII of the Code is clearly made out requiring
the interference of the High Court. But even in such cases, the High Court cannot direct the police as
to how the investigation is to be conducted but can always insist for the observance of process as
provided for in the Code.” (emphasis supplied) 12.6. In the case of Madan Mohan (supra), this
Court, of course, reiterated the settled principles that no superior Court could issue a
direction/mandamus to any subordinate Court commanding them to pass a particular order but, the

18

Devendra Nath Singh vs The State Of Bihar on 12 October, 2022

questioned directions had been as regards dealing with a bail application, which were not approved
by this Court while observing, inter alia, as under: -

“15. In our considered opinion, the High Court had no jurisdiction to direct the
Sessions Judge to “allow” the application for grant of bail. Indeed, once such
direction had been issued by the High Court then what was left for the Sessions Judge
to decide except to follow the directions of the High Court and grant bail to
Respondents 2 and 3. In other words, in compliance to the mandatory directions
issued by the High Court, the Sessions Judge had no jurisdiction to reject the bail
application but to allow it.

16. No superior court in hierarchical jurisdiction can issue such direction/mandamus
to any subordinate court commanding them to pass a particular order on any
application filed by any party. The judicial independence of every court in passing the
orders in cases is well settled.

It cannot be interfered with by any court including superior court.” 12.7. In the case of Neetu Kumar
Nagaich (supra), this Court issued directions for de novo investigation in regard to the unnatural
death of a law student. We need not elaborate on the said decision for the fact that such directions
were issued under the writ jurisdiction of this Court.

13. For what has been noticed hereinbefore, we could reasonably cull out the principles for
application to the present case as follows:

(a) The scheme of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 is to ensure a fair trial and
that would commence only after a fair and just investigation. The ultimate aim of
every investigation and inquiry, whether by the police or by the Magistrate, is to
ensure that the actual perpetrators of the crime are correctly booked and the
innocents are not arraigned to stand trial.

(b) The powers of the Magistrate to ensure proper investigation in terms of Section
156 CrPC have been recognised, which, in turn, include the power to order further
investigation in terms of Section 173(8) CrPC after receiving the report of
investigation. Whether further investigation should or should not be ordered is
within the discretion of the Magistrate, which is to be exercised on the facts of each
case and in accordance with law.

(c) Even when the basic power to direct further investigation in a case where a
charge-sheet has been filed is with the Magistrate, and is to be exercised subject to
the limitations of Section 173(8) CrPC, in an appropriate case, where the High Court
feels that the investigation is not in the proper direction and to do complete justice
where the facts of the case so demand, the inherent powers under Section 482 CrPC
could be exercised to direct further investigation or even reinvestigation. The
provisions of Section 173(8) CrPC do not limit or affect such powers of the High

19

Devendra Nath Singh vs The State Of Bihar on 12 October, 2022

Court to pass an order under Section 482 CrPC for further investigation or
reinvestigation, if the High Court is satisfied that such a course is necessary to secure
the ends of justice.

(d) Even when the wide powers of the High Court in terms of Section 482 CrPC are
recognised for ordering further investigation or reinvestigation, such powers are to be
exercised sparingly, with circumspection, and in exceptional cases.

(e) The powers under Section 482 CrPC are not unlimited or untrammelled and are essentially for
the purpose of real and substantial justice. While exercising such powers, the High Court cannot
issue directions so as to be impinging upon the power and jurisdiction of other authorities. For
example, the High Court cannot issue directions to the State to take advice of the State Public
Prosecutor as to under what provision of law a person is to be charged and tried when ordering
further investigation or reinvestigation; and it cannot issue directions to investigate the case only
from a particular angle. In exercise of such inherent powers in extraordinary circumstances, the
High Court cannot specifically direct that as a result of further investigation or reinvestigation, a
particular person has to be prosecuted.

14. Applying the principles aforesaid to the facts of the present case, what we find is that, in relation
to the allegations of defalcation of goods and misappropriation of stocks from the godown of the
Corporation, the person lodging the FIR with reference to the audit report, i.e., the Senior Dy.
Collector-cum-District Manager, made imputations only against the respondent No. 3, who was a
class IV employee of the Corporation but was purportedly posted as an in-charge Assistant Godown
Manager by the appellant, who was, at the relevant time, holding the position of the District
Manager. Though several features of the actions and omissions at the relevant time have been
mentioned in the audit report, we do not propose to dilate on the same. Suffice it to observe for the
present purpose that when all the relevant aspects were duly projected before the High Court in the
petition filed by the respondent No. 3, the High Court could not have simply ignored the same only
for the reasons that the informant omitted to state them while lodging the FIR, and/or the
investigating officer overlooked them while submitting the result of investigation, and/or the
learned Magistrate did not pay requisite attention to them while taking cognizance.

14.1. In the given set of facts and circumstances, we are satisfied that the present one had been such
a case of exceptional and special features where the High Court was justified in ordering further
investigation, particularly qua the role of the appellant. Thus, the principal part of the order
impugned, directing further investigation, in our view, calls for no interference12.

15. However, there are certain other aspects and features of the order impugned which are difficult
to be appreciated and approved. The High Court has chosen to use such harsh and severe
expressions in the impugned order which carry all the potential of causing prejudice to the appellant
and even to distract a fair and dispassionate investigation. As noticed, the High Court has made its
comments that the ‘entire game was played’ by the appellant who was holding the position of
District Manager. The High Court has even stated that the appellant was ‘ultimately responsible for
all such irregularities’. The High Court has gone to the extent of observing that the respondent No. 3

20

Devendra Nath Singh vs The State Of Bihar on 12 October, 2022

was made an accused in the case ‘as scapegoat to save the skin’ of the appellant. These and other
akin observations in the order impugned lead to the position as if the High Court has already
concluded on the result of investigation against the 12 It could be noticed that in the impugned
order dated 10.09.2018, the High Court has employed three different expressions as to the expected
course of action where the Magistrate has been directed to ‘give direction to the police to further
reinvestigate’ and to ‘direct the police to complete the re-investigation’ as also to consider ‘the
materials which will come during further investigation’. However, it is apparent that on the
substance of the matter, the directions are to ensure ‘further investigation’ in the matter,
particularly with regard to the role of the appellant. appellant. It is entirely a different matter to
order further investigation on being prima facie satisfied about the requirement to do so in view of
exceptional circumstances pertaining to a given case but, while doing so in exercise of inherent
powers, the High Court has not been justified in making such observations and remarks which are
likely to operate over and above the investigation and may cause prejudice to the appellant. As
noticed, the principle remains settled that the High Court cannot issue directions to investigate the
case from a particular angle.

16. Thus, we are of the view that in the given set of facts and circumstances, though the High Court
has rightly exercised its powers under Section 482 CrPC for directing further investigation but, has
not been justified in making such observations, comments, and remarks, which leave little scope for
an independent investigation and which carry all the potential to cause prejudice to the appellant.
The first question in this appeal is answered accordingly.

17. Adverting to the other question, i.e., as to whether the High Court was justified in passing the
order impugned without affording an opportunity of hearing to the appellant, we may refer to some
of the relevant decisions cited in this regard.

17.1. The case of Manharibhai Muljibhai Kakadia (supra) had been concerning the exercise of the
powers of revision by the High Court after dismissal of a complaint under Section 203 CrPC. This
Court pointed out that in such a revision petition, the accused/suspect arraigned in the complaint
gets the right of hearing before the Revisional Court, as is expressly provided in Section 401(2)
CrPC. This Court, however, made it clear that if the complaint is restored for fresh consideration of
the Magistrate, the persons who are alleged to have committed the crime shall have no right to
participate in the proceedings nor would they be entitled to any hearing until consideration of the
matter by the Magistrate for issuance of process. This Court said, inter alia, as under: -

“53. ….We hold, as it must be, that in a revision petition preferred by the complainant
before the High Court or the Sessions Judge challenging an order of the Magistrate
dismissing the complaint under Section 203 of the Code at the stage under Section
200 or after following the process contemplated under Section 202 of the Code, the
accused or a person who is suspected to have committed the crime is entitled to
hearing by the Revisional Court. In other words, where the complaint has been
dismissed by the Magistrate under Section 203 of the Code, upon challenge to the
legality of the said order being laid by the complainant in a revision petition before
the High Court or the Sessions Judge, the persons who are arraigned as accused in

21

Devendra Nath Singh vs The State Of Bihar on 12 October, 2022

the complaint have a right to be heard in such revision petition. This is a plain
requirement of Section 401(2) of the Code. If the Revisional Court overturns the
order of the Magistrate dismissing the complaint and the complaint is restored to the
file of the Magistrate and it is sent back for fresh consideration, the persons who are
alleged in the complaint to have committed the crime have, however, no right to
participate in the proceedings nor are they entitled to any hearing of any sort
whatsoever by the Magistrate until the consideration of the matter by the Magistrate
for issuance of process. We answer the question accordingly. The judgments of the
High Courts to the contrary are overruled.” (emphasis supplied) 17.2. The layout and
backdrop of, as also the questions involved in, the case of W.N. Chadha (supra) were
of their own peculiarities. For the present purpose, suffice it to notice that as regards
the process and manner of investigation, which included the issues relating to a letter
of rogatory, this Court, inter alia, pointed out the exclusion of the principle of audi
alteram partem in relation to an accused at the stage of investigation in the following
terms: -

“80. The rule of audi alteram partem is a rule of justice and its application is excluded
where the rule will itself lead to injustice. In S.A. de Smith's Judicial Review of
Administrative Action, (4th Edn.) at page 184, it is stated that in administrative law, a
prima facie right to prior notice and opportunity to be heard may be held to be
excluded by implication in the presence of some factors, singly or in combination
with another. Those special factors are mentioned under items (1) to (10) under the
heading “Exclusion of the audi alteram partem rule”.

81. Thus, there is exclusion of the application of audi alteram partem rule to cases
where nothing unfair can be inferred by not affording an opportunity to present and
meet a case. This rule cannot be applied to defeat the ends of justice or to make the
law “lifeless, absurd, stultifying and self-defeating or plainly contrary to the common
sense of the situation” and this rule may be jettisoned in very exceptional
circumstances where compulsive necessity so demands.

*** *** ***

89. Applying the above principle, it may be held that when the investigating officer is
not deciding any matter except collecting the materials for ascertaining whether a
prima facie case is made out or not and a full enquiry in case of filing a report under
Section 173(2) follows in a trial before the Court or Tribunal pursuant to the filing of
the report, it cannot be said that at that stage rule of audi alteram partem
superimposes an obligation to issue a prior notice and hear the accused which the
statute does not expressly recognise. The question is not whether audi alteram
partem is implicit, but whether the occasion for its attraction exists at all.

90. Under the scheme of Chapter XII of the Code of Criminal Procedure, there are
various provisions under which no prior notice or opportunity of being heard is

22

Devendra Nath Singh vs The State Of Bihar on 12 October, 2022

conferred as a matter of course to an accused person while the proceeding is in the
stage of an investigation by a police officer.

*** *** ***

92. More so, the accused has no right to have any say as regards the manner and
method of investigation. Save under certain exceptions under the entire scheme of
the Code, the accused has no participation as a matter of right during the course of
the investigation of a case instituted on a police report till the investigation
culminates in filing of a final report under Section 173(2) of the Code or in a
proceeding instituted otherwise than on a police report till the process is issued
under Section 204 of the Code, as the case may be. Even in cases where cognizance of
an offence is taken on a complaint notwithstanding that the said offence is triable by
a Magistrate or triable exclusively by the Court of Sessions, the accused has no right
to have participation till the process is issued. In case the issue of process is
postponed as contemplated under Section 202 of the Code, the accused may attend
the subsequent inquiry but cannot participate. There are various judicial
pronouncements to this effect but we feel that it is not necessary to recapitulate those
decisions. At the same time, we would like to point out that there are certain
provisions under the Code empowering the Magistrate to give an opportunity of
being heard under certain specified circumstances.” (emphasis supplied) 17.3. It
could also be usefully recapitulated that in the case of Popular Muthiah (supra), even
when not disapproving the exercise of inherent powers by the High Court irrespective
of the nature of proceedings (of course, while laying down the limitations on such
exercise of powers), this Court also observed that in the peculiar circumstances of the
case, where investigation was being ordered against the persons who were not
investigated earlier, the High Court should have given them an opportunity of
hearing before issuing the impugned directions. Thus, the impugned judgment was
set aside and the matter was remitted to the High Court for consideration afresh,
after notice to the appellants as also to the State.

18. In an appropriate application of the principles aforesaid, we are clearly of the view
that even though the decision in W.N. Chadha (supra) shall have no direct
application to the present case but then, the observation concerning opportunity of
hearing, as occurring in Manharibhai Muljibhai Kakadia (supra), also does not enure
to the benefit of the appellant because therein, the matter before the High Court had
been a revision petition governed by Section 401 CrPC and by virtue of sub-section
(2) thereof, opportunity of hearing to the affected party remains a statutory
mandate13. In Popular Muthiah (supra), of course, this Court held that the said
appellant against whom the High Court was issuing directions for investigation
should have been given an opportunity of hearing but, that had been the observation
in the unique and peculiar circumstances of the case where the crime in question had
already gone through one round of trial, with one person having been tried and
convicted. Moreover, while disapproving unwarranted directions of the High Court as

23

Devendra Nath Singh vs The State Of Bihar on 12 October, 2022

regards prosecution of the appellant, this Court also indicated that the High Court
ought to have considered if any purpose would be served by its directions. It cannot
be said that in Popular Muthiah, this Court has laid down a rule of universal
application that in every such case of exercise of powers under Section 482 CrPC for
ordering further investigation (which are even otherwise to be invoked sparingly and
in exceptional cases), the Court is obliged to extend an opportunity of hearing to the
person whose actions/omissions are to be investigated. In our view, the question of
opportunity of hearing in such matters would always depend upon the given set of
facts and circumstances of the case.

19. On the facts and in the circumstances of the present case, we are clearly of the
view that no purpose would be served by adopting the 13 Section 401 CrPC provides
for the wide revisional powers of the High Court and its sub-

section (2) reads as under: -

“(2) No order under this section shall be made to the prejudice of the accused or
other person unless he has had an opportunity of being heard either personally or by
pleader in his own defence.” course of Popular Muthiah (supra) where this Court
restored the matter for reconsideration of the High Court with an opportunity of
hearing to the appellant therein. Some of the prominent and peculiar circumstances
of the present case are that the allegations and imputations have their genesis in the
documentary evidence in the form of departmental instructions and the audit report;
the fact that the appellant was holding the office of the District Manager at the
relevant point of time is not in dispute; and hereinbefore, we have upheld the
exercise of inherent powers by the High Court in directing further investigation qua
the role of the appellant.

19.1. We have also taken note of the submissions that, according to the appellant, he
had already been exonerated of all charges after detailed departmental proceedings;
and such a fact did not appear before the High Court for want of notice to him. For
the present purpose, suffice it to observe that even if the appellant had been
exonerated in the departmental proceedings, such a fact, by itself, may not be
conclusive of criminal investigation; and for this fact alone, the High Court could not
have ignored all other features of the case and the material factors that had surfaced
before it.

20. At this juncture, and in the last segment of this discussion, it may also be
observed that we have taken note of another peculiar feature connected to this case
that apart from the subject-matter of the present appeal, being Barh P.S. Case No. 115
of 2012, there had also been another matter, being Bikram P.S. Case No. 129 of 2012
against the respondent No. 3 as also the present appellant, pertaining to similar
allegations of misappropriation of goods. As per the submissions made on behalf of
the State, in the said Bikram P.S. Case No. 129 of 2012, instituted for offences under

24

Devendra Nath Singh vs The State Of Bihar on 12 October, 2022

Sections 409, 420, 468, 471 and 474 IPC, after finding prima facie case against the
present appellant, prosecution sanction has also been obtained; and after the order
passed by the High Court, the investigation in the present case was also carried out
along with the aforesaid Bikram P.S. Case No. 129 of 2012. According to the affidavit
filed on behalf of the State, prima facie complicity of the appellant has been found
but, in this case, prosecution sanction has not been obtained for the appellant having
been given interim protection by this Court.

20.1. We would hasten to observe that the aforesaid submissions on behalf of the
State have only been taken note of without pronouncing on the merits thereof and
while leaving every aspect open for examination and consideration of the respective
investigating agency, sanctioning authority, and the Court at the appropriate stage
and in an appropriate manner. These submissions have been referred to herein only
in order to indicate that viewed from any angle, there does not appear any just and
strong reason to restore the matter for reconsideration of the High Court.

21. In the totality of circumstances and in the larger interest of justice, we are clearly
of the view that in this case, the investigation contemplated by the order impugned
should be allowed to be taken to its logical end but, while effacing the unwarranted
and unnecessary observations of the High Court14, lest there be any prejudice to any
party only because of such observations. In other words, the entire matter is left open
for examination by the investigating agency, by the sanctioning authority, and by the
Court concerned at the relevant stage and in accordance with law.

22. Accordingly and in view of the above, this appeal fails and is, therefore, dismissed
but, with the observations foregoing and while effacing the unwarranted and
unnecessary observations of the High Court in the order impugned.

……....…………………….J. (DINESH MAHESHWARI) ……....…………………….J. (ANIRUDDHA BOSE)
NEW DELHI;

OCTOBER 12, 2022.

14 As discussed in paragraph ‘15’ hereinbefore.

25