Ecgc Limited vs Mokul Shriram Epc Jv on 15 February, 2022

Ecgc Limited vs Mokul Shriram Epc Jv on 15 February, 2022

Author: Hemant Gupta

Bench: V. Ramasubramanian, Hemant Gupta

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

I.A. NO. 99210 OF 2021
IN
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1842 OF 2021

ECGC LIMITED                                                .....APPELLANT(S)

VERSUS

MOKUL SHRIRAM EPC JV                                     .....RESPONDENT(S)

ORDER

HEMANT GUPTA, J.

1. The present appeal is directed against an order passed by the National Consumer Dispute
Redressal Commission 1 whereby the appellant herein was directed to pay a sum of Rs. 265.01
Crores along with interest @ 10% p.a. from 19.9.2016 within a period of three months. In case of
failure to deposit the said amount, the awarded amount would carry compensation in the form of
simple interest @ 12% p.a. The appellant has filed an application (IA No. 99210 of 2021) ex
abundanti cautela to entertain the appeal as per the provisions of the Consumer Protection Act,
1986 2. It is the said application which is being decided by the present order.

2. The complainant was awarded a contract for construction of rain water drainage, heavy sewerage
and municipal road system by the Government of Basra, Iraq. The complainant obtained two
specific Natarajan Date: 2022.02.15 16:52:34 IST Reason:

1 National Commission 2 For short, the ‘1986 Act’ contracts (Letter of Credit
Comprehensive Risks Policies) by paying a sum of (cid:130)10,38,03,912/- as premium to the
appellant. The grievance of the complainant was that the payment for invoices issued
for the work done under the contract was suspended. Later, the contract also was
withdrawn by the Government of Basra owing to some internal conflict. The
appellant herein rejected the insurance claim of the complainant and thus relief was
sought before the National Commission by filing a complaint under Section 21(a)(i)
of the 1986 Act. The said complaint was allowed on 27.1.2021.

1

Ecgc Limited vs Mokul Shriram Epc Jv on 15 February, 2022

3. The question now being examined here is as to whether the present appeal would be governed
under the Consumer Protection Act, 20193 or under the erstwhile 1986 Act.

4. In terms of Section 67 of the 2019 Act, no appeal against the order of National Commission shall
be entertained by the Supreme Court unless the person has deposited fifty per cent of the amount
required to be paid. Whereas, under the 1986 Act, by virtue of a proviso inserted vide Central Act 62
of 2002 w.e.f. 15.3.2003, the condition was that no appeal shall be entertained by the Supreme
Court unless the person who is required to pay the amount deposits fifty per cent of the amount or
fifty thousand, whichever is less. The two provisions read thus:

1986 Act                      2019 Act
23. xx                                67. xx

3    For short, the ‘2019 Act’

Provided further that no appeal by a Provided further that no appeal person who is required to pay
any by a person who is required to amount in terms of an order of the pay any amount in terms of an
National Commission shall be order of the National Commission entertained by the Supreme Court
shall be entertained by the unless that person has deposited in Supreme Court unless that the
prescribed manner fifty per cent person has deposited fifty per of that amount or rupees fifty cent of
that amount in the thousand, whichever is less. manner as may be prescribed.

5. Learned Attorney General appearing for the appellant submitted that the appeal has been
preferred under Section 23 of the 1986 Act and not under the 2019 Act which came into force from
20.7.2020. It was stated that the condition of deposit of 50% of the amount is more onerous than
what was provided under the 1986 Act. Therefore, keeping in view the principle that the law which is
applicable at the time of initiation of the lis would be applicable, the provisions of 1986 Act would
govern the present appeal and not the provisions of 2019 Act. The appellant has deposited
(cid:130)50,000/- vide demand draft in terms of second proviso to Section 23 of the 1986 Act while
exercising its right of appeal under the 1986 Act. Hence, the present appeal be heard on merits.

6. The learned Attorney General inter alia argued that Section 107 of 2019 Act and Section 6 of the
General Clauses Act, 1897 4 unequivocally operate against any question of retrospectivity. Sub-
Section (2) of Section 107 of 2019 Act does not change the legal position as mentioned under Section
6 of the General Clauses Act. To appreciate the argument, Section 6 of the General Clauses Act and
Section 107 of the 2019 Act are reproduced hereunder:

4 For short, the ‘General Clauses Act’ “Section 6 of the General Clauses Act

6. Effect of Repeal. - Where this Act, or any Central Act or Regulation made after the
commencement of this Act, repeals any enactment hitherto made or hereafter to be
made, then, unless a different intention appears, the repeal shall not—

2

Ecgc Limited vs Mokul Shriram Epc Jv on 15 February, 2022

(a) revive anything not in force or existing at the time at which the repeal takes effect;
or

(b) affect the previous operation of any enactment so repealed or any thing duly done
or suffered thereunder; or

(c) affect any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred
under any enactment so repealed; or

(d) affect any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence
committed against any enactment so repealed; or

(e) affect any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right,
privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid;

and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced,
and any such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed as if the repealing Act or Regulation
had not been passed.

xx                  xx                   xx

Section 107 of the 2019 Act

107. (1) The Consumer Protection Act, 1986 is hereby repealed.

(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken or purported to have been done
or taken under the Act hereby repealed shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of
this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.

(3) The mention of particular matters in sub-section (2) shall not be held to prejudice or affect the
general application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 with regard to the effect of repeal.”

7. Sub-section (2) of Section 107 of the 2019 Act protects the actions taken under the 1986 Act
insofar as such actions are not inconsistent with the provisions of 2019 Act. Such actions shall be
deemed to have been undertaken as per the corresponding provisions of 2019 Act. Sub-section (3)
contemplates that the particular matters in sub-section (2) shall not prejudice or affect the general
application of Section 6 of the General Clauses Act with regard to the effect of repeal. Referring to
clause (c) of Section 6 of the General Clauses Act, it was argued that unless a different intention
appears, the repeal shall not affect any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or
incurred under any enactment so repealed. Further, Clause (e) stipulates that the repeal shall not
affect any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege,
obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment which may be imposed as if the repealing Act
or the Regulation has not been passed. It was thus argued that the repeal of enactment does not
affect any right acquired or accrued under the enactment so repealed or affect any legal proceeding

3

Ecgc Limited vs Mokul Shriram Epc Jv on 15 February, 2022

in respect of such a right. Such effect was to be construed only when a different intention appears
from the repealing statute. It was thus argued that the right to file an appeal under the 1986 Act has
accrued in favour of the appellant in terms of Section 6(c) of the General Clauses Act and that no
different intention is discernable from the repealing Act.

8. To support the above arguments, the learned Attorney General has relied upon Division Bench
judgment of the Calcutta High Court reported as Nogendra Nath Bose v. Mon Mohan Singha Roy &
Ors.5 which was approved by this Court in a judgment reported as Hoosein Kasam Dada (India) Ltd.
v. State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors.6. In Hoosein Kasam Dada, Hon’ble Mr. Justice S.R. Das speaking
for the Bench with Hon’ble Mr. Justice M.C. Mahajan was examining a matter consequent to the
amendment on 25.11.1949 by the Central Provinces and Berar Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act
(Act 57 of 1949) amending the Central Provinces and Berar Sales Tax Act, 1947. The proviso to
Section 22(1) of the 1947 Act prior to the amendment as enacted provided that no appeal against an
order of assessment shall be entertained unless it was satisfied that such amount of tax or penalty or
both as the appellant may admit to be due from him has been paid. The amending act contemplated
that no appeal shall be entertained unless an appeal is accompanied by a satisfactory proof of the
payment of the tax, with penalty, if any, in respect of which the appeal has been preferred.
Therefore, there was change in the condition of preferring an appeal from the amount admitted to
be due by the assessee than the payment of the tax and penalty of in respect of which an appeal has
been preferred.

9. It may be relevant to mention that the Court also noticed the 5 AIR 1931 Cal. 100 6 AIR 1953 SC
221 argument of the learned counsel for the State that until actual assessment is made, there can be
no lis and therefore, no right of appeal can accrue before that date. The Court observed that when
assessee files a return, the lis may not immediately arise. The authority may assess the return under
Section 11 of the 1947 Act, but if the authority is not satisfied as to the correctness of the return and
call for evidence, a controversy arises. In the aforesaid case, the sales tax return was filed on
28.11.1947 and a notice by the Assistant Commissioner of Sales Tax was issued on 25.1.1949 i.e.
prior to the amendment. This Court held as under:

“8. The above decisions quite firmly establish and our decisions in Janardan Reddy v.
State [(1950) SCR 941] and in Ganpat Rai v. Agarwal Chamber of Commerce Ltd.
[(1952) SCJ 564] uphold the principle that a right of appeal is not merely a matter of
procedure. It is a matter of substantive right. This right of appeal from the decision of
an inferior tribunal to a superior tribunal becomes vested in a party when
proceedings are first initiated in, and before a decision is given by, the inferior court.
In the language of Jenkins, C.J. in Nana bin Aba v. Shaik bin Andu to disturb an
existing right of appeal is not a mere alteration in procedure. Such a vested right
cannot be taken away except by express enactment or necessary intendment. An
intention to interfere with or to impair or imperil such a vested right cannot be
presumed unless such intention be clearly manifested by express words or necessary
implication.

4

Ecgc Limited vs Mokul Shriram Epc Jv on 15 February, 2022

9. …. In our view the above observation is apposite and applies to the case before us.
The true implication of the above observation as of the decisions in the other cases
referred to above is that the pre-existing right of appeal is not destroyed by the
amendment if the amendment is not made retrospective by express words or
necessary intendment. The fact that the pre-existing right of appeal continues to exist
must, in its turn, necessarily imply that the old law which created that right of appeal
must also exist to support the continuation of that right. As the old law continues to
exist for the purpose of supporting the pre-

existing right of appeal that old law must govern the exercise and enforcement of that right of appeal
and there can then be no question of the amended provision preventing the exercise of that right.
The argument that the authority has no option or jurisdiction to admit the appeal unless it be
accompanied by the deposit of the assessed tax as required by the amended proviso to Section 22(1)
of the Act overlooks the fact of existence of the old law for the purpose of supporting the pre-existing
right and really amounts to begging the question. The new proviso is wholly inapplicable in such a
situation and the jurisdiction of the authority has to be exercised under the old law which so
continues to exist. The argument of Sri Ganapathy Aiyer on this point, therefore, cannot be
accepted.

10. Finally, Sri Ganapathy Aiyer faintly urges that until actual assessment there can be no “lis” and,
therefore, no right of appeal can accrue before that event. There are two answers to this plea.
Whenever there is a proposition by one party and an opposition to that proposition by another a
“lis” arises. It may be conceded, though not deciding it, that when the assessee files his return a “lis”
may not immediately arise, for under Section 11(1) the authority may accept the return as correct
and complete. But if the authority is not satisfied as to the correctness of the return and calls for
evidence, surely a controversy arises involving a proposition by the assessee and an opposition by
the State. The circumstance that the authority who raises the dispute is himself the Judge can make
no difference, for the authority raises the dispute in the interest of the State and in so acting only
represents the State. It will appear from the dates given above that in this case the “lis” in the sense
explained above arose before the date of amendment of the section. Further, even if the “lis” is to be
taken as arising only on the date of assessment, there was a possibility of such a “lis” arising as soon
as proceedings started with the filing of the return or, at any rate, when the authority called for
evidence and started the hearing and the right of appeal must be taken to have been in existence
even on those dates. For the purposes of the accrual of the right of appeal the critical and relevant
date is the date of initiation of the proceedings and not the decision itself.”

10. Subsequently, the Constitution Bench in a judgment reported as Garikapati Veeraya v. N.
Subbiah Choudhry & Ors.7 approved the judgment in Hoosein Kasam Dada, though the issue was in
7 AIR 1957 SC 540 respect of right of appeal to the Federal Court under the Government of India
Act, 1935. The argument was that the appellant had a right to file an appeal as the suit, out of which
the proceedings arose before this Court, was filed on 22.4.1949. Hence, he had acquired a vested
right to appeal to the Federal Court which has since been replaced by the Supreme Court. It was the
said argument which was accepted by the Constitution Bench when the following principles were
delineated:

5

Ecgc Limited vs Mokul Shriram Epc Jv on 15 February, 2022

“23. From the decisions cited above the following principles clearly emerge:

(i) That the legal pursuit of a remedy, suit, appeal and second appeal are really but
steps in a series of proceedings all connected by an intrinsic unity and are to be
regarded as one legal proceeding.

(ii) The right of appeal is not a mere matter of procedure but is a substantive right.

(iii) The institution of the suit carries with it the implication that all rights of appeal
then in force are preserved to the parties thereto till the rest of the career of the suit.

(iv) The right of appeal is a vested right and such a right to enter the superior court
accrues to the litigant and exists as on and from the date the lis commences and
although it may be actually exercised when the adverse judgment is pronounced such
right is to be governed by the law prevailing at the date of the institution of the suit or
proceeding and not by the law that prevails at the date of its decision or at the date of
the filing of the appeal.

(v) This vested right of appeal can be taken away only by a subsequent enactment, if
it so provides expressly or by necessary intendment and not otherwise.

24. In the case before us the suit was instituted on April 22, 1949, and on the principle established
by the decisions referred to above the right of appeal vested in the parties thereto at that date and is
to be governed by the law as it prevailed on that date, that is to say, on that date the parties acquired
the right, if unsuccessful, to go up in appeal from the sub-court to the High Court and from the High
Court to the Federal Court under the Federal Court (Enlargement of Jurisdiction) Act, 1947 read
with clause 39 of the Letters Patent and Sections 109 and 110 of the Code of Civil Procedure
provided the conditions thereof were satisfied. The question for our consideration is whether that
right has been taken away expressly or by necessary intendment by any subsequent enactment. The
respondents to the application maintain that it has been so taken away by the provisions of our
Constitution.”

11. In a three-Judge Bench judgment reported as State of Bombay v.

M/s. Supreme General Films Exchange Ltd. & Anr. 8, the argument which arose for consideration
was that the court fees payable on the memorandum of appeal would be as on the date of filing of
the suit and not as per the amendment in the Court Fees Act, 1870 by Bombay Act 12 of 1954. The
court fee on the memorandum of appeal was thus held to be payable as was applicable prior to the
amendment of the Act. This Court held as under:

“12. It is thus clear that in a long line of decisions approved by this Court and at least
in one given by this Court, it has been held that an impairment of the right of appeal
by putting a new restriction thereon or imposing a more onerous condition is not a
matter of procedure only; it impairs or imperils a substantive right and an enactment

6

Ecgc Limited vs Mokul Shriram Epc Jv on 15 February, 2022

which does so is not retrospective unless it says so expressly or by necessary
intendment.”

12. The Constitution Bench in Vitthalbhai Naranbhai Patel v. 8 AIR 1960 SC 980 Commissioner of
Sales Tax, M.P., Nagpur 9 was considering a matter where the date on which sales tax returns were
filed was not disclosed. In the absence of the date of filing of the return, this Court held as under:

“9. The decision in Hoosein Kasam Dada’s case, 1953 SCR 987: (AIR 1953 SC 221),
proceeded on the ground that when a lis commences, all rights get crystallised and no
clog upon a likely appeal can be put, unless the law was made retrospective, expressly
or by clear implication. From the record of this case, we cannot say when the lis
commenced, and unless it can be proved conclusively that it was before the
amendment of the law, the rule in Hoosein Kasam Dada’s case, 1953 SCR 987: (AIR
1953 SC 221), cannot apply. There is no averment that right of appeal had vested, and
has been wrongly taken away.”

13. In another Constitution Bench judgment of this Court reported as M/s.
Hardeodas Jagannath v. The State of Assam & Ors.10, none of the previous
judgments were referred to and thus, it prima facie appears to have taken a
somewhat different view than what was held in the earlier Constitution Bench
judgments. But if examined closely, the said judgment is not taking any contrary view
and is in line with the earlier judgments of this Court. The issue was about an
amendment dated 1.4.1958 in the Assam Sales Tax Act, 1947 requiring deposit of
assessed tax and penalty as condition of filing of appeal. The assessee had filed half
yearly returns for periods ending on 30.9.1956, 31.3.1957 and 30.9.1957 respectively.
The premises of the assessee were searched on 6.3.1959 and the account books etc.
were seized. A notice for reassessment was issued on 4.4.1959 under Section 19A of
the

9 AIR 1967 SC 344 10 AIR 1970 SC 724 Assam Sales Tax Act, 1947. It was in this background, this
Court held as under:

“9. It was contended that the amendment came into force with effect from April 1,
1958 and it cannot be given retrospective effect so as to apply to assessment periods
ending on September 30, 1956, March 31, 1957 and September 30, 1957. We are
unable to accept this argument as correct because the assessments for these three
periods were completed after the amending Act came into force i.e., after April 1,
1958. The appeals against the assessments were also filed after the amendment. It is
therefore not correct to say that the amending Act has been given a retrospective
effect and the Assistant Commissioner of Taxes was therefore right in asking the
appellant to comply with the provisions of the amended Section 30 of the Act before
dealing with the appeals.”

7

Ecgc Limited vs Mokul Shriram Epc Jv on 15 February, 2022

14. Since the returns were filed prior to the amendment but the notice for
reassessment was issued after the Amending Act came into force, therefore, in view of
the Hoosein Kasam Dada, the provisions of the Amending Act alone would be
applicable and that is what has been held by this Court.

15. In a judgment reported as K. Raveendranathan Nair & Anr. v.

Commissioner of Income Tax & Ors. 11, it has been held that the relevant date for paying the court
fee would be when the proceedings were initiated in the lowest court and not when the appeal was
preferred before the High Court in view of the amendment in the Kerala Court Fees and Suits
Valuation Act, 1959.

16. In Anant Mills Co. Ltd. v. State of Gujarat & Ors.12, a four- 11 (2017) 9 SCC 355 12 (1975) 2 SCC
175 Judge Bench of this Court held that since the authority entertaining appeal has a jurisdiction to
dispense with the compliance of requirement to deposit the amount of property tax, it is not onerous
as discretion was vested with the appellate court. In another judgment reported as Gujarat Agro
Industries Co. Ltd. v. Municipal Corporation of the City of Ahmedabad & Ors. 13, the judgment in
Anant Mills was followed.

17. This Court in a judgment reported as Ramesh Singh & Anr. v.

Cinta Devi & Ors.14 held that an appeal under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 contemplating deposit
of twenty-five thousand rupees or fifty per cent of the amount whichever is less will not be
applicable to the claim applications filed under Motor Vehicles Act, 1939. Similar is the view of
another Bench of this Court in a judgment reported as M/s Gurcharan Singh Baldev Singh v.
Yashwant Singh & Ors.15 wherein the right of appeal conferred under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939
could not be said to be taken away after repeal of such Act by the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.

18. Mr. Nidhesh Gupta, learned senior counsel appearing for the respondent submitted that the
amendment is procedural in nature and thus always retrospective. Reliance was placed upon
Thirumalai Chemicals Limited v. Union of India & Ors.16. It was averred that procedure includes
the manner and form of filing 13 (1999) 4 SCC 468 14 (1996) 3 SCC 142 15 (1992) 1 SCC 428 16
(2011) 6 SCC 739 of appeal, pre-deposit and limitation. The right of appeal is a statutory right which
can be taken away by express provision of law, therefore, the conditions on which an appeal would
lie is also within the legislative competence.

19. We find that the reliance on Thirumalai Chemicals Limited may not be correct as this Court held
that Section 49 of FEMA does not seek to withdraw or take away the vested right of appeal in cases
where proceedings were initiated prior to repeal of FERA on 01.06.2000 or after. The said judgment
in fact held that liberal provision of condonation of delay as provided in the new Act would be
applicable. It was held as under:

“28. Above discussion will clearly demonstrate that Section 49 of FEMA does not
seek to withdraw or take away the vested right of appeal in cases where proceedings

8

Ecgc Limited vs Mokul Shriram Epc Jv on 15 February, 2022

were initiated prior to repeal of FERA on 01.06.2000 or after. On a combined reading
of Section 49 of FEMA and Section 6 of General Clauses Act, it is clear that the
procedure prescribed by FEMA only would be applicable in respect of an appeal filed
under FEMA though cause of action arose under FERA. In fact, the time limit
prescribed under FERA was taken away under the proviso to sub-section (2) of
Section 19 and the Tribunal has been conferred with wide powers to condone delay if
the appeal is not filed within forty-five days prescribed, provided sufficient cause is
shown. Therefore, the findings rendered by the Tribunal as well as the High Court
that the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to condone the delay beyond the date
prescribed under FERA is not a correct understanding of the law on the subject.

29. We, therefore, hold that the Appellate Tribunal can entertain the appeal after the
prescribed period of 45 days if it is satisfied, that there was sufficient cause for not
filing the appeal within the said period. We are therefore inclined to set aside the
orders passed by the Tribunal and the High Court and remit the matter back to the
Tribunal for fresh consideration in accordance with law on the basis of the findings
recorded by us…”

20. Mr. Gupta also referred to the three-Judge Bench judgment of this Court
reported as Newtech Promoters and Developers Pvt.

Ltd. v. State of UP & Ors.17 wherein pre-deposit was required to be made while filing an appeal
under the Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Act, 2016. The said judgment is not applicable
as while framing the statute, Section 43(5) contemplating pre- deposit was part of the initially
enacted provision. Similarly, another judgment reported as Tecnimont Pvt. Ltd. v. State of Punjab &
Ors.18 is also in respect of right of appeal on pre-deposit which was enacted originally in the Punjab
Value Added Tax Act.

21. The learned counsel for the respondent has also relied upon Division Bench judgments in Sri
Satya Nand Jha v. Union of India & Ors.19 and M/s. Indian Oil Corporation v. Orissa Sales Tax
Tribunal, CTC & Ors.20. It is to be noted that the Orissa High Court in Indian Oil Corporation was
in fact considering the reverse proposition wherein condition of pre-deposit of 50% of the deposited
amount of tax was deleted. The writ petition was filed by the assessee to challenge the notice issued
by the State to deposit 50% of the deposited amount after the amendment. The Division Bench held
as under:

“24. The Apex Court time & again held that right of appeal is 17 2021 SCC On Line SC
1044 18 2019 SCC On Line SC 1228 19 2016 SCC OnLine Jhar 2323 20 2009 SCC
OnLine Ori 353 a substantive right, but how the appeal is to be decided is a matter of
procedure. The rules of procedure are intended to advance justice & not to defeat it.
“Procedural law is intended to facilitate & not to obstruct the course of substantive
justice.” (vide Hoosein Kasam Dada (India) Ltd. v. State of M.P., AIR 1953 SC 221;
Garikapati Veeraya v. N. Subbiah Choudhry; AIR 1957 SC 540; M/s.

9

Ecgc Limited vs Mokul Shriram Epc Jv on 15 February, 2022

Ganesh Trading Co. v. Moji Ram, (1978) 2 SCC 91 : AIR 1978 SC 484; Harcharan v. State of
Haryana, (1982) 3 SCC 408 :

AIR 1983 SC 43; & Shiv Shakti Coop. Housing Society, Nagpur v. Swaraj Developers,
(2003) 6 SCC 659 : AIR 2003 SC 2434).

25. In the instant case, as the provision of the pre-deposit condition for entertaining
the appeal has been deleted prior to entertaining the appeal being a procedural
matter, the amendment would apply retrospectively. The instant case is squarely
covered by the Judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Lakshmi Rattan
Engineering Works Ltd. (supra).”

22. The High Court of Jharkhand in Sri Satya Nand Jha was dealing with the amendment in Section
35 of the Central Excise Act, 1944 by Section 105 of the Finance Act, 2014 prescribing that 7.5% or
10% of the duty demand or penalty levied is to be deposited. In the said case, the pre-amended
provision was that if the appellate authority on being satisfied that the deposit of the duty demanded
or penalty levied would cause undue hardship, then the condition of pre-deposit could be dispensed
with. But subsequent to the amendment, 7% of the duty assessed and 10% of the penalty levied was
made mandatory to be deposited. It may be noticed that the second proviso clarified that the
provisions of the amended Section 35 shall not be applied to the stay applications and appeals
pending before any appellate authority prior to the commencement of the Finance Act, 2014.
Therefore, the issue arising in the said case was of legality and validity of the pre-

deposit and not the retrospectivity of the said provision.

23. Mr. Gupta has relied upon the judgment of this Court in Manohar Infrastructure and
Constructions Private Limited v. Sanjeev Kumar Sharma & Ors.21 in which the dispute was that the
NCDRC had granted stay subject to deposit of the entire decretal amount. No argument was raised
or decided for retrospectivity of Section 51 of the 2019 Act but the question raised was whether the
NCDRC could direct such deposit of the entire decretal amount pending appeal though the statute
prescribes pre-deposit of 50% of the amount in dispute.

24. It was contended that the consumer protection legislation is a beneficial legislation, therefore,
the interpretation which benefits the consumer should be preferred as held by this Court in Neena
Aneja & Anr. v. Jai Prakash Associates Ltd.22.

25. It is to be noted that in Neena Aneja, this Court held that right to forum is not an accrued right.
Section 6(e) of the General Clauses Act protects the pending legal proceeding for enforcement of the
accrued right from the effect of repeal; it does not mean the legal proceeding at a particular forum
was saved from the effect of repeal. This Court found that there was no express intention in the
repealing enactment that all pending cases would stand transferred to the fora created under 2019
Act. This Court held as 21 Civil Appeal No. 7098 of 2021 with Ors. decided on 7.12.2021 22 2021
SCC OnLine SC 225 under:

10

Ecgc Limited vs Mokul Shriram Epc Jv on 15 February, 2022

“78. Having stated the above position, we need to harmonize it with the principle that
the right to a forum is not an accrued right, as discussed in Part C of this judgement.
Simply put, while Section 6(e) of the General Clauses Act protects the pending legal
proceedings for the enforcement of an accrued right from the effect of a repeal, this
does not mean that the legal proceedings at a particular forum are saved from the
effects from the repeal. The question whether the pending legal proceedings are
required to be transferred to the newly created forum by virtue of the repeal would
still persist. As discussed, this Court in New India Assurance (supra) and Maria
Christina (supra) has held that forum is a matter pertaining to procedural law and
therefore the litigant has to pursue the legal proceedings at the forum created by the
repealing act, unless a contrary intention appears. This principle would also apply to
pending proceedings, as observed in Ramesh Kumar Soni (supra), Hitendra Kumar
Thakur (supra) and Sudhir G Angur (supra). In this backdrop, what is relevant to
ascertain is whether a contrary intent to the general rule of retrospectivity has been
expressed under the Act of 2019 to continue the proceedings at the older forum.

79. Now, in considering the expression of intent in the repealing enactment in the
present case, it is apparent that there is no express language indicating that all
pending cases would stand transferred to the fora created by the Act of 2019 by
applying its newly prescribed pecuniary limits. In deducing whether there is a
contrary intent, the legislative scheme and procedural history may provide a relevant
insight into the intention of the legislature.

xx xx xx

84. … The legislature cannot be attributed to be remiss in not explicitly providing for
transfer of pending cases according to the new pecuniary limits set up for the fora
established by the new law, were that to be its intention. The omission, when
contextualized against the statutory scheme, portends a contrary intention to protect
pending proceedings through Section 107(2) of the Act of 2019. This intention
appears likely, particularly in light of previous decisions of the NCDRC which had
interpreted amendments that enhanced pecuniary jurisdiction, with prospective
effect. The NCDRC, in Southfield Paints and Chemicals Pvt. Ltd. v. New India
Assurance Co. Ltd., Consumer Case No. 286 of 2000 (NCDRC) construed amending
Act 62 of 2002 by which the pecuniary limits of jurisdiction were enhanced with
effect from 15 March 2003 as prospective by relying on its earlier decision in Premier
Automobiles Ltd. v. Dr. Manoj Ramachandran, Revision Petitions Nos. 400 to 402 of
1993, where the NCDRC held that the amendments enhancing the pecuniary
jurisdiction are prospective in nature [albeit on a reliance of the principle in Dhadi
Sahu (supra)]. Parliament would be conscious of this governing principle and yet
chose not to alter it in its application to the consumer fora.”

26. Having said so, this Court held that serious hardship would be caused to the
consumers if the cases already instituted before National Consumer Disputes

11

Ecgc Limited vs Mokul Shriram Epc Jv on 15 February, 2022

Redressal Commission were required to be transferred to the State Consumer
Disputes Redressal Forum.

Thereafter, the proceedings instituted before the commencement of 2019 Act would continue before
the fora corresponding to the provisions under the 1986 Act.

27. Reliance was also placed upon judgment of this Court reported as New India Assurance Co. Ltd.
v. Smt. Shanti Misra23 wherein the change in forum was said to be covered under procedural law. In
the said referred judgment, there was change of forum of filing of a claim application under the
Motor Vehicle Act, 1939 from that of a civil suit. It was held that change of forum would apply
retrospectively. It was held that claimant have a vested right of action and not of forum. Such is not
the question posed before us in the present appeal.

28. The change of forum and period of limitation have been held to be 23 (1975) 2 SCC 840
procedural law even in the judgments reported in Videocon International Limited v. Securities and
Exchange Board of India24, and Maria Cristina De Souza Sodder & Ors. v. Amria Zurana Pereira
Pinto & Ors.25.

29. Mr. Gupta has also relied upon Harihar Polyfibres v. Regional Director, ESI Corporation26,
Spring Meadows Hospital & Anr. v. Harjol Ahluwalia & Anr.27, Kishore Lal v. Chairman,
Employees’ State Insurance Corpn.28 and K.H. Nazar v. Mathew K. Jacob & Ors.29 to contend that
in respect of beneficial legislations, the interpretation which support the intention of law should be
accepted.

30. In Harihar Polyfibres, this Court was examining the scope of expression wages in the Employees’
State Insurance Act, 1948. It was held that the Act in question was a beneficial legislation and thus
any ambiguous expression was bound to receive a beneficial construction. The present dispute is not
of any ambiguity, therefore principles laid down in this case are not applicable.

31. In Spring Meadows Hospital, this Court held that the definition clause of Section 2(1)(d)(ii) of
the 1986 Act is wide enough to include not only the person who hires the services but also the
beneficiary of such services. Thus, both the parents of the child as 24 (2015) 4 SCC 33 25 (1979) 1
SCC 92 26 (1984) 4 SCC 324 27 (1998) 4 SCC 39 28 (2007) 4 SCC 579 29 (2020) 14 SCC 126 well as
the child would be consumer under the 1986 Act to claim compensation under the Act. In Kishore
Lal, this court held that the definition of 'consumer' in the 1986 Act is apparently wide enough and
encompasses within its fold not only the goods but also the services, bought or hired for
consideration. In K.H. Nazar, the question was, whether a rocky land which was used for quarrying
purposes can be treated as a “commercial site”, thus exempt from the purview of the Kerala Land
Reforms Act, 1963. We are not concerned with interpretation to be given to a clause in the statute as
in the judgments referred to by the respondents but only with the effect of substitution of a
provision than earlier provisions.

32. The Division Bench of the Madras High Court in M/s. Dream Castle & Anr. v. Union of India &
Ors.30 dealing with amended Section 35 of the Central Excise Act by Finance Act No. 2 of 2014 held

12

Ecgc Limited vs Mokul Shriram Epc Jv on 15 February, 2022

that when the unamended condition gave only a chance or hope for an assessee to get a total waiver
at the discretion of the Appellate Authority, the same cannot be equated to a vested right or stated to
be retrospective, unless it is definitely shown that the amended condition is more onerous than the
unamended condition. It was held as under:

“54. Therefore, it is well settled that the right of appeal is a creature of statute and the
legislature is well within its competence to impose conditions for the exercise of such
a right subject only to the restriction that the conditions so imposed are not so
onerous as to amount to unreasonable restrictions rendering the right almost
illusory.

xx xx xx 30 W.P. No. 13431 of 2015 etc. decided on 18.4.2016

59. Therefore, if one condition that was already available in the statute for the
exercise of a right of appeal, is merely replaced by another condition, the same
cannot be said to be retrospective, unless it is definitely shown that the amended
condition is more onerous than the unamended condition. When the unamended
condition gave only a chance or hope for an assessee to get a total waiver at the
discretion of the Appellate Authority, the same cannot be equated to a vested right. A
mere chance of convincing the Appellate Authority to exercise the discretion for the
grant of a total waiver is no vested right. The amendment, in our considered view, did
not take away a right vested, but merely made a chance divested. What has now gone,
is not the right, but the chance or hope. Therefore, the first contention of the learned
Senior counsel for the petitioner is liable to be rejected.”

33. There is another line of judgments taking a view that right of appeal is a creation of statute and
the legislature is competent to determine the conditions on which an appeal would lie. These are not
the cases of amending or repeal of a statute, therefore, such judgments are not applicable to the
questions arising in the present application.

34. In view of the binding precedents of the Constitution Bench judgments referred to above, we
hold that onerous condition of payment of 50% of the amount awarded will not be applicable to the
complaints filed prior to the commencement of the 2019 Act. Therefore, the I.A. is allowed.

.............................................J. (HEMANT GUPTA) .............................................J. (V.
RAMASUBRAMANIAN) NEW DELHI;

FEBRUARY 15, 2022.

13