Gambhirdan K Gadhvi vs The State Of Gujarat on 3 March, 2022

Gambhirdan K Gadhvi vs The State Of Gujarat on 3 March, 2022

Author: M. R. Shah

Bench: B.V. Nagarathna, M. R. Shah

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

Writ Petition (Civil) No.1525 OF 2019

Gambhirdan K Gadhvi                                          ..Petitioner (S)

VERSUS

The State of Gujarat & Ors.                                ..Respondent (S)

JUDGMENT

M. R. Shah, J.

1. By this writ petition under Article 32 of the Constitution of India the petitioner has prayed for a
writ of quo warranto challenging the appointment of respondent No.4 as a Vice Chancellor of
respondent No.2 – Sardar Patel University (hereinafter referred to as “SP University”) and to quash
and set aside the notification dated 29.08.2019, bearing No.GH/SH/76/SPY/122010/2626/ KH−2
passed by respondent No.1 – State of Gujarat, appointing respondent No.4 as the Vice Chancellor of
the respondent − SP University. The petitioner has also prayed for any other appropriate writ,
direction and order directing respondent authorities to recover from respondent No.4 all
consequential benefits not limited to pay, with retrospective effect, that have been extended to him
by virtue of his illegal appointment as Vice Chancellor of the SP University.

2. It is the case on behalf of the petitioner that the University Grants Commission (hereinafter
referred to as the “UGC”) framed UGC Regulations on Minimum Qualifications for Appointment of
Teachers and Other Academic Staff in Universities and Colleges and Measures for the Maintenance
of Standards in Higher Education, 2010 (hereinafter referred to as the “UGC Regulations, 2010”)
which, inter alia, prescribes in Regulation 7.3.0 that a person shall have ten years of teaching work
experience as a professor in the University system. It also provides for constitution of a Search
Committee consisting of a nominee of the Visitor/Chancellor, a nominee of the Chairman of UGC, a
nominee of Syndicate/Executive Council of the University. That the Search Committee has to

1

Gambhirdan K Gadhvi vs The State Of Gujarat on 3 March, 2022

recommend the names of suitable candidates for appointment as Vice Chancellor of a University. 2.1
That the UGC Regulations, 2010 has been substituted subsequently vide UGC Regulations, 2018
with slight modifications which shall be referred to hereinbelow. 2.2 It is the further case on behalf
of the petitioner that the Union Ministry of Human Resource Development laid down a Scheme of
revision of pay of teachers and equivalent cadres in the Universities following the 6 th Central Pay
Commission (hereinafter referred to as the “Scheme”). The Scheme provides a fixed pay of
Rs.75,000/− along with a special allowance of Rs.5,000/− per month to the Vice Chancellor. Para
8(p)(v) of the said Scheme provides that it is extended to Universities, Colleges and other higher
educational institutions coming under the purview of the State Legislature, provided the State
Governments wish to adopt and implement the scheme with certain conditions, inter alia, financial
assistance from the Central Government to the extent of 80% of the maintenance expenditure and
remaining 20% shall be met by the State Government. Payment of Central assistance for
implementing the scheme was subject to the condition that the entire scheme of revision of pay
scales together with all the conditions to be laid down by the UGC by way of regulations and other
guidelines shall be implemented by the State Governments and the Universities thereunder without
any modification. According to the petitioner, the State of Gujarat passed a Resolution dated
11.11.2009 adopting the Scheme. Since the Scheme has been adopted, all regulations framed by the
UGC are binding upon the State of Gujarat including the respondent − SP University. That on
adoption of the Scheme by the State Government as well as the SP University, the said University is
receiving Central financial assistance under the Scheme and is included in the list of State
universities receiving Central financial assistance as per Section 12(b) of the UGC Act, 1956. It is the
case on behalf of the petitioner that since the Scheme has been adopted, all regulations framed by
the UGC are binding upon the State of Gujarat including the SP University.

2.3 The UGC addressed a communication dated 11.08.2014 to H.E. − the Governor of Gujarat
seeking compliance with the UGC Regulations, 2010 with respect to appointment of Vice
Chancellors in the State of Gujarat. That H.E. − the Governor of Gujarat communicated to the
Government of Gujarat vide communication dated 30.08.2014 to comply with the UGC Regulations,
2010 with respect to the appointment of Vice Chancellors. At this stage, it is required to be noted
that H.E. – Governor of Gujarat is the ex−officio Chancellor of all the Universities in the State
including the SP University.

2.4 It is the case on behalf of the petitioner that ignoring Regulation 7.3.0 of the UGC Regulations, a
Search Committee was constituted under Section 10(2)(b) of the Sardar Patel University Act, 1955
(hereinafter referred to as the “SPU Act”) on 29.07.2016 with no nominee of the Chairman of the
UGC. According to the petitioner, even as per Section 10(2)(b), the Search Committee has only the
authority to recommend a panel of suitable candidates. The Search Committee, in the present case,
exceeded its jurisdiction and prescribed its own eligibility criteria for the post of Vice Chancellor by
diluting the eligibility criteria laid down in the UGC Regulations, 2010. That respondent No.2 issued
an advertisement, inviting applications for the post of Vice Chancellor, while mentioning the
aforesaid eligibility criteria prescribed by the Search Committee. Thereafter the State issued a
notification appointing respondent No.4 as the Vice Chancellor of the SP University for his first term
of three years. According to the petitioner respondent No.4 was not having teaching work
experience as a professor for a period of ten years, which is mandatory as per the UGC Regulations,

2

Gambhirdan K Gadhvi vs The State Of Gujarat on 3 March, 2022

2010. That respondent No.4 herein was promoted to the post of Professor with effect from
08.03.2008. According to the petitioner though respondent No.4 lacked the eligibility, he was
appointed as the Vice Chancellor at the fixed pay of Rs.75,000/− which is as per the revised Scheme
– Appendix I dated 31.08.2008.

2.5 That the petitioner challenged the said appointment of respondent No.4 before the High Court
by way of filing Special Civil Application (SCA) No.18922 of 2017. By judgment and order dated
05.07.2018 the Division Bench of the High Court dismissed the said SCA by observing and holding
that the UGC Regulations had not been adopted by the State of Gujarat and thus were not binding
upon respondent University. While dismissing the SCA and upholding the appointment of
respondent No.4 to the post of Vice Chancellor of the University, the Division Bench of the High
Court referred to Section 10 of the SPU Act, which does not provide for any qualification whatsoever
for appointment to the post of Vice Chancellor. The Division Bench of the High Court observed that
such a position would leave room for a lot of arbitrariness in the matter of selection of persons for
appointment as Vice Chancellor. The Division Bench of the High Court observed that though it is
true that UGC Regulations provides for certain qualifications, however, the same are not binding
unless the State legislation is appropriately amended. That the Division Bench of the High Court
also noted the communication dated 11.08.2014 addressed by the UGC to H.E. – Governor of
Gujarat. By the said communication it was requested to ensure that all the appointments of Vice
Chancellors in the State are made in accordance with the provisions laid down in the UGC
Regulations. The said Regulations, inter alia, provide for minimum qualifications for the
appointment of Vice Chancellor in Regulation 7.3.0. The High Court noted that the Principal
Secretary to H.E. – the Chancellor had addressed a communication dated 30.08.2014 to the
Principal Secretary, Government of Gujarat, requesting him to take note of the said important
communication and take necessary steps at the Government level but the same had been ignored by
the State and no steps had been taken pursuant thereto. Therefore, the High Court observed that it
is high time the State of Gujarat adopts the UGC Regulations and amends the State legislation
appropriately so that no room is left for any manipulation, arbitrariness, nepotism and favouritism.
At this stage, it is required to be noted that despite the above observations made in para 24 by the
High Court, no further steps have been taken by the State Government to adopt the UGC
Regulations and amend the State legislation appropriately.

2.6 Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the judgment and order passed by the High Court
dismissing SCA No.18922/2017, upholding the appointment of respondent No.4 to the post of Vice
Chancellor of SP University, petitioner preferred a Special Leave Petition (SLP) before this Court by
filing SLP (C) No.21792/2018. The said SLP came up before this Court for final hearing on
30.07.2019. However, by the time the said SLP could be heard, only one month remained in the first
term of respondent No.4, therefore, this Court did not interfere with the appointment of respondent
No.4 and vide order dated 30.07.2019 disposed of the same; however, this Court specifically
observed that all questions of law are left open.

2.7 That thereafter an advertisement dated 12.06.2019 was published, inviting applications to the
post of Vice Chancellor of respondent No.2 – SP University. According to the petitioner again the
Search Committee was not constituted as per the UGC Regulations. According to the petitioner in

3

Gambhirdan K Gadhvi vs The State Of Gujarat on 3 March, 2022

the said advertisement the Search Committee has further diluted the eligibility criteria to suit
respondent No.4, in so far as it states that persons who have remained Vice Chancellor for one term
are eligible. That thereafter respondent No.4 has been again appointed as the Vice Chancellor of the
SP University vide notification dated 29.08.2019 for a further term of three years. It is the case on
behalf of the petitioner that impugned notification appointing respondent No.4 as the Vice
Chancellor of the SP University is absolutely illegal and in violation of the UGC Regulations, 2010
and the UGC Regulations, 2018. Therefore, the present writ petition has been preferred for a writ of
quo warranto challenging the appointment of respondent No.4 as the Vice Chancellor of the SP
University.

2.8 It is the case on behalf of the petitioner that the earlier decision of the Division Bench of the
High Court passed in Special Civil Application No.18922/2017 may come in the way of the petitioner
and if again the petitioner approaches the High Court by filing a writ petition under Article 226 of
the Constitution of India. This is because the petitioner will have to face the decision of the Division
Bench of the High Court passed in SCA No.18922/2017 which though challenged before this Court,
the same was disposed of without considering the legality and/or correctness of the judgment and
order passed by the Division Bench of the High Court in SCA No.18922/2017. This was because by
the time the matter was heard, only one month of service of respondent No.4 was left and while
disposing of the SLP, it was observed by this Court that all questions of law are left open. Hence, the
petitioner has preferred this writ petition under Article 32 of the Constitution of India. Therefore, it
is prayed to entertain the present writ petition and consider the same on merits in the aforesaid
facts and circumstances of the case.

3. Shri I.H. Syed learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the petitioner has vehemently
submitted that the appointment of respondent No.4 as Vice Chancellor of SP University is absolutely
illegal and contrary to the statutory guidelines issued by the UGC.

3.1 It is contented that appointment of respondent No.4 as Vice Chancellor is by a Search Committee
not legally constituted as per the UGC guidelines.

3.2 It is submitted by Shri Syed learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the petitioner that at
the relevant time when his first appointment was made as Vice Chancellor, he was not fulfilling the
eligibility criteria required as per the UGC guidelines as well as even the eligibility criteria fixed by
even the Search Committee. It is further submitted that at the relevant time when respondent No.4
was appointed, he was not having ten years of experience as a professor which was mandatorily
required as per the UGC guidelines as well as the eligibility criteria fixed by the Search Committee.

3.3 It is further contended by Shri Syed, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the
petitioner that in the present case the Search Committee constituted was not legal and valid. It is
urged that as per the UGC guidelines which the State and universities were bound, one of the
members of the Search Committee should be the Chairman of the UGC and/or his nominee. It is
submitted that in the present case the Search Committee constituted did not include the Chairman
of the UGC and/or his nominee. Hence, the appointment of respondent No.4 by such an illegal
Search Committee is absolutely illegal and contrary to the statutory provisions and, therefore, the

4

same is required to be quashed and set aside by issuing a writ of quo warranto.

Gambhirdan K Gadhvi vs The State Of Gujarat on 3 March, 2022

3.4 It is further submitted by Shri Syed learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the
petitioner that in the present case even the Search Committee prescribed the eligibility criteria for
the post of Vice Chancellor. That the SPU Act as such does not provide and/or prescribe any
eligibility criteria for the post of Vice Chancellor which as such is a very important and prestigious
post so far as the University is concerned. That even the Division Bench of the High Court in the
earlier round of litigation in paragraph 24 of the judgment specifically criticised the State for not
prescribing/providing the minimum qualifications for appointment of Vice Chancellor at par with
the UGC Regulations, 2010. It is submitted that Division Bench of the High Court even noted the
communication dated 11.08.2014 addressed to H.E. – Governor of Gujarat to ensure that all the
appointments of Vice Chancellors in the State are made in accordance with the provisions laid down
in the UGC Regulations/guidelines which provide for minimum qualifications for the appointment
of Vice Chancellor as per Regulation 7.3.0 of the UGC Regulations, 2010 and also noted that even
H.E. – Governor of Gujarat addressed a communication dated 30.08.2014 to the State Government
to take note of the communication dated 11.08.2014 and to take necessary steps at the Government
level. That thereafter the Division Bench of the High Court has noted that said communications have
been ignored by the State government and no steps have been taken pursuant thereto and therefore,
it is high time that the State government adopts the UGC Regulations and amends the State
legislation appropriately so that no room is left for manipulation, arbitrariness, nepotism and
favouritism. That despite the above and even thereafter also no further steps have been taken by the
State Government to amend the State legislation. 3.5 It is further submitted by Shri Syed, learned
Senior Advocate, appearing on behalf of the petitioner that by adopting the Scheme dated
31.12.2008 vide Resolution dated 11.11.2009, all regulations framed by the UGC shall be binding on
the State Government including the SP University. That UGC Regulations, 2010 which, inter alia,
prescribe in Regulation 7.3.0 that a person shall have ten years of teaching work experience as a
professor in the University system. It also provides for constituting of the search committee,
consisting of a nominee of the Visitor/Chancellor, a nominee of the Chairman of the UGC, a
nominee of the Syndicate/Executing Council of the University. That such a search committee has to
recommend the names of the successful candidates. It is submitted that in the present case
respondent No.4 was appointed as Vice Chancellor for the second term even though he did not fulfil
the said criteria. 3.6 It is submitted that even respondent No.4 was being paid a fixed pay of
Rs.75,000/− along with a special allowance of Rs.5,000/− per month as per the Scheme dated
31.12.2008. It is submitted that once the Scheme dated 31.12.2008 had been adopted by the State
government and the SP University and the said University started receiving central financial
assistance and even it is included in the list of State universities receiving financial assistance as per
Section 12(b) of the UGC Act, 1956, thereafter it will not be open to the State and/or the University
not to follow the UGC Regulations and to continue to appoint the Vice Chancellor illegally and
contrary to the provisions of the UGC Regulations, 2010 (now UGC Regulations, 2018).

3.7 It is further submitted by Shri Syed, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the
petitioner that the UGC Regulations, 2010/2018 are Central legislation and therefore, the State
and/or the State universities are bound by the Central legislation and UGC Regulations, 2010/2018,
the subject ‘education’ being in the Concurrent List of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution.

5

Gambhirdan K Gadhvi vs The State Of Gujarat on 3 March, 2022

Reliance is placed on the decisions of this Court in the cases of Annamalai University represented by
Registrar Vs. Secretary to Government, Information and Tourism Department and Ors, (2009) 4
SCC 590 and Kalyani Mathivanan Vs. K.V. Jeyaraj & Ors, (2015) 6 SCC 363.

3.8 Shri Syed, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the petitioner has submitted that the
post of Vice Chancellor in a University is a very important and prestigious post. Post of Vice
Chancellor can be said to be holding of a public office. It is submitted that the future of the students
– next generation can be said to be in the hands of the Vice Chancellor who has to run the
administration and management and lead the University and guide the students. It is urged that
therefore greater care and caution should be taken while making the appointment of the Vice
Chancellor of a University and the best talent shall have to be appointed as Vice Chancellor. It is
submitted that any appointment as a Vice Chancellor contrary to the statutory rules and regulations
warrants issuance of a writ of quo warranto. It is submitted that the Vice Chancellor, not having the
requisite qualifications and who does not fulfil the eligibility criteria and/or who is appointed by a
search committee which is not legally constituted, cannot hold such an important public office. 3.9
Making the above submissions and relying upon the above decisions, it is prayed to allow the
present writ petition and to issue a writ of quo warranto as prayed in the petition.

4. Shri Manoj Ranjan Sinha, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the UGC – respondent No.3
herein has as such supported the petitioner. It is submitted that in a search committee for
appointment as Vice Chancellor, one of the members of the search committee shall be a nominee of
the Chairman of the UGC. It is submitted that UGC Regulations, 2010 and 2018 were/are binding to
all the States and the Universities.

4.1 It is further submitted that even as per clause 7.3.0 of the UGC Regulations, 2010/2018, the
members of the Search cum Selection Committee, can be persons of eminence in the sphere of
higher education. It further provides that one member of the search committee shall be nominated
by the Chairman of the UGC for selection of Vice Chancellors of the State, Private and Deemed to be
universities. That as per the UGC Regulations, Visitor/Chancellor shall appoint the Vice Chancellor
out of the panel of the names recommended by the Search cum Selection committee. It is contended
that being a Central legislation all the States, Private and Deemed to be Universities are bound by
the UGC Regulations and the guidelines issued from time to time.

5. The present petition is opposed by Shri Vinay Navare, learned Senior Advocate appearing on
behalf of respondent No.2 − SP University.

5.1 Shri Vinay Navare, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of respondent No.2 − SP
University has vehemently submitted that in the earlier round of litigation, the Division Bench of the
High Court dismissed the writ petition and did not interfere with the appointment of respondent
No.4 as the Vice Chancellor of SP University and the SLP against the same was dismissed by this
Court. Therefore, it is not open for the petitioner to again challenge the appointment of respondent
No.4 as a Vice Chancellor for the second term. It is submitted that as such the UGC Regulations,
2010 and the subsequent Regulations, 2018 have not been adopted by the State government and
therefore, the UGC Regulations are not binding to the State and/or universities and in the present

6

case SP University.

Gambhirdan K Gadhvi vs The State Of Gujarat on 3 March, 2022

5.2 It is submitted that appointment of respondent No.4 is governed under the SPU Act, 1955 and
the Search Committee was constituted by the State government under the SPU Act. That as such
Section 10 of the said Act, does not provide for any specific eligibility criteria/minimum eligibility
criteria for the post of Vice Chancellor, therefore, the Search Committee itself prescribed the
eligibility criteria. That after selecting respondent No.4 and on the recommendations made by the
Search Committee, respondent No.4 has been appointed.

5.3 It is submitted that in the absence of any statutory breach, appointment of respondent No.4 has
been made as per the SPU Act, 1955 and hence no writ of quo warranto be issued. It is submitted
that while challenging the appointment of respondent No.4 in the first term, the Division Bench of
the High Court rightly refused to issue a writ of quo warranto. Therefore, with regard to the
appointment of respondent No.4 as a Vice Chancellor for the second term also, no writ of quo
warranto can be issued.

5.4 It is further submitted by Shri Navare, learned Senior Advocate, appearing on behalf of
respondent No.2 − SP University that even otherwise the petitioner has no locus standi. It is
submitted that the petitioner is an ex− employee of the respondent − University and has a grudge
against the University and therefore, the present writ petition has been preferred challenging the
appointment of Vice Chancellor. It is prayed not to entertain the writ petition at the instance of such
a person.

6. Shri Gaurav Agrawal, learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondent No.4, while adopting the
submissions made by Shri Navare, has further submitted that so far as the appointment of
respondent No.4 as a Vice Chancellor for the second term is concerned, UGC Regulations, 2010 are
not applicable as UGC Regulations, 2010 have been substituted by the UGC Regulations, 2018.

7. Ms. Ruchi Kohli, learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondent No.1 – State has opposed the
present writ petition.

7.1 When a pointed question was asked to Ms. Kohli, learned counsel appearing on behalf of
respondent No.1 – State, whether the State legislation is amended providing for the minimum
eligibility criteria at par with the UGC Regulations, as observed by the High Court in the earlier
round of litigation in para 24, she is not in a position to satisfy and/or point out any such
amendment in the State legislation.

8. We have heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respective parties at length.

9. By way of this writ petition filed under Article 32 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner has
prayed for a writ of quo warranto by challenging the appointment of respondent No.4 herein as Vice
Chancellor of the SP University – respondent No.2 herein. When a writ of quo warranto will lie has
been dealt with by this Court in the case of Rajesh Awasthi Vs. Nand Lal Jaiswal and Ors., (2013) 1
SCC 501. In para 19, it has been observed and held as under: − “19. A writ of quo warranto will lie

7

Gambhirdan K Gadhvi vs The State Of Gujarat on 3 March, 2022

when the appointment is made contrary to the statutory provisions. This Court in Mor Modern
Coop. Transport Society Ltd. v. Govt. of Haryana [(2002) 6 SCC 269] held that a writ of quo
warranto can be issued when appointment is contrary to the statutory provisions. In B. Srinivasa
Reddy [(2006) 11 SCC 731 (2) : (2007) 1 SCC (L&S) 548 (2)] , this Court has reiterated the legal
position that the jurisdiction of the High Court to issue a writ of quo warranto is limited to one
which can only be issued if the appointment is contrary to the statutory rules. The said position has
been reiterated by this Court in Hari Bansh Lal [(2010) 9 SCC 655 : (2010) 2 SCC (L&S) 771]
wherein this Court has held that for the issuance of writ of quo warranto, the High Court has to
satisfy itself that the appointment is contrary to the statutory rules.” 9.1 In the case of Retd. Armed
Forces Medical Association and Ors. Vs. Union of India & Ors., (2006) 11 SCC 731, it has been
observed by this Court that strict rules of locus standi are relaxed to some extent in a quo warranto
proceedings. It is further observed in the said decision that broadly stated, the quo warranto
proceeding affords a judicial remedy by which any person, who holds an independent substantive
public office or franchise or liberty, is called upon to show by what right he holds the said office,
franchise or liberty, so that his title to it may be duly determined, and in case the finding is that the
holder of the office has no title, he would be ousted from that office by a judicial order. It is further
observed that in other words, the procedure of quo warranto gives the judiciary a weapon to control
the executive from making appointments to public office against law and to protect citizens from
being deprived of public office to which they have a right. These proceedings also tend to protect the
public from usurpers of public office. It is further observed that it will, thus, be seen that before a
person can effectively claim a writ of quo warranto, he has to satisfy the court that the office in
question is a public office and is held by a usurper without legal authority, and that inevitably would
lead to an enquiry, as to, whether, the appointment of the alleged usurper has been made in
accordance with law or not. Thus, as per the law laid down in a catena of decisions, the jurisdiction
of the High Court to issue a writ of quo warranto is a limited one, which can only be issued when a
person is holding the public office does not fulfil the eligibility criteria prescribed to be appointed to
such an office or when the appointment is contrary to the statutory rules. Keeping in mind the law
laid down by this Court in the aforesaid decisions on the jurisdiction of the Court while issuing a
writ of quo warranto, the factual and legal controversy in the present petition is required to be
considered.

10. Respondent No.4 is holding the post of Vice Chancellor.

The post of Vice Chancellor in a University can be said to be a public office. There cannot be any
dispute about the same. It is nobody’s case that holding the post of Vice Chancellor cannot be said to
be holding a post of public office.

11. Now the next question which is posed for consideration of this Court is, whether, the
appointment of respondent No.4 as a Vice Chancellor of the SP University – respondent No.2 herein
can be said to be contrary to any statutory provisions and whether, can it be said that respondent
No.4 fulfils the eligibility criteria for the post of Vice Chancellor 11.1 While examining the aforesaid
issues the relevant provisions of the UGC Regulations, 2010 enacted in exercise of powers conferred
under clauses (e) and (g) of Sub−section (1) of Section 26 of the University Grants Commission Act,
1956 and the relevant provisions of the SPU Act, 1955, are required to be referred to. 11.2 The UGC

8

Gambhirdan K Gadhvi vs The State Of Gujarat on 3 March, 2022

Act, 1956 was enacted to make provision for the co−ordination and determination of standards in
Universities and for that purpose, to establish a University Grants Commission. Section 12 deals
with “Functions of the Commission”, while Section 14 speaks of “Consequences of failure of
Universities to comply with recommendations of the Commission”. Section 26 deals with “Power to
make regulations”. As per Section 28 the rules and regulations framed under the UGC Act are
required to be laid before each House of the Parliament and when both the Houses agree then rules
and regulations can be given effect with such modification as may be made by the Parliament.
Therefore, any regulation enacted in exercise of powers under Section 26 can be said to be
subordinate legislation.

11.3 For the appointment and career advancement of teachers in the universities and institutions
affiliated to it, UGC by Regulation dated 04.04.2000, enacted the University Grants Commission
(Minimum Qualifications Required for the Appointment and Career Advancement of Teachers in
Universities and Institutions Affiliated to it) Regulations, 2000. However, in the said Regulation of
2000, no qualifications were prescribed for the post of “Pro− Chancellor” or “Vice Chancellor”.

Thereafter, the Government of India, Ministry of Human Resource Development Department of
Higher Education, New Delhi by Letter No. 1−32/2006−U.II/U.I(i) dated 31−12−2008
communicated to the Secretary, University Grants Commission, New Delhi the scheme of revision of
pay of teachers and equivalent cadres in universities and colleges following the revision of pay scales
of the Central Government employees on the recommendations of the 6th Central Pay Commission.
By the said letter, the Government of India directed that there shall be only three designations in
respect of teachers in the universities and colleges, namely, Assistant Professors, Associate
Professors and Professors. In the said letter revised pay scales, service conditions and Career
Advancement Scheme for teachers and equivalent positions including the post of Assistant
Professors/Associate Professors/Professors in universities and colleges were intimated. Pay scales of
Pro−Vice− Chancellor/Vice−Chancellor were also mentioned therein. It was intimated that the said
Scheme may be extended to the universities, colleges and other higher educational institutions
coming under the purview of the State Legislature, provided the State Governments wish to adopt
and implement the Scheme subject to the terms and conditions mentioned therein. In view of the
aforesaid Letter No. 1−32/2006−U.II/U.I(i), dated 31−12−2008 issued by the Government of India
and in exercise of the powers conferred under clauses (e) and (g) of sub−section (1) of Section 26 of
the UGC Act, 1956, UGC enacted the Regulations, 2010 in supersession of the UGC Regulations,
2000. It was published in the Gazette of India on 28−6− 2010 and came into force with immediate
effect. 11.3.1 Regulation 7.3.0 deals with the post of Vice Chancellor which reads as under: − “7.3.0.
Vice−Chancellor.—(i) Persons of the highest level of competence, integrity, morals and institutional
commitment are to be appointed as Vice−Chancellors. The Vice−Chancellor to be appointed should
be a distinguished academician, with a minimum of ten years of experience as Professor in a
university system or ten years of experience in an equivalent position in a reputed research and/or
academic administrative organization.

(ii) The selection of Vice−Chancellor should be through proper identification of a panel of 3−5
names by a Search Committee through a public notification or nomination or a talent search process
or in combination. The members of the above Search Committee shall be persons of eminence in the

9

Gambhirdan K Gadhvi vs The State Of Gujarat on 3 March, 2022

sphere of higher education and shall not be connected in any manner with the university concerned
or its colleges. While preparing the panel, the Search Committee must give proper weightage to
academic excellence, exposure to the higher education system in the country and abroad, and
adequate experience in academic and administrative governance to be given in writing along with
the panel to be submitted to the Visitor/Chancellor. In respect of State and Central universities, the
following shall be the constitution of the Search Committee:

(a) a nominee of the Visitor/Chancellor, who should be the Chairperson of the
Committee.

(b) a nominee of the Chairman, University Grants Commission.

(c) a nominee of the Syndicate/Executive Council/Board of Management of the
university.

(iii) The Visitor/Chancellor shall appoint the Vice− Chancellor out of the panel of
names recommended by the Search Committee.

(iv) The conditions of service of the Vice−Chancellor shall be prescribed in the
statutes of the universities concerned in conformity with these Regulations.

(v) The term of office of the Vice−Chancellor shall form part of the service period of
the incumbent concerned making him/her eligible for all service related benefits.”
11.3.2 Regulation 7.4.0 mandates that the universities/State Governments shall
modify or amend the relevant Acts/Statutes of the universities concerned within six
months of adoption of these Regulations.

11.3.3 Thus, UGC Regulations, 2010, inter−alia, prescribes in Regulation 7.3.0 that a person shall
have ten years of teaching work experience as a professor in a university system. It also provides for
constitution of a search committee consisting of a nominee of the Visitor/Chancellor, a nominee of
the Chairman of the UGC, a nominee of the Syndicate/Executive Council of the University and the
search committee has to recommend the names of the successful candidates. 11.4 Prior to enactment
of UGC Regulations, 2010, the Union Ministry of Human Resource Development laid down a
scheme of revision of pay of teachers and equivalent cadres in the Universities following the 6th
Central Pay Commission. The Scheme provides a fixed pay of Rs.75,000/− along with a special
allowance of Rs.5,000/− per month to the Vice Chancellor. Para 8(p)(v) of the said scheme provides
that it is extended to Universities, Colleges and other higher educational institutions coming under
the purview of the State Legislature provided the State Governments wish to adopt and implement
the scheme with certain conditions, inter alia, financial assistance from the Central Government to
the extent of 80% of the maintenance expenditure and remaining 20% shall be met by the State
Government. It further provides that payment of Central assistance for implementing the scheme is
subject to the condition that the entire scheme of revision of pay scales together with all the
conditions to be laid down by the UGC by way of regulations and other guidelines shall be
implemented by the State Governments and the Universities thereunder without any modification.

10

Gambhirdan K Gadhvi vs The State Of Gujarat on 3 March, 2022

In the present case, State of Gujarat has adopted the said Scheme dated 31.12.2008 by a Resolution
dated 11.11.2009 with effect from 01.01.2006 subject to the conditions mentioned in the said
resolution. Even in the said resolution, condition No.13 provides that the State Government will
publish the educational qualifications as per the UGC instructions published from time to time and
quality yardstick, teaching work days, norms, instructions, resolutions will have to be implemented.
It is not in dispute that the SP University is receiving Central financial assistance under the Scheme
and it is included in the State universities receiving Central financial assistance as per Section 12(b)
of the UGC Act, 1956. Therefore, having adopted the UGC Scheme and implemented the same and
getting Central financial assistance to the extent of 80% of the maintenance expenditure, the State
Government and the SP University are bound by the UGC Regulations, 2010. The UGC Regulations,
2010 are superseded by the UGC Regulations, 2018. However, the eligibility criteria for the post of
Vice Chancellor and the constitution of the search committee for appointment of a Vice Chancellor
remains the same. Therefore, the State of Gujarat and the universities thereunder including the SP
University are bound to follow UGC Regulations, 2010 and UGC Regulations, 2018.

12. Respondent No.4 herein has been appointed as a Vice Chancellor of the SP University under the
SPU Act, 1955. Section 10 of the said Act relates to the post of Vice Chancellor which reads as under:
− “[10. (1) The Vice−Chancellor shall be appointed by the State Government from amongst three
persons recommended under sub−section (3) by a committee appointed for the purpose under sub−
section (2).

(2) (a) for the purpose of sub−section (1) the Chancellor shall appoint a Committee which shall
consist of the following members, namely:

—

(i) two members (not being persons connected with the University or with any
affiliated college or recognised institution) out of whom one shall be a person
nominated in the manner prescribed by Statutes by the Syndicate and the Academic
Council jointly and the other shall be a person nominated in the manner prescribed
by Statutes by the Vice−Chancellor of all the Universities established by law in the
State of Gujarat;

(ii) one member to be nominated by the Chancellor.

(b) The Chancellor shall appoint one of three members of the Committee as its
chairman. (3) The Committee so appointed shall, within such time and in such
manner as may be prescribed by Statutes, select three persons whom it considers fit
for being appointed Vice− Chancellor and shall recommend to the State Government
the names of the persons so selected together with such other particulars as may be
prescribed by the Statutes.

(4) The Vice−Chancellor shall hold office for a term of three years and he shall be
eligible for being appointed to that office for a further term of three years only.

11

Gambhirdan K Gadhvi vs The State Of Gujarat on 3 March, 2022

(5) The emoluments to be paid to the Vice− Chancellor, and the terms and conditions
subject to which he shall hold office, 1 [shall be determined by the State
Government]:

Provided that such emoluments or such terms and conditions shall not, during the
currency of the term of the holder of that office, be varied to his disadvantage without
his consent. (6) (a) During the leave or absence of the Vice− Chancellor, or

(b) in the event of a permanent vacancy in the office of the Vice−Chancellor, until an
appointment is made under sub−section (1) to that office, the Pro−Vice−Chancellor,
and in the absence of the Pro−Chancellor, one of the Deans nominated by 3 [the State
Government], for that purpose shall carry on the current duties of the office of the
Vice−Chancellor.” 12.1 As per Section 10 of the Act, 1955 the search committee shall
consist of two members (not being persons connected with the respondent −
University or with any affiliated college or recognised institution) out of whom, one
shall be a person nominated in the manner prescribed by Statutes by the Syndicate
and the Academic Council jointly and the other shall be a person nominated in the
manner prescribed by Statutes by the Vice−Chancellor of all the Universities
established by law in the State of Gujarat and the third member to be nominated by
the Chancellor.

Section 10 of the SPU Act does not provide any qualification whatsoever for appointment to the post
of Vice Chancellor. Even the eligibility criteria to be prescribed is left to the Search Committee.
There are no guidelines whatsoever on the eligibility criteria to be prescribed by the Search
Committee. On the other hand, the UGC Regulations, 2010/2018 specifically prescribes the
qualification / eligibility criteria for the post of Vice Chancellor. It also provides for the constitution
of the Search Committee. As observed hereinabove as per Regulation 7.3.0 a person shall have ten
years of teaching work experience as a professor in the university system and it also provides for
constitution of a search committee consisting of a nominee of the Visitor/Chancellor, a nominee of
the Chairman of the UGC, a nominee of the Syndicate/Executive Council of the University. But
respondent No.4 did not/ does not fulfil the eligibility criteria prescribed under the UGC
Regulations, 2010/2018. He was/is not having ten years of teaching work experience as a professor
in the university system. Moreover, his name was not recommended by the legally constituted
search committee, constituted as per the UGC Regulations, 2010/2018. Also, the search committee
has prescribed the eligibility criteria for the post of Vice Chancellor by diluting the eligibility criteria
laid down in the UGC Regulations, 2010/2018.

12.2 Thus, the provisions of the SPU Act, 1955/provisions under the State legislation are just
contrary to the UGC Regulations, 2010/2018, which, as observed hereinabove, are binding on the
State Government and the universities thereunder. Even the State Government has not bothered to
amend the State legislation – to put at par with the UGC Regulations, 2010/2018 and has continued
the appointment in the universities dehors the UGC Regulations.

12

Gambhirdan K Gadhvi vs The State Of Gujarat on 3 March, 2022

13. At this stage, it is required to be noted that in the present case the UGC vide communication
dated 11.08.2014 addressed to the H.E. – Governor of Gujarat, who is also the Chancellor of the
University has drawn the attention of H.E. – Governor of Gujarat to ensure that all the
appointments of Vice Chancellors in the State are made in accordance with the provisions laid down
in the Regulations of UGC. The letter/communication dated 11.08.2014 reads as under: −
“University Grants Commission Prof. Dr. Jaspal S. Sandhu Secretary D.O.No.F.1−1/2014(Secy) 11th
August, 2014 At the outset kindly allow me to apologise for encroaching upon your precious time.
But it is the criticality of the subject which has compelled me to draw your kind attention to it.

The appointment of Vice−Chancellors in our University system has become a subject of widespread
criticism. We need visionary leadership to give proper direction to higher education in today’s
competitive world. It is possible only when we have persons of the highest competence & integrity,
in the position of the Vice− Chancellor. In this connection, the University Grants Commission had
brought out a Regulations titled "Minimum Qualifications for Appointment of Teachers and other
Academic Staff in Universities and Colleges and Measures for the Maintenance of Standards in
Higher Education, 2010. The UGC has prescribed the minimum qualifications for the appointment
of the Vice−Chancellor in this Regulation, which reads as under:

"Persons of the highest level of competence, integrity, morals and institutional
commitment are to be appointed as Vice−Chancellors. The Vice− Chancellor to be
appointed should be a distinguished academician, with a minimum of ten years of
experience as Professor in a University system or ten years of experience in an
equivalent position in a reputed research and/or academic administrative
organization."

It hardly needs any mention that the notifications published in The Gazette of India are mandatory.
May I, therefore, request your Excellency to use your good offices to ensure that all the
appointments of Vice− Chancellors in your State are made in accordance with the provisions laid
down in the aforementioned Regulations of the UGC.

I am certain that your guidance and support in this regard will make a huge difference in the
governance of higher education in the country.

Yours faithfully Jaspal S.Sandhu Shri O.P. Kohli Hon’ble Governor of Gujarat, Raj Bhawan
Gandhinagar 382 020 Gujarat” 13.1 That thereafter H.E. – Governor of Gujarat – Chancellor of the
Universities communicated to the Principal Secretary to the Government of Gujarat vide
communication dated 30.08.2014 and emphasized and requested him to take note of the UGC
communication dated 11.08.2014 and take necessary steps at the Government level. The
communication dated 30.08.2014 issued by the Principal Secretary to the H.E. – Governor of
Gujarat, reads as under: − OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNER OF GUJARAT Raj
Bhavan Ghandhinagar−382020.

Date: 30 AUG 2014 Important:

13

Gambhirdan K Gadhvi vs The State Of Gujarat on 3 March, 2022

To, The Principal Secretary to the Government of Gujarat Education Department,
Block No.5, 7th Floor, New Sachivalay, Gandhinagar Sub: Appointment of Vice
Chancellors Ref: A Communication from the Secretary, University Grant
Commission, Government of India, New Delhi dated 11th August, 2014. Sir, With
reference to the above subject, it is stated that recently we have received a
communication from Prof. (Dr.) Jaspal S. Sandhu, Secretary, University Grant
Commission, New Delhi reading the appointment of the vice chancellors in the
universities. It has been emphasized that the order to ensure maintenance of
standards in Higher Education, the UGC has prescribed certain minimum
qualifications for the appointment of the Vice Chancellors. Hon. Governor has been
requested to ensure the all the appointment of the Vice Chancellors in Gujarat are
made in accordance with the provisions laid down in the UGC Regulation. (Copy of
the communication is enclosed herewith for ready reference) You are requested to
note the above pertinent communication and take necessary steps at the Government
level.

Regards, Yours faithfully, sd/− (Arvind Joshi) Principal Secretary to Hon. Governor
13.2 Despite the above clear instructions from the office of H.E. – Governor of
Gujarat, who is also the Chancellor of all the universities, it is unfortunate that till
date the State legislation has not been amended by the State Government and the
appointments to the post of Vice Chancellor in the Universities in the said State are
being made just contrary to the UGC guidelines and Regulations. At this stage, it is
required to be noted that even in the earlier round of litigation being SCA No.18922
of 2017 in which this very petitioner challenged the appointment of this very
respondent No.4 as a Vice Chancellor of SPU made in the year 2016, the Division
Bench of the High Court made certain observations against the State Government not
adopting the UGC Regulations and not amending the State legislation appropriately.
The relevant observations made by the High Court in para 24 are as under: − “24.
Even while upholding the appointment of the sixth respondent to the post of Vice
Chancellor of the respondent University, this court cannot shut its eyes to the fact
that section 10 of the SPU Act does not provide for any qualification whatsoever for
appointment to the post of Vice Chancellor which would leave room for a lot of
arbitrariness in the matter of selection of persons for appointment as Vice
Chancellor. The UGC Regulations provide for certain qualifications. However, the
same are not binding unless the State legislation is appropriately amended.

The UGC, by a communication dated 11 th August 2014, addressed to His Excellency the Governor
of Gujarat, has requested him to use his good offices to ensure that all the appointments of Vice
Chancellors in the State are made in accordance with the provisions laid down in the UGC
Regulations, which provide for minimum qualifications for the appointment of Vice Chancellor with
reference to regulation 7.3.0 of the UGC Regulations, 2010. Pursuant thereto, the Principal
Secretary to His Excellency the Governor of Gujarat addressed a communication dated 30th August
2014 to the Principal Secretary, Government of Gujarat, requesting him to note the said important
communication and take necessary steps at the Government level. However, it appears that such

14

Gambhirdan K Gadhvi vs The State Of Gujarat on 3 March, 2022

communication has been ignored and no steps have been taken pursuant thereto. It is, therefore,
high time that the State of Gujarat adopts the UGC Regulations and amends the State legislation
appropriately so that no room is left for any manipulation, arbitrariness, nepotism and favouritism.”
Even the aforesaid observations made in para 24 were taken note of by this Court while disposing of
the SLP (C) No.21792 of 2018 in which the decision of the Division Bench of the High Court was
under challenge. 13.3 Thus, despite the communication by the UGC dated 11.08.2014 and thereafter,
the communication by the H.E. – Governor of Gujarat dated 30.08.2014 and even the observations
made by the Division Bench of the High Court in paragraph 24 in its judgment and order dated
05.07.2018 in SCA No.18922 of 2017, reproduced hereinabove, it is unfortunate that as on today, no
further steps have been taken by the State Government, to amend the State legislation and to put the
same at par with the UGC Regulations, and the State and the universities thereunder have continued
to make the appointments of Vice Chancellors just contrary to the UGC Regulations, which as
observed hereinabove are binding. 13.4 At this stage, it is required to be noted that as per Section 9
of the SPU Act, 1955, H.E. – Governor of Gujarat is the Chancellor of the University and he shall, by
virtue of his office, be the head of the University and the President of the Senate. Therefore, even as
the head of the University, his advice was/is binding upon the University and therefore, the State
ought to have taken the necessary steps at the Government level as requested in the communication
dated 30.08.2014. Even the request made by the H.E. – Governor of Gujarat, who is also the
Chancellor of the University, ought not to have taken very lightly. The State ought to have taken the
corrective measures by suitably amending the State legislation on par with the UGC Regulations.

14. The submissions made by Shri Navare, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of
respondent No.2 – SP University that as the earlier writ petition filed by the petitioner herein, in
which the appointment of respondent No.4 herein as the Vice Chancellor, was under challenge came
to be dismissed and the High Court refused to issue a writ of quo warranto and the judgment and
order passed by the High Court in SCA No.18922 of 2017 was not disturbed by this Court and
therefore, the controversy stands concluded and it is not open for the petitioner to raise the same
issue again is concerned, the aforesaid submissions is noted only to be rejected. This Court did not
opine anything on the merits of the judgment and order passed by the High Court. This Court
refused to entertain the Special Leave Petition solely on the ground that by the time the same was
taken up for hearing the tenure of respondent No.4 herein as a Vice Chancellor was coming to an
end. Even while dismissing the same on the aforesaid ground alone, this Court specifically observed
that all the questions of law are left open.

15. Thus, we find that the appointment of respondent No.4 is contrary to the UGC Regulations,
2018. Also, respondent No.4 has been appointed by a search committee, not constituted as per the
UGC Regulations, 2018. Moreover, respondent No.4 does not fulfil the eligibility criteria as per the
UGC Regulations, 2018, namely, having ten years of teaching work experience as a professor in the
university system. As observed hereinabove, by adopting the Scheme and having accepted 80% of
the maintenance expenditure from the Central government and when respondent No.4 is paid a
fixed pay of Rs.75,000/− along with a special allowance of Rs.5,000/− per month, which is
prescribed as per the Scheme of 2008, the State and the universities thereunder are bound by the
UGC Regulations, including the UGC Regulations, 2018. The appointment of respondent No.4 is
even otherwise not as per the eligibility criteria prescribed by the Search Committee, which is as

15

Gambhirdan K Gadhvi vs The State Of Gujarat on 3 March, 2022

under: − “1. Persons of the highest level of competence, integrity, morals and institutional
commitment.

2. Persons should be a distinguished academician with proven leadership qualities shall be
satisfying anyone of the following:

(cid:135) 10 years’ experience of teaching and research. As professor or (cid:135) Vice Chancellor /
Pro Vice Chancellor of any University including former Vice Chancellor / Pro Vice
Chancellor or (cid:135) Director / Principal of a college / institution / Research Organization
with 15 years of teaching / research / administration.” In fact, in the instant case,
H.E. – Governor of Gujarat who is also the Chancellor of all the Universities in the
said State had through his Principal Secretary directed that the communication from
the Secretary, University Grants Commission, Government of India, New Delhi dated
11th August, 2014 be complied and appropriate steps be taken in that regard. We
have referred to the aforesaid letter dated 30th August, 2014. The letter of the
Secretary of the UGC dated 11th August, 2014 to H.E. – Governor of Gujarat
informing about the regulations titled “Minimum qualifications for appointment of
teachers and other academic staff in Universities and Colleges and measures for the
maintenance of standards in higher education, 2010” has also been extracted above
in the said letter. It has been clearly stated that the UGC has prescribed minimum
qualifications for the appointment of a Vice− Chancellor and therefore, such an
appointment must be in accordance with the provisions laid down in the afore−
mentioned regulations of the UGC. It is clear that the respondent−State of Gujarat
has failed to take note of the communication from the UGC and instead the
respondent− University has left to the sweet will of the search committee to prescribe
eligibility criteria for the appointment of the Vice−Chancellor of the University. The
eligibility criteria when once fixed by the UGC under its regulations would in our view
apply to all the universities which are aided by the UGC to be bound by the said
regulations even in the absence of the same being incorporated under the respective
universities Act of the respective States. Therefore, when the appointment of
respondent No.4 is found to be contrary to the UGC Regulations, 2018 and the UGC
Regulations are having the statutory force, we are of the opinion that this is a fit case
to issue a writ of quo warranto and to quash and set aside the appointment of
respondent No.4 as the Vice Chancellor of the SP University.

16. It cannot be disputed that the UGC Regulations are enacted by the UGC in
exercise of powers under Section 26(1)(e) and 26(1)(g) of the UGC Act, 1956. Even as
per the UGC Act every rule and regulation made under the said Act, shall be laid
before each House of the Parliament.

Therefore, being a subordinate legislation, UGC Regulations becomes part of the Act. In case of any
conflict between State legislation and Central legislation, Central legislation shall prevail by applying
the rule/principle of repugnancy as enunciated in Article 254 of the Constitution as the subject
‘education’ is in the Concurrent List (List III) of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution. Therefore,

16

Gambhirdan K Gadhvi vs The State Of Gujarat on 3 March, 2022

any appointment as a Vice Chancellor contrary to the provisions of the UGC Regulations can be said
to be in violation of the statutory provisions, warranting a writ of quo warranto.

17. In view of the above discussion and for the reasons stated above, the appointment of respondent
No.4 as a Vice Chancellor of the SP University – respondent No.2 herein, is contrary to the UGC
provisions, namely, UGC Regulations, 2018. We hence allow the present writ petition and issue a
writ of quo warranto quashing and setting aside the appointment of respondent No.4 as the Vice
Chancellor of SP University. The present petition is accordingly, Allowed.

17.1 Before parting we may hope and trust that wiser counsel will now prevail and the State
Government shall amend the State legislation accordingly on par with the UGC Regulations, which
as such was recommended by the H.E. – Governor of Gujarat as far as back in the year 2014 and
even thereafter, the Division Bench of the High Court had made observations in para 24 of its
judgment and order dated 05.07.2018 in SCA No.18922 of 2017, in which, the High Court observed
that it is high time that the State Government adopts the UGC Regulations and amends the State
legislation appropriately so that no room is left for any manipulation, arbitrariness, nepotism and
favouritism, before any fresh appointment as a Vice Chancellor in the State and the universities
thereunder are made. As observed hereinabove, prescribing the eligibility criteria shall not be left to
the sweet will of the search committee. It may lead to arbitrariness and different search committees
in absence of any statutory guidelines and/or prescription, may prescribe different eligibility
criteria.

17.2 It is to be noted that the post of Vice Chancellor of the University is a very important post so far
as the University is concerned. Being a leader and head of the institution, the Vice Chancellor of the
University has to play very important role. While academic qualifications, administrative
experience, research credentials and track record could be considered as basic eligibility
requirements, the greater qualities of a Vice Chancellor would be one who is a true leader and a
passionate visionary. A Vice Chancellor needs to be one who understands and handles the affairs of
the University as ethical business and maintains a pellucidity in his conduct towards the betterment
of the University as well as the students therein. A Vice Chancellor should be one who can inspire
students and guarantee entry of high−quality teachers into the University system. A Vice Chancellor
functions as a bridge between the executive and academic wings of a university as he is the head of
both a ‘teacher’ and an ‘administrator’.

We may refer to some of the significant commission reports concerning the personality and role of a
Vice− Chancellor of a university as under:

a) The 1949 Radhakrishnan Commission stated that originally, the Vice−
Chancellorship of an Indian University was regarded as an honorary post to be filled
by a prominent man in his leisure time. But now the position has changed, there is
enough work to justify a full−time appointment and the Universities should have full
time paid Vice−Chancellors. While discussing the duties of a Vice−Chancellor, the
Commission stated that a Vice−Chancellor must be the chief liaison between the
University and the public and must be a keeper of the university’s conscience, both

17

Gambhirdan K Gadhvi vs The State Of Gujarat on 3 March, 2022

setting the highest standard by example and dealing firmly and promptly with
indiscipline and malpractice of any kind. He/she must have the strength of character
to resist unflinchingly the many forms of pressure. Being a full−time task, it needs an
exceptional man (or woman) to undertake it. The Commission rejected the proposal
of selecting the Vice−Chancellor by an external body and recommended that the
Chancellor should appoint the Vice−Chancellor upon the recommendation of the
Executive.

b) The 1971 Report of the Committee on Governance of Universities and Colleges by
the University Grants Commission chaired by Dr. P.B. Gajendragadkar, former Chief
Justice of India while reiterating the recommendations and observations made by the
aforesaid commissions also stated that the selection of a Vice−Chancellor is the single
most important decision that the governing body of the university may be called upon
to make.

While the Chancellor of a University may be a high dignitary of the State of Union of India or an
eminent scholar or eminent person in public life of the State, the appointment of Vice−Chancellor,
being the important functionary of the University is most strategic. The powers of proper
maintenance of discipline and a healthy environment for both teachers and students in the
university is vested with the Vice−Chancellor along with all the other powers vested in him/her by
various Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations. The Commission also stated that appointment of a
Vice−Chancellor is made in most of the Universities out of a panel of at least three names by the
Chancellor in case of State Universities and by the Visitor in case of Central Universities. The panel
of names is prepared by a Search Committee constituted in accordance with the provision of
Act/Statute. Since it was difficult to have a uniform system of forming a committee in all the States,
the alternatives to constitute the Search Committee were also provided in the report.

c) The 1990 Report of the UGC Committee towards New Educational Management by Professor A.
Gnanam (also called as the Gnanam Committee Report, 1990) accentuated the role of a Vice−
Chancellor, stating that the Vice−Chancellor should be a person with vision and qualities of
academic leadership and with a flair for administration because what the universities need is a
sensitive, efficient, fair and bold administrator. The Vice−Chancellor should be a distinguished
educationist from the higher education system having highest level of competence, integrity, morals
and self−respect.

d) The Ramlal Parikh Committee 1993 accented that the universities need distinguished and
dignified persons as Vice−Chancellors and it is necessary to ensure that they are treated with dignity
and regard, which the office merits.

e) The University Grants Commission in its hand book titled Governance in Higher Education:

Hand Book for Vice−Chancellors published in 2019 has penned down the role of
Vice−Chancellor of Indian Universities having gained a paramount importance in the
recent times. In the words of the Prof. D.P. Singh, the then Chairman of University

18

Gambhirdan K Gadhvi vs The State Of Gujarat on 3 March, 2022

Grants Commission and Former Director of National Assessment and Accreditation
Council (NAAC): − “As Chief Executives and Academic Heads of Universities, the
Vice Chancellors are expected to be efficient and effective in terms of: − a.
Implementation of National Higher Education Policy and programmes, b.
Institutional change in tune with the national reforms package, c. Quality and
innovation enhancement and their sustainability, d. Productive engagement with
‘communities of scholars’ from within their universities and from national and
international domains, e. Nurturing of ‘Research and Innovation Ecosystem’ and
translation of deliverables to society and economy f. Adoption of international best
practices of ‘Good Governance.” ‘The Vice Chancellor has to evolve as the leader of a
symphony of orchestra with the attributes of: − a. Developing teams and teamwork,
building partnerships and collaborations delicately interwoven by collegiality,
friendship and intellectual engagement;

b. devising a strategy and action plan
with     defined       milestones    and
deliverables;

c. ensuring primary accountabilities of self and the above−mentioned university
governing bodies; and d. steering an institutional monitoring and evaluation
mechanism on university performance built on principles of transparency.’
Discussing the situation in the backdrop of principle of governance as quoted by
Chanakya in his Nitishastra− ‘Yatha Raja Tatha Praja’, the sense of morality must
begin from the door of the leader who preaches it.

Thus, universities are autonomous and the Vice− Chancellor is the leader of a higher
education institution. As per the norm, he/she should be an eminent academician,
excellent administrator and also someone who has a high moral stature. The
aforesaid reports of the Radhakrishnan Commission, Kothari Commission, Gnanam
Committee and Ramlal Parikh Committee have highlighted the importance of the
role of Vice−Chancellor in maintaining the quality and relevance of universities, in
addition to its growth and development, keeping in view, the much−needed changes
from time to time. Further, these committees have also made suggestions and
recommendations for identifying the right person for the said position. At this stage,
it is correct to say that a Vice−Chancellor is the king−pin of a University’s system and
a keeper of the University’s conscience.

Further, in our view, the Search / Selection Committee plays a vital and significant
role in the selection of the Vice Chancellor; yet the selected Vice Chancellor’s
performance in the universities vary from university to university. Therefore, the
members of the Search Committee, who are given the privilege and honour of
selecting and suggesting names for the appointment of Vice Chancellor are directly or
indirectly responsible for the achievement of the University. Commitment to the
quality and the objectives of the universities in particular and higher education
system in general, are of course the deciding factors in selecting the right person.

19

Gambhirdan K Gadhvi vs The State Of Gujarat on 3 March, 2022

We are sure and we hope and trust that while making afresh appointment of Vice
Chancellor in the State and the universities thereunder, the aforesaid aspects shall be
kept in mind by the State and the concerned universities. With this hope and trust we
leave the matter there.

…………………………………J.
(M. R. SHAH)

New Delhi                          …………………………………J.
March, 03 2022.                     (B.V. NAGARATHNA)

20