Gregory Patrao vs Mangalore Refinery And Petrochemicals ... on 11 July, 2022

Gregory Patrao vs Mangalore Refinery And Petrochemicals ... on
11 July, 2022

Author: M.R. Shah

Bench: B.V. Nagarathna, M.R. Shah

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 4105-4107 OF 2022

Gregory Patrao and Ors.                                  …Appellant(s)

Versus

Mangalore Refinery and
Petrochemicals Limited & Ors.                            …Respondent(s)

JUDGMENT

M.R. SHAH, J.

1. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment and order passed by the High
Court of Karnataka at Bengaluru in First Appeal No. 259 of 2021 and other allied first appeals, by
which the High Court has set aside the judgment and award passed by the learned Reference Court
and has remanded the matter to the Reference Court to decide the references afresh after affording
an opportunity to all the parties including respondent No. 1 herein - M/s. Mangalore Refineries &
Petrochemicals Ltd., Mangalore (MRPL), the original claimants / original landowners have
preferred the present appeals.

2. The lands belonging to the original claimants/original landowners/appellants herein were
acquired under Section 28(4) of the Karnataka Industrial Areas Development Act, 1966 (hereinafter
referred to as “KIAD Act, 1966”) under three different notifications. The lands were sought to be
acquired for the development of the Karnataka Industrial Areas Development Board (hereinafter
referred to as “KIADB”) for establishment of industrial areas. The Land Acquisition Officer after
affording an opportunity of hearing to the owners of the land passed an award on 06.10.2009. At the
instance of the landowners, the references were made to the Reference Court. The Reference Court
vide judgment dated 29.07.2020 enhanced the amount of compensation. 2.1 Feeling aggrieved and
dissatisfied with the judgment and award passed by the Reference Court dated 29.07.2020,

1

Gregory Patrao vs Mangalore Refinery And Petrochemicals ... on 11 July, 2022

enhancing the amount of compensation, respondent No.1 herein – MRPL, who was allotted the land
as a lessee by the KIADB, preferred the present appeals before the High Court and prayed for leave
to appeal. It was the case on behalf of the MRPL that as the MRPL is the beneficiary of the
acquisition and under the agreement between the KIADB and MRPL, the latter has to pay the
additional amount of compensation and, therefore, the burden to pay the additional compensation
would be upon the MRPL, therefore, MRPL ought to have been heard by the Reference Court. It was
the case on behalf of the MPRL that MRPL can be said to be a “person interested”. Heavy reliance
was placed upon the decisions of this Court in the case of Himalayan Tiles and Marble (P) Ltd. Vs.
Francis Victor Countinho (Dead) By LRs', (1980) 3 SCC 223; UP Awas Evam Vikas Parishad Vs.
Gyan Devi (Dead) by LRs. and Ors., (1995) 2 SCC 326; Neelagangabai & Another Vs. State of
Karnataka & Others, (1990) 3 SCC 617; and Neyvely Lignite Corporation Ltd. Vs. Special Tahsildar
(Land Acquisition) Neyvely and Others, (1995) 1 SCC 221.

2.2 On the other hand, it was the case on behalf of the original owners that the MRPL, being an
allottee from the KIADB and the beneficiary of the land acquisition proceedings is the KIADB and
not the MRPL and the amount awarded by the Land Acquisition Officer was deposited by the
KIADB, MRPL cannot be said to be a ‘person interested’. Relying upon the decision of this Court in
the case of Peerappa Hanmantha Harijan Vs. State of Karnataka, (2015) 10 SCC 469, it was prayed
to dismiss the appeals.

2.3 By the impugned common judgment and order and mainly relying upon the decision of this
Court in the case of UP Awas Evam Vikas Parishad (supra), the High Court has granted the
permission to MRPL to file the appeals challenging the judgment and award passed by the
Reference Court and thereafter has quashed and set aside the judgment and award passed by the
Reference Court by holding that the MRPL can be said to be a “person interested” and therefore,
ought to have been heard before enhancing the amount of compensation. Thereafter, the High Court
has remanded the matter back to the Reference Court for a decision afresh after affording an
opportunity to all the parties to adduce evidence including MRPL.

2.4 Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned common judgment and order passed by
the High Court, the original claimants/original landowners have preferred the present appeals.

3. Shri Shailesh Madiyal, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants – original claimants
has vehemently contended that in the facts and circumstances of the case, the High Court has erred
in quashing and setting aside the judgment and award/order passed by the Reference Court in the
appeals preferred by MRPL by holding that MRPL can be said to be a “person interested” and
therefore, MRPL ought to have been heard by the Reference Court before enhancing the amount of
compensation.

3.1 Shri Madiyal, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants has submitted that in the
present case the real issue is as to whether in an acquisition under KIAD Act, 1966, a
post-acquisition allottee of a parcel of land is a necessary party in the proceedings for the
determination of the compensation.

2

Gregory Patrao vs Mangalore Refinery And Petrochemicals ... on 11 July, 2022

3.2 It is urged that in terms of Section 28(1) of the KIAD Act, 1966, the acquisition is carried out by
the State Government “for the purpose of development by the Board, or for any other purpose, in
furtherance of the objects of the said Act”. That in the present case, the acquisition was carried out
by the State Government for the purposes of “establishment of industry and to develop it” through
the KIADB. It is submitted that even the preliminary/final notifications do not mention that the
acquisition was for the MRPL. It is further urged that in terms of Section 28(8) of the KIAD Act,
1966, the State Government, after it has taken possession of the land, transfers the land to the
KIADB and, thereafter in terms of Section 32(2) of the KIAD Act, 1966, the KIADB is empowered to
deal with the land so transferred in accordance with the regulations made and the directions given
by the State Government in this behalf. It is submitted that therefore, the company to which a land
is allotted under the KIAD Act, 1966 cannot be said to be the beneficiary of the acquisition. It is
submitted that as such the beneficiary is in fact the KIADB which in turn allots the acquired land to
companies such as MRPL.

3.3 It is submitted that as such the issue involved in the present appeals is not res integra in view of
the direct decision of this Court in the case of Peerappa Hanmantha Harijan (supra). That this
Court, in the above case dealing with an acquisition under the KIAD Act, 1966 itself, repelled the
claim of the post-acquisition allottee company that it has a right to participate in the award
proceedings for determination of the market value of the land. It is submitted that this Court, after
considering, inter alia, the scheme of the KIAD Act, 1966 held that the allottee company is not a
beneficiary of the acquired land under the KIAD Act, 1966. That in the said decision, it is further
observed and held that Section 54 of the Land Acquisition Act, which provides a right to appeal is
only available to the landowners, State Government and the beneficiary of the acquired land and not
the allottee company. It is submitted that in the present case, KIADB can be said to be a beneficiary
of the acquired land and not the allottee company - MRPL. It is submitted that therefore, the
appeals filed by the respondent No.1 – MRPL before the High Court were not at all maintainable
and the High Court ought to have dismissed the said appeals in view of the law laid down in the case
of Peerappa Hanmantha Harijan (supra). 3.4 Now, so far as, reliance placed by the High Court on
the judgments of this Court in UP Awas Evam Vikas Parishad (supra) and Himalayan Tiles and
Marble (P) Ltd. (supra) while passing the impugned common judgment and order, it is vehemently
submitted by learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants – original landowners that the
High Court has committed a grave error in relying upon the aforesaid decisions. That both the
aforesaid decisions, which have been heavily relied upon by the High Court while passing the
impugned common judgment and order are not applicable at all with respect to an acquisition under
the KIAD Act, 1966.

3.5 Hence, the aforesaid decisions do not apply to the facts and circumstances of the present case,
since the said judgments pertain to the acquisition under Part VII of the Land Acquisition Act r/w
Section 50 of the Land Acquisition Act, which provides for direct acquisition for a company/local
authority. It is submitted that the conclusion of this Court at para 24 of UP Awas Evam Vikas
Parishad (supra) clearly states that a company or local authority for whom a land is being acquired
has a right to participate before the Reference Court. But in the present case, the land has been
acquired for the KIADB, which is neither a company nor a local authority.

3

Gregory Patrao vs Mangalore Refinery And Petrochemicals ... on 11 July, 2022

3.6 It is submitted that as such the decisions of this Court in the case of UP Awas Evam Vikas
Parishad (supra) and Himalayan Tiles and Marble (P) Ltd. (supra) have been considered and
distinguished by this Court in the case of Peerappa Hanmantha Harijan (supra) (at paras 61 and 62).

3.7 It is further submitted that even in the subsequent decision, this Court in the case of Satish
Kumar Gupta Vs. State of Haryana, (2017) 4 SCC 760 relying upon the case of Peerappa Hanmantha
Harijan (supra) has distinguished the judgments in the case of UP Awas Evam Vikas Parishad
(supra) and Himalayan Tiles and Marble (P) Ltd. (supra), and has held and taken a view that a
post-acquisition allottee of land is neither a necessary or proper party nor has any locus to be heard
in the matter of determination of compensation under the scheme of the Land Acquisition Act.

3.8 It is further submitted by learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants that as such the
High Court has committed a grave error in not following a binding precedent of this Court rendered
in the case of Peerappa Hanmantha Harijan (supra). That the aforesaid judgment of this Court was
binding upon the High Court but the High Court has not followed the same and has observed on the
basis of an erroneous reasoning that the decision of this Court in UP Awas Evam Vikas Parishad
(supra), being a decision of Three Judge Bench as compared to a decision of Two Judge Bench in
Peerappa Hanmantha Harijan (supra) binds the High Court. It is submitted that the High Court has
not properly appreciated and considered the fact that the decision of this Court in the case of UP
Awas Evam Vikas Parishad (supra) was subsequently considered and distinguished by this Court in
the case of Peerappa Hanmantha Harijan (supra). Therefore, the High Court was bound by the
decision of this Court in the case of Peerappa Hanmantha Harijan (supra) even on the doctrine of
stare decisis as embodied in Article 141 of the Constitution and reliance is placed on the following
decisions of this Court:-

“Director of Settlements, A.P. Vs. M.R. Apparao, (2002)

4 SCC 638 (para 7); Rashmi Metaliks Ltd. Vs. Kolkata Metropolitan Development Authority, (2013)
10 SCC 95 (para 7) and Bir Singh Vs. Mukesh Kumar, (2019) 4 SCC 197 (para 30).

3.9 Making the above submissions, it is prayed to allow the present appeals.

4. Present appeals are vehemently opposed by Ms. Shalini Sati Prasad, learned counsel appearing on
behalf of the respondent No.1 – MRPL.

4.1 It is submitted by learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent No.1 – MRPL that the
present appeals raise the question as to whether respondent No.1 – MRPL can be said to be a
“person interested” for the purpose of Section 18(1) of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 and
consequently, whether the respondent No. 1 was a proper party in the proceedings before the
Learned Reference Court. It is submitted that as such there is no infirmity in the impugned
judgment and order passed by the High Court as the High Court has relied upon the direct
judgments of this Court in the case of UP Awas Evam Vikas Parishad (supra) and Himalayan Tiles
and Marble (P) Ltd. (supra). 4.2 Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the MRPL has vehemently
submitted that the MRPL can be said to be a “person interested” for the purpose of Sections 18 and

4

Gregory Patrao vs Mangalore Refinery And Petrochemicals ... on 11 July, 2022

20 of the Land Acquisition Act and Section 29(4) of the KIAD Act, 1966 and therefore was a proper
party in the proceedings before the Reference Court.

4.3 It is submitted that there is no requirement under Section 28(1) or Section 28(4) of the KIAD
Act, 1966 to make a statement in the notification as to the specific company for which the land is
intended to be acquired. It is submitted that even otherwise in the agreement between KIADB and
the MRPL, liability to pay the enhanced amount of compensation would be upon the MRPL and
therefore, before enhancing the amount of compensation, the Reference Court ought to have heard
the MRPL. That the MRPL cannot be made liable to bear the financial burden of the enhanced
awarded amount without a fair chance of contesting the enhancement by the Reference Court.
Therefore, the High Court has rightly remanded the matter to the Reference Court to provide the
MRPL, who is a “person interested”, an opportunity to be heard before awarding the enhanced
amount of compensation to the landowners.

4.4 It is further submitted by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondent No.1 – MRPL
that as per Section 2(11) of the KIAD Act, 1966, the expression “person interested” has the same
meaning assigned to it in Section 3 of the Land Acquisition Act. That as per Section 3(b) of the Land
Acquisition Act, the expression “person interested” includes all persons claiming an interest in
compensation to be made on account of the acquisition of the land under the said Act; and a person
shall be deemed to be interested in land if he is interested in an easement affecting the land.

4.5 It is submitted that in the present case, KIADB constituted under the KIAD Act, 1966 had
executed an agreement with the MRPL dated 08.12.1994. Accordingly, in view of the said agreement
with the KIADB, the land was acquired pursuant to the three different notifications issued by the
State under Section 28(4) of the KIAD Act, 1966. That the land was granted to respondent No. 1 -
MRPL by the State Level Single Window Clearance Committee whose approvals are binding on all
departments and authorities in terms of Section 8 of the Karnataka Industries Facilitation Act 2002.
It is submitted that therefore, MRPL can be said to be a “person interested” in the acquired land. 4.6
On the submission that the MRPL can be said to be a “person interested” under the relevant
provisions of the Land Acquisition Act and/or KIAD Act, 1966 and therefore a proper party before
the proceedings, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent No.1 has heavily relied
upon the judgments of this Court in the case of UP Awas Evam Vikas Parishad (supra); Himalayan
Tiles and Marble (P) Ltd. (supra) as well as another decision of this Court in the case of Delhi
Development Authority Vs. Bhola Nath Sharma (Dead) by L.Rs. and Ors., 2011 (2) SCC 54.

4.7 It is further submitted that as such and being well aware that the land had been acquired for the
MRPL, the appellants herein in fact had impleaded MRPL as a party respondent in their petition
challenging the acquisition before the High Court. Therefore, thereafter in the references made for
enhancement of compensation, the landowners ought to have impleaded the MPRL, being an
affected and proper party. 4.8 Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the MRPL has further
submitted that MRPL cannot be made liable to bear the financial burden of the enhanced amount of
compensation without being given a fair chance of contesting the enhancement of the amount of
compensation. Reliance is placed upon paras 22 and 41 of the case of UP Awas Evam Vikas Parishad
(supra). It is submitted that the ratio of this Court in the case of UP Awas Evam Vikas Parishad

5

Gregory Patrao vs Mangalore Refinery And Petrochemicals ... on 11 July, 2022

(supra) in paras 22 and 41 has not been considered and distinguished by this Court in the case of
Peerappa Hanmantha Harijan (supra). It is submitted that therefore, even if it is presumed that the
respondent No. 1 - MRPL does not have any right to be impleaded in the proceedings before the
learned Reference Court, the principles of natural justice and the doctrine of legitimate expectation
would be attracted so as to ensure that the respondent No. 1 – MRPL is not rendered remediless
while being burdened with the financial implications of the orders passed by the learned Reference
Court in the absence of any opposition to the enhancement.

4.9 Making above submissions and relying upon the above decisions, it is prayed to dismiss the
present appeals.

5. Heard the learned counsel for the respective parties at length.

6. The short question, which is posed for the consideration of this Court is, whether, respondent
No.1 – MRPL, who is simply an allottee of the land by the KIAD Board, after the acquisition of the
lands under Section 28 of the KIAD Act, 1966, which was for the benefit of Karnataka Industrial
Areas Development Board (KIADB) can be said to be a “person interested” under the provisions of
KIAD Act, 1966 and therefore, was a proper party in the reference proceedings initiated at the
instance of the original landowners?

7. While answering the aforesaid issue/question, it is required to be noted that in the present case,
the land has been acquired under the provisions of the KIAD Act, 1966 and the notification has been
issued under Section 28(1) of the KIAD Act, 1966. The land has been acquired by the State
Government for KIADB under three different notifications. After the lands were acquired,
respondent No.1 – MRPL has been allotted the lands acquired as per the agreements between the
KIADB and the MRPL. The present is not an acquisition under the provisions of the Land
Acquisition Act and therefore, as such, neither Section 50 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 nor any
other provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 shall be applicable with respect to the lands
acquired under the provisions of the KIAD Act, 1966. Taking into consideration, the aforesaid
factual aspects, the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court in which it has heavily
relied upon the decisions of this Court in the case of UP Awas Evam Vikas Parishad (supra) and
Himalayan Tiles and Marble (P) Ltd. (supra) are required to be considered.

7.1 At the outset, it is required to be noted that as such, the issue involved in the present appeal in
respect of the acquisitions under the KIAD Act, 1966 and the right of the subsequent allottee to
participate in the reference proceedings and whether the subsequent allottee can be said to be a
“person interested” under the provisions of the KIAD Act, 1966 is no longer res integra. While
deciding the acquisition under the very KIAD Act, 1966 and the right of the subsequent allottee, who
has been allotted the land by the KIADB in the case of Peerappa Hanmantha Harijan (supra) after
distinguishing the decision of this Court in the case of UP Awas Evam Vikas Parishad (supra) and
Himalayan Tiles and Marble (P) Ltd. (supra), it is specifically observed and held by this Court that
an allottee company cannot be said to be a beneficiary or a “person interested” entitled for hearing
before determination of compensation. By observing and holding so, this Court had an occasion to
consider the entire scheme of acquisition under the KIAD Act, 1966 and has distinguished the

6

Gregory Patrao vs Mangalore Refinery And Petrochemicals ... on 11 July, 2022

acquisition under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894. Before this Court also, the High Court remanded
the matter at the instance of the allottee company in the writ petition filed by the allottee company
to the Reference Court. This Court set aside the same while holding that the allottee company, who
has been allotted the land under the provisions of the KIAD Act, 1966, can neither be said to be a
beneficiary nor a “party interested” entitled for hearing before determination of compensation. This
Court in the case of Peerappa Hanmantha Harijan (supra) considered in detail the allotment/lease
agreement in favour of the allottee/lessee and also the relevant provisions of the KIAD Act, 1966 and
has observed in paragraphs 50 to 54 as under:-

“50. On a careful examination of the aforesaid clauses of the lease agreement
executed between the parties in respect of the land of the appellants, it becomes
manifestly clear that the said agreement is executed by KIADB in favour of the
Company after allotment of land was made in favour of the Company as provided
under Regulations 10(a) and (c) of the KIADB Regulations respectively by following
the procedure of inviting applications and submission of the applications by the
interested parties along with the required deposits towards the cost of the land.
Further, Clauses 5(a) and (b) of the lease agreement referred to supra, would clearly
state that the premium indicated in Clause 1 of the lease agreement represents the
tentative cost of the land and in the event of the lessor incurring payment of amounts
to the landowners over and above the awards made by the acquiring authority by
virtue of the award passed by the competent court of law or in view of the provisions
of the LA Act in respect of demised premises or any part thereof, the same shall be
met by the lessee within one month from the date of receipt of the communication
signed by the Executive Member or any other officer authorised by the lessor. Clause
5(b) also makes similar provision to that effect between the lessor and the lessee.

51. From a careful reading of the aforesaid clauses of the lease agreement along with
the provisions of Section 32(2) of the KIAD Act and Regulations 4, 7, 10(b), (c) and
(d) of the KIADB Regulations, it is clear that the Company is only the lessee by way of
allotment of the land as the same has been allotted by KIADB in its favour and has
executed the lease deed in its favour in respect of the allotted land.

52. In view of the aforesaid documents, namely, the notifications issued under
Sections 28(1) and 28(4) of the KIAD Act by the State Government, it can be safely
concluded by us that the acquisition of the land involved in these proceedings is for
the purpose of industrial development by KIADB in Sedam Taluk.

Therefore, the beneficiary of the acquired land is only KIADB but not the Company as claimed by it.
A reading of Section 28(5) of the KIAD Act makes it clear that the land which is acquired by the
State Government statutorily vests absolutely with it. After following the procedure provided under
Sections 28(6) and (7) of the KIAD Act, the State Government takes possession of the acquired land
from the owners/person/persons who are in possession of the land and transfers the same in favour
of KIADB for its development and disposal of the same in accordance with Regulation 10(a) of the
KIADB Regulations, referred to supra.

7

Gregory Patrao vs Mangalore Refinery And Petrochemicals ... on 11 July, 2022

53. In the instant case, a perusal of the provisions of the lease agreement executed between the
parties referred to supra and Regulation 10 clauses (a), (c),

(d) and (e) of the KIADB Regulations make it abundantly clear that the Company is only the
allottee/lessee of the acquired land and as per Clauses 5(a) and (b) of the lease agreement referred
to supra, the premium indicated in the lease agreement in respect of the allotted land in its favour
represents the tentative cost of the land. It has been further specified in the lease agreement that in
the event of the lessor incurring the payment of amounts to the landowners over and above the
awards made by the acquiring authority by virtue of awards passed by the competent court of law in
view of the provisions of the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 1984 in respect of demised
premises or any part thereof, the same shall be met by the lessee within one month from the date of
receipt of communication signed by the Executive Member or any other officer authorised by the
lessor. In view of the above conditions of the lease agreement, neither KIADB nor the Company can
contend that the acquisition of the land involved in these proceedings is in favour of the lessee
Company. Therefore, the Company is neither a beneficiary nor an interested person as claimed by
them in terms of Section 2(11) of the KIAD Act or under Section 3(b) of the LA Act as per which,
“person interested” includes all persons claiming an interest in compensation to be made on account
of the acquisition of land under the KIAD Act and that a person shall be deemed to be interested in
the land if he is interested in an easement affecting the land. It is necessary to examine Section 3(b)
read with Section 9 of the LA Act, which deals with notice to persons interested and Section 11,
which deals with enquiry and award to be passed by the Deputy Commissioner/Land Acquisition
Officer.

54. A careful reading of the aforesaid provisions of the LA Act, the KIAD Act and the KIADB
Regulations would clearly go to show that the Company is neither a beneficiary, nor an interested
person in the land as on the date of acquisition of the land, as the land was acquired by the State
Government in favour of KIADB who is the beneficiary and it has allotted in favour of the Company
after the acquired land was transferred in its favour by the State Government and executed the lease
agreement referred to supra.” 7.2 Thereafter, this Court distinguished the nature of acquisition
under the Land Acquisition Act from the acquisition under the KIAD Act, 1966 by observing as
under in paragraphs 57, 58 and 60 to 65:-

“57. For the acquisition of land under the provisions of the LA Act in favour of a
company the mandatory procedure as provided under Part VII of the LA Act and
Rules must be adhered to, that is not the case in the acquisition of land involved in
these proceedings as the acquisition of land is under the provisions of the KIAD Act
and therefore the reliance placed upon the provision of Section 3(f)(viii) of Karnataka
LA Amended Act 17 of 1961 is not applicable to the facts of the case on hand and
therefore, the said provision cannot be made applicable to the case on hand.

58. The definition of “public purpose” under the LA Act cannot be imported to the
acquisition of land by the State Government for the industrial development under the
provision of the KIAD Act as the words “development”, “industrial area” and
“industrial estate” have been clearly defined under sub-sections (5), (6) and (7) of

8

Gregory Patrao vs Mangalore Refinery And Petrochemicals ... on 11 July, 2022

Section 2 of the KIAD Act which reads thus:

“2. (5) ‘Development’ with its grammatical variations means the carrying out of
levelling, digging, building, engineering, quarrying or other operations in, on, over or
under land, or the making of any material change in any building or land, and
includes redevelopment; and ‘to develop’ shall be construed accordingly;

(6) ‘Industrial area’ means any area declared to be an industrial area by the State
Government by notification which is to be developed and where industries are to be
accommodated; and industrial infrastructural facilities and amenities are to be
provided and includes, an industrial estate;

(7) ‘Industrial estate’ means any site selected by the State Government where
factories and other buildings are built for use by any industries or class of industries.”
X X X X

60. The reliance placed upon the provisions of Sections 50(1) and (2) of the LA Act,
also are not applicable to the case on hand for the reason that Section 50 of the LA
Act applies to the acquisition of land in favour of a company by the State Government
by following the mandatory procedure contemplated under Part VII of the LA Act
and relevant rules framed for that purpose. Therefore, the claim made by the
Company that it has got every right to participate in the proceedings for
determination and redetermination of the market value of the acquired land and
award of compensation passed by the Land Acquisition Officer or Deputy
Commissioner or before the Reference Court or the appellate court is wholly
untenable in law and therefore, the submissions made on behalf of the Company
cannot be accepted and the same is rejected.

61. Further, both the learned Senior Counsel on behalf of KIADB and the Company
have placed reliance on various decisions rendered by this Court in support of their
above respective legal submissions that the Company is an interested person and,
therefore, it has got right to participate in the proceedings before the Reference Court
for determination of compensation before passing the award either by the Land
Acquisition Officer or the Deputy Commissioner or the Reference Court at the
instance of the owner or any other interested person. These include judgments
rendered by this Court in U.P. Awas Evam Vikas Parishad v. Gyan Devi [(1995) 2 SCC
326] , Himalayan Tiles and Marble (P) Ltd. v. Francis Victor Coutinho [(1980) 3 SCC
223] and P. Narayanappa v. State of Karnataka [(2006) 7 SCC 578] and other
decisions which are not required to be mentioned in this judgment as they are all
reiteration of the law laid down in the above cases.

62. The reliance placed on the various decisions of this Court by both the learned
Senior Counsel on behalf of KIADB and the Company, is misplaced as none of the
said judgments relied upon are applicable to the fact situation in the present case for

9

Gregory Patrao vs Mangalore Refinery And Petrochemicals ... on 11 July, 2022

the reason that those cases dealt with reference to the acquisition of land under the
provisions of the LA Act, either in favour of the company or development authorities,
whereas in the case on hand, the acquisition proceedings have been initiated under
the KIAD Act for industrial development by KIADB. Further, the original acquisition
record in respect of the acquired land involved in the proceedings by the learned
Standing Counsel on behalf of the State of Karnataka as per our directions issued vide
our orders dated 17-11-2014 [Peerappa Hanmantha Harijan v. State of Karnataka,
2014 SCC OnLine SC 1678, wherein it was directed: “Issue notice to the State
Government. The learned counsel for the petitioners to take out notice to the learned
Standing Counsel appearing for the State Government. Dasti, in addition, is also
permitted. Mr V.N. Raghupathy, learned counsel accepts notice for the State of
Karnataka and Mr Nishanth Patil, learned counsel accepts notice for Karnataka
Industrial Area Development Board (for short ‘KIADB’). The learned counsel
appearing for the State Government and the learned counsel appearing for KIADB
are directed to produce the relevant records in respect of the proceedings relating to
land acquisition involved in these matters. There shall be stay of the effect and
operation of the impugned order during the pendency of these petitions. List the
matters after four weeks. In the meanwhile, all the respondents are at liberty to file
written statements, if any.”] and 24-3-2015 [Peerappa Hanmantha Harijan v. State of
Karnataka, 2015 SCC OnLine SC 1707, wherein it was directed: “Heard Ms Kiran
Suri, learned Senior Counsel for the petitioners in SLPs (C) Nos. 31624-

25 of 2014 in part. List all the matters as part for further hearing. Vide order dated 17-11-2014,
learned counsel for the State as well as the learned counsel for KIADB were directed to produce the
relevant records in respect of the proceedings relating to land acquisition involved in these matters,
record as well as the records relating to allotment of land. However, as per office records, nothing
has been produced so far. In this view of the matter, the learned counsel for the State as well as the
learned counsel for KIADB are directed to comply with the order dated 17-11- 2014 and produce the
relevant records in respect of the proceedings relating to land acquisition and the allotment of land
involved in these matters before the next date of hearing. List the matters on 15-4-2015.”], do not
disclose the fact that the acquisition of lands covered in the acquisition notifications are in favour of
the Company. Thus, the acquisition of land in favour of KIADB is abundantly clear from the
preliminary and final notifications issued by the State Government and thereafter following the
procedure under sub-sections (6) and (7) of Section 28 of the KIAD Act, it took possession of the
acquired land from the owners who were in possession of the same and was transferred in favour of
KIADB for its disposal for the purpose for which lands were acquired as provided under Section
32(2) of the KIAD Act read with the Regulations referred to supra framed by KIADB under Section
41(2)(b) of the KIAD Act. Therefore, the reliance placed upon the judgments of this Court by the
learned Senior Counsel on behalf of the Company and KIADB, are wholly inapplicable to the fact
situation and do not support the case of the Company.

63. In view of the foregoing reasons recorded by us on the basis of the acquisition notifications
issued by the State Government under the statutory provisions of the KIAD Act and therefore, we
have to answer Points (i), (ii) and (iii) in favour of the landowners holding that the Company is

10

Gregory Patrao vs Mangalore Refinery And Petrochemicals ... on 11 July, 2022

neither the beneficiary nor interested person of the acquired land, hence, it has no right to
participate in the award proceedings for determination of the market value and award the
compensation amount of the acquired land of the appellants. Hence, the writ petition filed by the
Company questioning the correctness of the award passed by the Reference Court which is affirmed
by the High Court is not at all maintainable in law. On this ground itself, the writ petition filed by
the Company should have been rejected by the High Court, instead it has allowed and remanded the
case to the Reference Court for reconsideration of the claims after affording opportunity to the
Company, which order suffers from error in law and therefore, the same is liable to be set aside.

64. Further, the learned Judge of the High Court has erroneously held that the allottee Company is a
beneficiary of the acquired land of the appellants, which finding of the learned Judge is not correct
both on facts and in law. The findings and reasons recorded by the High Court in the impugned
judgment in allowing the writ petition and quashing the award of the Reference Court and
remanding it back to the Reference Court and allowing the Company to participate in the
proceedings for redetermination of compensation for the acquired land is wholly impermissible in
law and the same are in contravention of the provisions of the KIAD Act, the LA Act, the KIADB
Regulations and the lease agreement, which has been executed by KIADB in favour of the Company
and therefore, the impugned judgment and order [State of Karnataka v. Peerappa Hanmantha
Harijan, Review Petition No. 2537 of 2013 in MFA No. 32157 of 2012, order dated 22-9-2014 (KAR)]
is liable to be set aside by allowing the appeals of the owners.

65. Further, the learned Single Judge of the High Court has further committed an error in law in not
appreciating Section 54 of the LA Act, which provision provides the right to appeal to the
landowners, or State Government and beneficiaries of the acquired land but not to the company
which is the lessee. When the company does not have the right to file an appeal against the award it
also has no right to file a writ petition. KIADB has filed the belated appeal after disposal of the
appeal filed by the appellants by the High Court and against which award it has filed the present
appeal questioning the correctness of the same and prayed for enhancement of compensation and
the said appeal is being disposed of by this common judgment after adverting to the rival legal
contentions urged on behalf of the parties. The High Court has rightly dismissed the belated appeal
filed by KIADB.” 7.3 This Court thereafter had considered the decisions in the case of UP Awas
Evam Vikas Parishad (supra) and Himalayan Tiles and Marble (P) Ltd. (supra) and has
distinguished the same and has observed and held that the decisions in the case of UP Awas Evam
Vikas Parishad (supra) and Himalayan Tiles and Marble (P) Ltd. (supra) shall not be appliable with
respect to the acquisition under the KIAD Act, 1966. Once, this Court in the subsequent decision in
the case of Peerappa Hanmantha Harijan (supra) dealt with and considered the earlier decisions in
the case of UP Awas Evam Vikas Parishad (supra) and Himalayan Tiles and Marble (P) Ltd. (supra)
and distinguished the same and observed and held with respect to the acquisition under the KIAD
Act, 1966 that the allottee company can neither be said to be a “person interested” nor entitled for
hearing before determination of compensation, the said ratio was binding upon the High Court.
Thus, it was not open for the High Court to not follow the binding decision of this Court in the case
of Peerappa Hanmantha Harijan (supra) by observing that in the subsequent decision in the case of
Peerappa Hanmantha Harijan (supra), the earlier decisions in the case of UP Awas Evam Vikas
Parishad (supra) and Himalayan Tiles and Marble (P) Ltd. (supra) have not been considered. The

11

Gregory Patrao vs Mangalore Refinery And Petrochemicals ... on 11 July, 2022

High Court has not noted that as such while deciding the case of Peerappa Hanmantha Harijan
(supra), this Court did consider the earlier decisions in the case of UP Awas Evam Vikas Parishad
(supra) and Himalayan Tiles and Marble (P) Ltd. (supra) and had clearly distinguished the same.
Not following the binding precedents of this Court by the High Court is contrary to Article 141 of the
Constitution of India. Being a subsequent decision, in which the earlier decisions were considered
and distinguished by this Court, the subsequent decision of this Court was binding upon the High
Court and not the earlier decisions, which were distinguished by this Court.

7.4 Under the circumstances, the High Court has committed a grave/serious error in passing the
impugned judgment and order by relying upon the judgments of this Court in the case of UP Awas
Evam Vikas Parishad (supra) and Himalayan Tiles and Marble (P) Ltd. (supra) and by not following
the subsequent decision of this Court in the case of Peerappa Hanmantha Harijan (supra).

7.5 Now, so far as the reliance placed upon the decisions of this Court in the case of UP Awas Evam
Vikas Parishad (supra) and Himalayan Tiles and Marble (P) Ltd. (supra) relied upon by the
respondent No.1 – MRPL and even relied upon by the High Court is concerned, at the outset, it is
required to be noted that the said decisions were with respect to the acquisition under the Land
Acquisition Act, 1894 and the provisions of Land Acquisition Act, 1894, more particularly, Section
50 of the Land Acquisition Act fell for consideration before this Court. As observed and held by this
Court in the subsequent decision in the case of Peerappa Hanmantha Harijan (supra), the
acquisition under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 and the acquisition under the KIAD Act, 1966 are
both distinct and the provisions under both the Acts are distinguishable.

7.6 We see no reason to take a different view than the view taken by this Court in the case of
Peerappa Hanmantha Harijan (supra) that the MRPL being a subsequent allottee after the land was
acquired by KIADB, can neither be said to be a beneficiary nor a “person interested” for the purpose
of determination of compensation. Under the circumstances, the impugned judgment and order
passed by the High Court taking a contrary view is unsustainable and the same deserves to be
quashed and set aside.

8. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, present appeals succeed. The impugned
common judgment and order passed by the High Court setting aside the judgment and award/order
passed by the Reference Court and remanding the matter to the Reference Court is hereby quashed
and set aside. The judgment and order passed by the Reference Court Is hereby restored.

Present appeals are allowed accordingly. However, in the facts and circumstances of the case, there
shall be no order as to costs.

………………………………….J.
[M.R. SHAH]

12

Gregory Patrao vs Mangalore Refinery And Petrochemicals ... on 11 July, 2022

NEW DELHI;                              ………………………………….J.
JULY 11, 2022.                            [B.V. NAGARATHNA]

13