Indian Ex Servicemen Movement (An All ... vs Union Of India Department Of ... on 16 March, 2022

Indian Ex Servicemen Movement (An All ... vs Union Of India
Department Of ... on 16 March, 2022

Author: D.Y. Chandrachud

Bench: Vikram Nath, Surya Kant, Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud

Reportable

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 419 of 2016

Indian Ex Servicemen Movement & Ors.                        … Petitioners

Versus

Union of India & Ors.                                       … Respondents

JUDGMENT Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, J This judgment has been divided into the following
sections to facilitate analysis:

A. Factual Background ................................................................................... 3 B.
Submissions of Counsel ......................................................................... 11 C.
Analysis..................................................................................................... 24 C. 1
Concept and genesis of OROP .........................................................................26 C. 2.
Plea of Discrimination ........................................................................................38 C.2.1
ACP-MACP ...........................................................................................................44
C.2.2 Financial Implications ......................................................................................46
C.2.3 Average to Maximum.........................................................................................48
C.2.4 Periodic revision every five years .................................................................49
PART A A. Factual Background 1 The petition under Article 32 of the Constitution
addresses a challenge to the manner in which the “One Rank One Pension”1 policy
for ex-servicemen of defence forces has been implemented by the first respondent2
through a letter dated 7 November 2015 issued to the Chiefs of three defence forces.
The letter defines OROP as the payment of uniform pension to armed services
personnel retiring in the same rank with the same length of service, irrespective of
the date of retirement. OROP, in terms of the letter, aims to bridge the gap between

1

Indian Ex Servicemen Movement (An All ... vs Union Of India Department Of ... on 16 March, 2022

the rate of pension of current and past pensioners at periodic intervals. The
petitioners contend that in the course of implementation, the principle of OROP has
been replaced by ‘one rank multiple pensions’ for persons with the same length of
service. The petitioners contend that the initial definition of OROP was altered by the
first respondent and, instead of an automatic revision of the rates of pension, the
revision now would take place at periodic intervals. The petitioners submit that the
deviation from the principle of automatic revision of rates of pension, where any
future enhancement to the rates of pension are automatically passed on to the past
pensioners, is arbitrary and unconstitutional under Articles 14 and 21 of the
Constitution.

2 The salient facts giving rise to the proceedings need to be stated. The demand for
OROP by ex-servicemen of the defence forces was initially examined by Parliament in
2010-11. On 19 December 2011, the Rajya Sabha Committee on Petitions3 presented
its 142nd Report on the Petition Praying for Grant of “OROP” Also referred as the
“Union Government” “Koshyari Committee” PART A OROP to Armed Forces
Personnel4. The Committee recommended the implementation of OROP. The
Committee defined OROP as a uniform pension to be paid to armed forces personnel
retiring in the same rank with the same length of service, irrespective of their date of
retirement, where any future enhancements in the rates of pension were to be
automatically passed on to the past pensioners. The Committee noted that OROP was
being implemented till 1973 when the Third Central Pay Commission took a decision
to revoke it. The relevant observations/recommendations of the Koshyari Committee
are extracted below:

“11.The Committee takes note of the fact that a sum of Rs 1300 crores is the total
financial liability for the year 2011-12 in case OROP is implemented fully for all the
defence personnel in the country across the board. The Committee is informed that
out of this, 1065 crores would go to retirees belonging Post Below Officer Ranks
(PBOR) while the Commissioned Officers would be getting the remaining i.e. 235
crores. The Committee feels that 1300 crores is not a very big amount for a country of
our size and economy for meeting the long pending demand of the armed forces of
the country. The Committee understands that this ·1300 crores is the expenditure
for one year which might increase at the rate of 10 percent annually. Even if it is so,
the Committee does not consider this amount to be high, keeping in view the
objective for which it would be spent. Needless for the Committee to point out here
that our defence personnel were getting their pension and family pension on an
entirely different criteria before the Third Central Pay Commission came into force.
Till the recommendations of the Third Central Pay Commission were implemented
for the defence personnel of the country, they were satisfied and happy with
dispensation meant for their pension/family pension.

….

2

Indian Ex Servicemen Movement (An All ... vs Union Of India Department Of ... on 16 March, 2022

11.4 …the Committee feels that the decision of the Government to bring our defence personnel on
the pattern of the civilians with regard to their pay, pension, etc. (from Third Central Pay
Commission onwards) is not a considered decision which has caused hardship to the defence
personnel and has given birth to their demand for OROP. The Committee understands that before
the Third Central Pay Commission, the defence personnel were getting their pay/ pension on the
basis of a separate criteria unconnected with “Koshyari Committee Report” PART A the criteria
devised for the civilian work force. That criteria acknowledged and covered the concept of OROP
which has been given up after the Third Central Pay Commission. 11.5 The Committee is not
convinced with the hurdles projected by the Ministry of Defence (D/o Ex-Servicemen Welfare) in
implementing of OROP for defence personnel. They have categorized the hurdles into
administrative, legal and financial. The financial aspect has already been dealt with by the
Committee. So far as the administrative angle is concerned, the Committee is given to understand
that all the existing pensioners/ family pensioners are still drawing their pension/family pension
based upon the lawfully determined pension/family pension. In that case, revision of their
pension/family pension, prospectively, as a one time measure should not pose any administrative
hurdle. So far as the legal aspect is concerned, the Committee is not convinced by the argument put
forth against the implementation of OROP because the pension/family pension is based upon the
service rendered by personnel while in service and comparison of services rendered during two sets
of periods does not seem to be of much relevance. If seen from a strict angle, in each set of periods,
the army officer performed the duties attached to his post and it may not be proper to infer that the
officers who served at a later period performed more compared to the officers of earlier period. On
the contrary, facts tilt towards treating past pensioners/family pensioners at par with the more
recent ones.” 3 On 17 February 2014, the Finance Minister announced in his Budget Speech that the
Union Government had in principle accepted OROP and it would be implemented prospectively
from financial year 2014-15. The Finance Minister stated that an amount of Rs 500 crores has been
transferred to the Defence Pension Account to meet the budgetary expense. On 26 February 2014,
the Defence Minister chaired a meeting to discuss the implementation of OROP. The Defence
Secretary, the Secretary to the Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare, the Controller General of
Defence Accounts5, the three Vice Chiefs of Staff, and senior officers of the Service Headquarters
along with the concerned Joint Secretaries attended the meeting. The minutes of the meeting refer
to OROP as a uniform pension to be paid to armed forces personnel that are retiring in the “CGDA”
PART A same rank with the same length of service, irrespective of the date of retirement, where any
future enhancements in the rates of pension are to be automatically passed on to the past
pensioners. The fourth respondent, CGDA, was directed to take necessary steps to give effect to the
decision of implementing OROP in consultation with the three defence forces, and the first and
second respondents. 4 By its letter dated 26 February 2014 the first respondent directed CGDA to
work out the modalities of executing OROP. However, OROP was not implemented at the time. On
10 July 2014 in his Budget Speech for the year 2014-2015, the Finance Minister reaffirmed the
Union Government’s commitment to implement OROP and a further sum of Rs 1000 crores was set
apart to meet the requirement. In a written reply to a Member of Parliament on 2 December 2014,
the Minister of State for Defence stated that OROP implies that a uniform pension is paid to retired
servicemen having the same rank with the same length of service, irrespective of the date of
retirement, with any future enhancement in the rates being passed on to the past pensioners
automatically. 5 The above sequence of events has been emphasised by the petitioners to highlight

3

Indian Ex Servicemen Movement (An All ... vs Union Of India Department Of ... on 16 March, 2022

that OROP always entailed an automatic revision of the rates of pension to bridge the gap in the
pension being received by past and current pensioners. However, according to the petitioners, a
letter dated 7 November 2015 of the Joint Secretary of the first respondent to the Chiefs of three
defence forces introduced a revised definition of OROP, where the revision between the past and
current rates of pension was to take place at periodic intervals. Besides stating that OROP would
take effect from 1 July 2014, the letter also highlighted the salient features of OROP:

PART A “3. Salient features of the OROP are as follows:

i. To begin with, pension of the past pensioners would be re- fixed on the basis of
pension of retirees of calendar year 2013 and the benefit will be effective with effect
from 1.7.2014. ii. Pension will be re-fixed for all pensioners on the basis of the
average of minimum and maximum pension of personnel retired in 2013 in the same
rank and with the same length of service.

iii. Pension for these drawing above the average shall be protected.

iv. Arrears will be paid in four equal half yearly instalments. However, all the family
pensioners including those in receipts of Special/Liberalized family pension and
Gallantry award winner shall be paid arrears in one instalment. v. In future, the
pension would be re-fixed every 5 years.”

6 The above definition of OROP was also adopted by the first respondent while implementing OROP
by its notification dated 14 November 2015. The rates of pension were now to be revised every five
years. The notification also constituted a Committee headed by Justice L. Narasimha Reddy to
examine and make recommendations on the terms of reference received by the Union Government
on measures to remove anomalies that may arise in the implementation of the letter dated 7
November 2015. 7 By its letter dated 25 January 2016 to the Defence Minister the first petitioner
objected to the revision of the definition of OROP highlighting that the deviation from the automatic
revision of rates of pension to a revision at periodic intervals changed the accepted meaning of
OROP. It was submitted that the revised definition would deprive the past pensioners of equal
monetary benefits, which militated against the principle of OROP. The letter urged that the
Committee headed by Justice L. Narasimha Reddy would be ‘inapt’ in making recommendations on
the issue of OROP since the terms of reference took into PART A account the revised definition of
OROP. The letter urged the Defence Minister to revert to the original definition of OROP where the
pension of past pensioners would be automatically revised pursuant to any future enhancements.
The first petitioner also wrote to Justice L. Narasimha Reddy on 25 March 2016 highlighting the
anomalies that will result from the implementation of the revised definition of OROP.

8 Meanwhile, the first respondent issued a letter to the Chiefs of the three defence forces on 3
February 2016 regarding the implementation of OROP. On 29 October 2016, the first respondent
issued a letter to the Chiefs of the three defence forces revising the pension of pre-2016 defence
forces’ pensioners and family pensioners. The existing pension was to be revised upwards by
implementing the basic pension drawn on 31 December 2015 by a multiplication factor of 2.57. The

4

Indian Ex Servicemen Movement (An All ... vs Union Of India Department Of ... on 16 March, 2022

petitioners have highlighted that owing to the periodic revision of the pension rate according to the
revised definition, the pension of many ex- servicemen would not be updated to the 31 December
2015 level. 9 A post-facto approval of the Union Cabinet for implementation of OROP was received
on 6 April 2016 and was conveyed by the Cabinet Secretariat on 7 April 2016. The proposal, which
was approved by the Union Cabinet is as follows:

“9.1. Ex-post facto approval of the Cabinet is solicited for implementation of One
Rank One Pension as under.

9.1.1 The benefit will be given with effect 1st July, 2014.

9.1.2 Pension will be re-fixed for pre 01.07.2014 pensioners retiring in the same rank
and with the same length of service as the average minimum and maximum pension
drawn by the retirees in the year 2013. Those drawing pensions above the average
will be protected.

9.1.3 The benefit would also be extended to family pensioners including war widows
and disabled pensioners.

PART A 9.1.4 Personnel who opt to get discharged henceforth on their own request under Rule
13(3)1(i)(b), Rules 13(3)1(iv) or Rule 16B of the Army Rule 1954 or equivalent Navy or Air Force
Rules will not be entitled to the benefits of OROP. It will be effective prospectively.

9.1.5. Arrears will be paid in four half-yearly instalments. However, all the family pensioners
including those in receipt of Special/Liberalized family pension and Gallantry award winners shall
be paid arrears in one instalment.

9.1.6 In future, the pension would be re-fixed every 5 years. 9.1.7. Constitution of Judicial
Committee headed by Justice L Narasimha Reddy, Retd. Chief Justice of Patna High Court on
14.12.2015 which will give its report in six months on references made by the Government of India.”
10 Aggrieved by what the petitioners contend is a revision in the definition of OROP, the petition
under Article 32 was instituted before this Court on 9 June 2016. On 1 May 2019, this Court took
note of the anomalies which were highlighted on behalf of the petitioners:

“Fixation of pension as per calendar year 2013 instead of FY 2014: Fixation of
pension as per calendar year 2013 would result in past retirees (pre 2014) getting less
pension of one increment than the soldier retiring after 2014.

Fixation of pension as mean of Min and Max pension: Fixing pension as mean of Min
and Max pension of 2013 would result different pensions for the same ranks and
same length of service and the past retiree would get 1.5 increment lesser on account
of such fixation.

5

Indian Ex Servicemen Movement (An All ... vs Union Of India Department Of ... on 16 March, 2022

For example, if 8(i) and (ii) are implemented, two soldiers who have served for same
length of years, holding the same rank will draw different pension. A Sepoy (Group Y)
who retired prior to 31 Dec 2013 will get Rs.6665 p.m. and another Sepoy (Group Y)
who retired on and after 1 Jan 2014 would get Rs 7605 p.m. Further, on account of
such implementation, a higher rank Naik soldier who retired before 31 Dec 2013
would draw a lesser pension of rs.7170 p.m., than a junior rank Sepoy who retired
after 1 Jan 2014 as his pension would be Rs.7605. This fact is illustrated by a tabular
chart which is enclosed. (See Pg.1, CC).

Therefore, implementation of this new definition of OROP defeats the very principle
of OPOP by creating a class within a class of the same officers, which in practice
tantamounts to one rank different pensions. This is also contrary to the judgment by
this Hon'ble Court in Union of India v SPS Vains, {2008) 9 SCC 125.

PART A Another fallacy in the new definition of OROP which detracts from the
principle of OROP is:

(iii) Pension Equalization every five years It is submitted that Pension equalization
every five years would result in the grave disadvantage to the past retirees."

This Court directed the first respondent to scrutinise the grievances raised by the petitioners.
Pursuant to the order, the first respondent filed an affidavit on 5 December 2019 submitting that
after extensive consultations with experts and ex-servicemen, the Union Government decided that it
is practical and feasible to revise the pension under OROP every five years. The average of the
minimum and maximum pension in calendar year 2013 was decided to be taken as the revised
pension of all pensioners retiring in the same rank and with the same length of service. At the same
time, the first respondent chose to protect the pensioners who were drawing pension above the
average. Thus, it was submitted, that the implementation of OROP has benefitted the past
pensioners, though the amount of financial benefit varies. It was urged on behalf of the first
respondent that revising the rate of pension every year would cause administrative difficulty and is
impracticable to implement. 11 Since the grievance of the petitioners remained unaddressed, it falls
on this Court to adjudicate upon whether the revision of the definition of OROP and its
implementation in the present form, is arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 21 of the
Constitution. Before we analyse the rival contentions, we advert to the submissions of the counsel.

(cid:12)                                                                                  PART B

B.        Submissions of Counsel

12        Mr Huzefa Ahmadi, Senior Counsel, appeared for the petitioners. The

6

Indian Ex Servicemen Movement (An All ... vs Union Of India Department Of ... on 16 March, 2022

following submissions have been made on behalf of the petitioners during the course of the
proceedings:

(i) The letter issued by the Joint Secretary of the first respondent to the Chief of Air
Staff on 7 November 2015 arbitrarily alters the definition of OROP6 by bridging the
gap between the rates of pension of the current and the past pensioners at ‘periodic
intervals’ and not ‘automatically’. This definition is contrary to the definition arrived
at in the meeting held on 26 February 2014 and the subsequent executive order
issued on the same day;

(ii) The implementation of the scheme with the new definition would lead to a
situation where the pension drawn by an ex-serviceman who retired on an earlier
date would be less than the pension drawn by an ex-serviceman who retired in 2014,
until such time that a ‘periodic’ review is conducted to correct the anomaly;

(iii) The new definition creates a class within a class where ex-

servicemen who retired with the same rank and same length of service would receive different
pensions. In Union of India v. SPS Vains7, this Court has held that the creation of a class within a
class is unconstitutional;

(iv) Even if the differential pay is rectified by a periodic review, it would cause injustice;

“new definition” (2008) 9 SCC 125 PART B

(v) The effective date of implementation of OROP was already fixed as 1 April 2014 and this date has
been arbitrary re-fixed to 1 July 2014 by the letter issued by the first respondent on 7 November
2015;

(vi) According to the letter dated 7 November 2015, the pension of the personnel retiring on or after
1 April 2014 will be fixed based on the last pay drawn on retirement. However, the pension of
soldiers who retired earlier than 2013 would be fixed on the basis of the pension of the retirees of
the calendar year 2013. This would lead to a situation of one rank different pension;

Rank: Sepoy (Group Y)
I                         II                       III
Length of Service   Pension of sepoys who      Pension of sepoys        Difference between I
retired between 1965-      who retired in 2014      and II multiplied by
2013 (as per               (as     per    Pension   2.57 as per report of
Notification dated 3       Payment Order of         the Seventh Pay
February 2016 which        2014 which applies to    Commission
applies to this category   this category)
with effect from

7

Indian Ex Servicemen Movement (An All ... vs Union Of India Department Of ... on 16 March, 2022

1.07.2014
15 years            Rs. 6665 (as on            Rs. 7605                 Rs. 940 x 2.5= Rs.
01/07/2013)                                         2415
Figure 1

(vii)    The pension of the past pensioners is further lowered by the re-

fixation of pension based on the average of the minimum and maximum pension of personnel
retiring in the calendar year 2013, as compared to personnel retiring on or after 1 April 2014. In
some cases, a past pensioner who retired before 2014 receives pension lower than personnel of a
lower rank retiring on or after 2014. For instance, if the new definition is followed then a Sepoy who
retired prior to 31 December 2013 will get a pension of Rs. 6665 per month while another Sepoy who
retired on or after 1 January 2014 would PART B get a pension of 7605 per month. Extracted below
is a chart depicting the anomaly:

Rank: Naik (Group Y) I II III Length of Service Pension of Naiks who Pension of
Naiks who Difference between I retired between 1965- retired in 2014 and II
multiplied by 7 2013 (as per Pension CPC multiplication (as per notification Payment
Order of factor of 2.57 dated 03.02.2016 2014 which applies to which applies to this
this category) (Page category w.e.f. 6) 01.07.2014 leaving a hiatus of one year) (Page
4) 20 years Rs. 7170 (as on Rs. 8295 Rs. 1125 x 2.57= Rs.

01/07/2013)                                      2891

Figure 2

Rank: Group Captain
I                        II                      III
Length of service   Pension of ones who      Pension of ones who     Difference between I
retired between 1965-    retired in 2014         and II multiplied by 7
2013                     (as per Pension         CPC multiplication
(as per notification     Payment Order of        factor of 2.57
dated 03.02.2016         2014 which applies to
which applies to this    this category) (Page
category w.e.f.          6)
01.07.2014 leaving a
hiatus of one year)
(Page 8)
32 years            Rs. 36130                Rs. 37110               Rs. 980 x 2.57= Rs.

This has been given by
Govt whereas as per 7

be fixed with a
multiplication factor of

CPC, their pension is to

8

Indian Ex Servicemen Movement (An All ... vs Union Of India Department Of ... on 16 March, 2022

2.67 given in the table
below
Figure 3

(cid:12)                                                                                PART B

(viii) The difference in the pension as provided in the chart is not due to the Modified
Assured Career Progression8. Even according to the new definition, all personnel
with the same rank and same length of service must receive the same pension;

(ix) The notification issued on 14 December 2015 adheres to the arbitrary definition of OROP as
provided by the letter issued on 7 November 2015. The terms of reference of the Committee
appointed under the notification are also restricted to the arbitrary new definition of OROP. The
letter issued by the first respondent to the Chief of Army Staff, the Chief of Naval Staff, and the Chief
of Air Staff on 3 February 2016 also defined OROP in new and arbitrary terms;

(x) As noted by the Koshyari Committee, after the Sixth Central Pay Commission, officers from the
grade of Lt. Colonel and above fall within one pay band of Rs 37400 to Rs 67000. Therefore, defence
retirees before 2014 would get pension with reference to the minimum of the pay bracket,
irrespective of the fact that they held higher posts such as Major General and Lt. General;

(xi) All Havildars were granted the honorary rank of Naib Subedar. They must thus be given the
pension of Naib Subedar;

(xii) All personnel who retired as Major after thirteen years of service as Commissioned Officers
should be given the pension of Lt. Colonel “MACP” PART B since Commissioned Officers now
automatically become Lt. Colonels after thirteen years of service;

(xiii) All veterans who retired before 2004 as Lt. Colonel should be given the pension of Colonel
since all Commissioned Officers now automatically retire as Colonel;

(xiv) While the Government defines OROP as a “uniform pension to be paid to the defence
personnel retiring in the same rank, with the same length of service regardless of the date of
retirement”, it creates a class within a class based on the date of retirement;

(xv) The decision to define OROP in narrow terms is an executive act which can be judicially
reviewed and is not a policy decision; (xvi) According to the letter of the Union Government dated 7
November 2015, the pension of past pensioners would be fixed one and a half year behind even if
equalization is done once in five years; (xvii) Under the Seventh Pay Commission, the basic pension
of all pensioners is to be arrived at by multiplying basic pension as on 31 December 2015 by a factor
of 2.57. Since the basic pension of those who retired before 31 December 2013-14 has not been

9

Indian Ex Servicemen Movement (An All ... vs Union Of India Department Of ... on 16 March, 2022

updated to 31 December 2015 (that is Rs. 7605 per month) but has only been fixed based on the
mean of the 2013 pension, that is Rs. 6665 per month, a past pensioner will get Rs. 2415 less than an
officer with the same rank and same length of service but who retired later;

PART B (xviii) The Union Government has stated that after the Seventh Pay Commission, the basic
pension of personnel in the Colonel and Brigadier ranks will be arrived at by increasing the
multiplication factor from 2.57 to 2.67. However, this increase has been denied to the past
pensioners on the ground that the benefit will only be given in 2019 after the periodic equalization
as per the new definition; (xix) The ex-servicemen received the benefit of OROP till the Third
Central Pay Commission. Subsequently, it was recommended that the pension of ex-servicemen be
reduced and to compensate them for such reduction, they were to be absorbed in paramilitary
forces, police forces or public sector organisations. However, though the pension was reduced, the
recommendation relating to their absorption was not implemented. The army personnel then
demanded that OROP must be implemented;

(xx) The reliance placed by the respondents on DS Nakara v. Union of India9 is incorrect since it
only deals with the general law applicable to civil servants. The decision in SPS Vains (supra) deals
with the special law applicable to ex-servicemen of the defence forces; (xxi) The one man Committee
headed by Justice L Narasimha Reddy submitted its report to the Union Government on 26
December 2016. Even after two years, the Government is still ‘studying’ the report and has not yet
released the report;

1983 AIR 130 PART B (xxii) If the respondents can calculate the enhancement of pension for every
five years, there is no reason that it cannot be done every year;

(xxiii) The rule of reduction in the pension if the service of the armed personnel is less than twenty
six years was introduced in 1973. If a soldier has served for less than twenty six years then his
pension would be reduced pro rata of X (number of years served) % 26. The Government has not
updated the basic pay of soldiers and did not bring it at par with the 31 December 2015 pay before
multiplying it with the factor of 2.57. At the same time, the pension was altered from being rank
based to 50 percent of the last drawn pay. This resulted in double loss to ex-servicemen. This Court
has also struck down the rule of reducing pension if an employee has served less than twenty six
years;

(xxiv) While the respondents have submitted that an amount of Rs 10,795 crores has been paid as
arrears for OROP in two years, it only amounts to an average increase of Rs 2131 per month per
soldier. The Union Government is spending a higher amount of funds for Central Government
employees and pensioners;

(xxv) The Union Government has spent Rs 32,385 crores for OROP in six years which is less than its
spending of Rs 27,800 crores per year for the scheme of Non-Functional Upgradation. The Union
Government consistently has been spending less on the armed forces. For instance, the “High
Altitude Siachen Allowance” for Army PART B personnel is Rs 31,500, while it is Rs 50,000 to
70,000 for all Central Cadre for serving in ‘hard areas’ like Shillong; (xxvi) MACP Scheme should be

10

Indian Ex Servicemen Movement (An All ... vs Union Of India Department Of ... on 16 March, 2022

given to all past retirees to comply with the judgment of this Court in SPS Vains (supra). Even if
MACP has been given to the 2013 retirees, the comparison made in the chart still holds correct;

(xxvii) While the Union Government states that the benefit of OROP is to be given to ‘past retirees’,
it has created a confusion by stating that the scheme must be given prospective effect; and (xxviii)
The MACP Scheme came into effect from 1 January 2016.

Therefore, the figure of Rs. 6665 referring to the pension receivable by a Sepoy should include the
benefits of the MACP scheme. 13 We have heard Mr Venkataramanan, the learned Additional
Solicitor General of India, for the respondents. The respondents have made the following
submissions during the course of the proceedings:

(i) The budget for pension has been increased after the implementation of OROP with
effect from 1 July 2014. The disbursement of arrears with respect to OROP is
approximately Rs 10795.04 crores. The yearly recurring expenditure on account of
OROP is Rs 7123.38 crores. For the six years from 1 July 2014, the total recurring
expenditure is approximately Rs 42740.28 crores;

(ii) OROP seeks to bridge the gap by taking the maximum and minimum pension
within the rank of pensioners holding the same rank and same length of service to
determine the average. Those PART B who are below the average pension are
brought to the average and those who are drawing a higher pension are protected;

(iii) The OROP scheme has been implemented prospectively with effect from 1 July
2014. The benefits arising out of the scheme are to be paid after 1 July 2014 to those
who retired prior to 1 July 2014;

(iv) The OROP scheme envisages revision of pension once in five years, unlike civilian
pension schemes which are revised once in ten years. The plea of the petitioners to
provide ‘automatic’ adjustment cannot be acceded to as it is impossible to implement
it;

(v) It is a settled principle of law that minutes, statements and inter-

ministerial discussions with the Ministry and within the Ministry do not have the force of law.
Therefore the reference made by the petitioners to the minutes of the meeting to argue that the
definition of OROP has been altered is unsustainable;

(vi) The scheme/policy can be challenged on the grounds of arbitrariness but a demand to substitute
the policy cannot be made;

(vii) The disparity alleged by the petitioners in the pensions of the defence personnel with the same
rank and same length of service has been wrongly depicted on account of the OROP scheme. An
artificial disparity has been shown by equating different classes of pensioners;

11

Indian Ex Servicemen Movement (An All ... vs Union Of India Department Of ... on 16 March, 2022

(viii) In Figure 1 of the chart produced by the petitioners, they have compared the pension payable
to a Sepoy with 15 years of service under the OROP Scheme and the pension of a Sepoy who retired
PART B before 2014 (before the application of OROP) after fifteen years of service who is drawing
pay in the rank of Naik due to the MACP Scheme introduced pursuant to Circular No. 555 dated 4
February 2016;

(ix) The pension figure of Rs 6,665 is arrived at by taking the average pension of the maximum and
minimum pension of 2013. However, the figure of Rs 7,605 is calculated on the basis of 50 percent
of the last pay drawn before retirement;

(x) Under the MACP Scheme, a Sepoy who was originally getting Rs 2000 as grade pay would after
eight years of service receive a next grade pay of Rs 2400. The grade pay of Rs 2400 corresponds to
the grade pay of Naik. Similarly after sixteen years of service, he would receive the higher grade pay
of Rs. 2800, which corresponds to the grade pay of Havildar;

(xi) Similarly, the disparity shown in Figure 2 by the petitioners is due to the implementation of the
MACP Scheme rather than OROP. Figure 3 which pertains to the rank of Group Captain quotes the
pension amount of Group Captain Daniel Victor who retired on 28 February 2015. The OROP
scheme is not applicable to Group Captain Victor;

(xii) The comparison drawn by the petitioners is a comparison between non-comparables. The
pension calculated based on the average pension in 2013 cannot be compared with the actual
pension received based on the pension rules;

PART B

(xiii) The MACP regime warranted a service of 6, 16 and 24 years of service by the Sepoy for
grouping with the rank of Naik, Havildar and Naib Subedar. On the other hand, under the earlier
Assured Career Progression10 regime, the required service is of 10, 20 and 30 years;

(xiv) For computation of OROP, the Union Government has taken MACP as the base and has
applied it across the board to all retirees having the same length of service. OROP is not calculated
based on MACP and ACP regime. No such differentiation is made;

(xv) An executive decision of the Union Government on the OROP can only be challenged on legal
principles. However, the petitioners are seeking the most beneficial interpretation of OROP to be
implemented. It cannot be contended that the most beneficial interpretation of OROP is the only
‘true’ interpretation and that it must be implemented as a right;

(xvi) In SPS Vain (supra), this Court held that pre and post 1996 retired Major Generals must be
treated at par to remove an anomaly in the pension of pre-1996 retired Major generals. The
principle in that case was about the removal of anomaly between the ranks of Major General and
Brigadier which had arisen due to the implementation of the fifth and the sixth Central Pay
Commission; (xvii) In Indian Ex-Services League v. Union of India11, this Court has held that unless

12

Indian Ex Servicemen Movement (An All ... vs Union Of India Department Of ... on 16 March, 2022

the claim of OROP can be treated to be flowing “ACP” AIR 1991 SC 1182 PART B from the reliefs
provided in Nakara (supra), the reliefs claimed cannot be granted. It was also observed that the
decision in Nakara (supra) cannot be enlarged to cover within it all the claims made by the pension
retirees since the purpose of computation of the pension is different. The decisions in KL Rathee v.
Union of India12 and Suchet Singh Yadav v. Union of India13 support this submission;

(xviii) The Committee headed by Justice L Narasimha Reddy submitted its report to the Union
Government. The Internal Committee is examining the feasibility of the recommendations; (xix)
The recommendations of the Koshyari Committee were not accepted by the Union Government and
are thus not binding upon it. The recommendations of the Committee cannot be termed as the
decision of the Union Government;

(xx) Since the Sixth Pay Commission, the length of service is no longer a criterion for calculating
pension. The pension is now determined by 50 percent of the last pay drawn. However, due to
demands, OROP rates have been prepared based on the average pension of retirees in 2013;

(xxi) It is not feasible to undertake an automatic revision. Though the government has accepted the
principle of uniformity, it is not unreasonable to define periodicity for ensuring uniformity; SLJ
1997 (30 207) (2019) 11 SCC 520 PART B (xxii) The argument that OROP should be approved with
effect from 1 April 2014 because it was announced in the Budget of 2014 is erroneous. The scheme
was proposed by the Ministry of Defence through the letters dated 7 November 2015 and 3 February
2016; (xxiii) The pension of OROP beneficiaries who retired before 1 July 2014 was revised by the
multiplication factor of 2.57 according to the recommendations of the Seventh Central Pay
Commission. However, those who retired after 1 January 2016 received the benefit of only revision
in emoluments in terms of the recommendations of the Seventh Central Pay Commission; (xxiv) The
statement made by the Finance Minister on 17 February 2014 was not based on the decision of the
Union Cabinet. The Cabinet Secretariat conveyed the approval of the Prime Minister to the OROP
scheme on 7 November 2015. The Ministry of Defence communicated this policy by a notification
dated 7 November 2015. A post facto approval was conveyed by the Union Cabinet on 6 April 2016;

(xxv) One of the qualifying conditions for the OROP scheme is that the personnel must have the
‘same length of service’. One who had not put in the same length of service is not eligible for an
MACP. The total financial outflow that is likely to be incurred by the Union Government for
non-MACP to be linked with MACP personnel would be in the range of Rs 42,776.38 crores; and
PART C (xxvi) The expression ‘automatically’ used in the Koshyari Committee report, the minutes of
the meeting held on 26 February 2014 and the executive order dated 26 February 2014 defining the
OROP scheme follow the expression ‘in the rates of pension to be automatically passed on to the
past pensioners’. It must, thus, be read as meaning that the rates of pension will be passed to the
past pensioners without any difficulties. The phrase ‘automatically’ does not mean the time period.

C.    Analysis

14    Though, a significant number of factual and detailed issues were raised in

13

Indian Ex Servicemen Movement (An All ... vs Union Of India Department Of ... on 16 March, 2022

the course of the pleadings. Mr Huzefa Ahmadi, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the
petitioners brought focus upon and urged the following specific submissions during the course of
the hearing:

(i) The Union government took an executive decision to implement OROP as
understood by the Koshyari Committee. This is evidenced by:

a. The statement of the Minister of Finance in the Lok Sabha on 17 February 2014;

b. The decision taken on 26 February 2014 in the meeting convened by the Union
Minister for Defence;

c. The letter dated 26 February 2014 of the Union government to the CGDA;

d. The Budget speech of the Minister of Finance on 10 July 2014; and PART C e. The
reply of 2 December 2014 of the Minister of State for Finance to Member of
Parliament.

(ii) The essential elements underlying the concept of OROP are:

a. Those retiring from the same rank with the same length of service must receive the
same pension irrespective of the date of retirement;

b. Future enhancements of pension must be automatically passed on to past
pensioners; and c. Bridging of the gap between the rate of pension of present and
past pensioners.

(iii) In substitution of the above principle underlying OROP, the communication
dated 7 November 2015 of the Ministry of Defence modified the executive decision by
stipulating that:

i. The pension of past pensioners would be refixed on the basis of the pension of the
retirees of calendar year 2013, with the benefit being effective from 1 July 2014;

ii. Pension is to be revisited for all pensioners on the basis of the average of the
minimum and maximum pension of persons who retired in 2013 in the same rank
and with the same length of service;

iii. In the future pension would be revisited every five years and not automatically;
and PART C iv. Hence, the actual decision which was taken on 7 November 2015
deviates from the principle of equality which OROP adopts.

15 The submissions which have been urged by the pensioners are sought to be
buttressed by referring to the charts set out in the earlier part of this judgment and

14

Indian Ex Servicemen Movement (An All ... vs Union Of India Department Of ... on 16 March, 2022

marked as figures 1, 2 and 3 by which an attempt has been made to show the
disparity in the pension payable to persons of the same rank with the same length of
service, based on the date of retirement.

C. 1 Concept and genesis of OROP 16 The adoption of OROP as a guiding statement of policy on 7
November 2015 was preceded by discussions both within and outside Parliament. The Koshyari
Committee submitted its report on 10 December 2011. The Committee formulated an understanding
of the concept of OROP. According to the report of the Committee, OROP implies that a “uniform
pension be paid to the armed forces personnel retiring in the same rank with the same length of
service irrespective of their date of retirement and any future enhancements in the rate of pension to
be automatically passed on to the past pensioners”. The concept, according to the report implied
“bridging the gap between the rate of pension of the current pensioners and the past pensioners”.
This understanding of the concept of OROP in the Koshyari Committee Report was based on the
norm that hierarchy in the armed forces comprises of two elements namely rank and length of
service. Ranks are conferred by the President and signify command, control and responsibility.
Ranks are allowed to be retained even after retirement. Hence OROP, according to the Koshyari
Committee postulates that two PART C personnel from the armed forces in the same rank and with
the equal length of service should get the same pension irrespective of their dates of retirement and
any future enhancement in the rates of pension must be automatically passed on to past pensioners.
While proposing the adoption of OROP in principle, the Koshyari Committee highlighted that:

(i) OROP was in vogue till 1973 when the Third Central Pay Commission decided
otherwise;

(ii) Unlike civilian employees who retire by age, armed forces personnel retire by
rank; and

(iii) The conditions of service of personnel from the armed forces are harsher than
those of civilian employees and armed forces personnel cannot be equated with
civilian employees of the government.

17 Now it needs to be understood that the Koshyari Committee Report is a report submitted to the
Rajya Sabha by the Committee on Petitions. The report cannot be enforced as a statement of
government policy. In Kalpana Mehta v. Union of India14, a Constitution Bench of this Court dealt,
on the reference under Article 145(3), with two issues namely:

“9…73.1. (i) Whether in a litigation filed before this Court either under Article 32 or
Article 136 of the Constitution of India, the Court can refer to and place reliance upon
the report of the Parliamentary Standing Committee?

73.2. (ii) Whether such a report can be looked at for the purpose of reference and, if
so, can there be restrictions for the purpose of reference regard being had to the
concept of parliamentary privilege and the delicate balance between the (2018) 7 SCC
1 PART C constitutional institutions that Articles 105, 121 and 122 of the Constitution

15

Indian Ex Servicemen Movement (An All ... vs Union Of India Department Of ... on 16 March, 2022

conceive?” Chief Justice Dipak Misra (speaking for himself and Justice AM
Khanwilkar) held thus:

“Q. Conclusions 159.1. Parliamentary Standing Committee report can be taken aid of
for the purpose of interpretation of a statutory provision wherever it is so necessary
and also it can be taken note of as existence of a historical fact.

159.3. In a litigation filed either under Article 32 or Article 136 of the Constitution of
India, this Court can take on record the report of the Parliamentary Standing
Committee. However, the report cannot be impugned or challenged in a court of law.

159.4. Where the fact is contentious, the petitioner can always collect the facts from
many a source and produce such facts by way of affidavits, and the court can render
its verdict by way of independent adjudication. 159.5. The Parliamentary Standing
Committee report being in the public domain can invite fair comments and criticism
from the citizens as in such a situation, the citizens do not really comment upon any
Member of Parliament to invite the hazard of violation of parliamentary privilege.”

18 One of us (DY Chandrachud, J) speaking for himself and Justice Dr AK Sikri held that a report of
a Parliamentary Committee may have a bearing upon diverse perspectives some of which were
formulated thus:

“259.1. The report of a Parliamentary Committee may contain a statement of position
by Government on matters of policy; 259.2. The report may allude to statements
made by persons who have deposed before the Committee;

259.3. The report may contain inferences of fact including on the performance of
Government in implementing policies and legislation;

259.4. The report may contain findings of misdemeanour implicating a breach of
duty by public officials or private individuals or an evasion of law; or 259.5. The
report may shed light on the purpose of a law, the social problem which the
legislature had in view and the manner in which it was sought to be remedied.” PART
C The judgment elaborates that:

“264. Committees of Parliament attached to ministries/departments of the
Government perform the function of holding the Government accountable to
implement its policies and its duties under legislation. The performance of
governmental agencies may form the subject-matter of such a report. In other cases,
the deficiencies of the legislative framework in remedying social wrongs may be the
subject of an evaluation by a Parliamentary Committee. The work of a Parliamentary
Committee may traverse the area of social welfare either in terms of the extent to
which existing legislation is being effectively implemented or in highlighting the
lacunae in its framework. There is no reason in principle why the wide jurisdiction of

16

Indian Ex Servicemen Movement (An All ... vs Union Of India Department Of ... on 16 March, 2022

the High Courts under Article 226 or of this Court under Article 32 should be
exercised in a manner oblivious to the enormous work which is carried out by
Parliamentary Committees in the field. The work of the committee is to secure
alacrity on the part of the Government in alleviating deprivations of social justice and
in securing efficient and accountable governance. When courts enter upon issues of
public interest and adjudicate upon them, they do not discharge a function which is
adversarial. The constitutional function of adjudication in matters of public interest
is in step with the role of Parliamentary Committees which is to secure
accountability, transparency and responsiveness in the Government. In such areas,
the doctrine of separation does not militate against the court relying upon the report
of a Parliamentary Committee. The court does not adjudge the validity of the report
nor for that matter does it embark upon a scrutiny into its correctness.

There is a functional complementarity between the purpose of the investigation by the
Parliamentary Committee and the adjudication by the court. To deprive the court of the valuable
insight of a Parliamentary Committee would amount to excluding an important source of
information from the purview of the court. To do so on the supposed hypothesis that it would
amount to a breach of parliamentary privilege would be to miss the wood for the trees. Once the
report of the Parliamentary Committee has been published it lies in the public domain. Once
Parliament has placed it in the public domain, there is an irony about the executive relying on
parliamentary privilege. There is no reason or justification to exclude it from the purview of the
material to which the court seeks recourse to understand the problem with which it is required to
deal. The court must look at the report with a robust common sense, conscious of the fact that it is
not called upon to determine the validity of the report which constitutes advice tendered to
Parliament. The extent to which the court would rely upon a report must necessarily PART C vary
from case to case and no absolute rule can be laid down in that regard.” 19 In a concurring
judgment, Justice Ashok Bhushan observed:

“449.7. Both the parties have not disputed that parliamentary reports can be used for
the purposes of legislative history of a statute as well as for considering the statement
made by a minister. When there is no breach of privilege in considering the
parliamentary materials and reports of the Committee by the Court for the above two
purposes, we fail to see any valid reason for not accepting the submission of the
petitioner that courts are not debarred from accepting the parliamentary materials
and reports, on record, before it, provided the court does not proceed to permit the
parties to question and impeach the reports.”

20 The Koshyari Committee Report can be relied upon to indicate the background of the adoption of
OROP. The report furnishes the historical background, the reason for the demand, and the view of
the Parliamentary Committee which proposed the adoption of OROP for personnel belonging to the
armed forces. Beyond this, the Koshyari Committee Report cannot be construed as embodying a
statement of governmental policy. Governmental policy formulated in terms of Article 73 by the
Union or Article 162 by the State has to be authoritatively gauged from the policy documents of the
government, which in present case is the communication dated 7 November 2015. Prior to it , on 17

17

Indian Ex Servicemen Movement (An All ... vs Union Of India Department Of ... on 16 March, 2022

February 2014, a statement was made by the Union Minister of Finance in the Lok Sabha while
presenting the interim budget for 2014-15 stating that the government had accepted the principle of
OROP for the defence forces and that the decision would be implemented from financial year
2014-15. The statement of the Union Minister of Finance reflects an in-principle decision to adopt
OROP for all personnel belonging to the armed forces. Evidently, the modalities of PART C
implementing OROP were yet to be chalked out and were adopted later. On 26 February 2014, a
meeting was held by the Minister of Defence to discuss the modalities for implementing the decision
to adopt OROP. Paragraph 3 of the minutes of the meeting elaborate that OROP implies that:

(i) Uniform pension be paid to armed forces personnel retiring in the same rank with
the same length of service irrespective of the date of retirement;

(ii) Any future enhancement in the rates of pension should be passed on to past
pensioners;

(iii) The gap between the rates of pension of current and past pensioners should be
bridged; and

(iv) Future enhancements in the rates of pension should be automatically based on to
the past pensioners at that stage.

21 The CGDA was directed to initiate steps in consultation with the Finance and Ex-servicemen
Welfare departments of the Ministry of Defence to give effect to the decision. The meeting which
was held on 26 February 2014 was part of the decision-making process of the Union Government for
determining the modalities for implementing OROP. On 26 February 2014, a communication was
addressed by the Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare to CGDA noting that at the meeting chaired
by the Minister of Defence, it had been decided to implement OROP for all ranks of the defence
forces prospectively from the financial year of 2014-15. Para 2 of the communication reads as
follows:

“Accordingly, CGDA may work out the modalities in consultation with Service Hqrs,
(who in turn may PART C appropriately consult ex-servicemen), Department ESW
and MoD (Fin) and take necessary to implement the same.”

22 On 10 July 2014, the Minister of Finance in the course of his speech while presenting the annual
budget stated that the Union Government had adopted the policy of OROP to address pension
disparity and a further sum of Rs 1,000 crores was set aside to meet the requirement of the year. On
2 December 2014, information on OROP was furnished by the Minister of State for Defence in a
reply to a Member of the Rajya Sabha.

23 The adoption in principle of OROP followed by the discussion on the modalities for
implementing it eventually led to the communication dated 7 November 2015 of the Ministry of
Defence to the Chiefs of Army Staff, Air Force Staff and Naval staff. The communication indicates
that :

18

Indian Ex Servicemen Movement (An All ... vs Union Of India Department Of ... on 16 March, 2022

“2. It has now been decided to implement “One Rank One Pension” (OROP) for the
Ex-Servicemen with effect from 1.07.2014. OROP implies that uniform pension be
paid to the Defence Forces Personnel retiring in the same rank with the same length
of service, regardless of their date of retirement, which, implies bridging the gap
between the rates of pension of current and past pensioners at periodic intervals.
[sic]” Paragraph 3 of the communication adverts to the salient features:

“3. Salient features of the OROP as follows: i. To begin with, pension of the past
pensioner would be re- fixed on the basis of pension of retirees of calendar year 2013
and the benefit will be effective with effect from 1.7.2014. ii. Pension will be re-fixed
for all pensioners on the basis of the average of minimum and maximum pension of
personnel retired in 2013 in the same rank with the same length of service.

iii. Pension for those drawing above the average shall be protected.

iv. Arrears will be paid in four equal half yearly instalments. However, all the family
pensioners including those in receipt PART C of Special/Liberalized family pension
and Gallantry award winners shall be paid arrears in one instalment. v. In future, the
pension would be re-fixed every 5 years. ” The communication also indicated that
personnel who opt to get discharged henceforth would not be entitled to the benefit
of OROP. Moreover, the Union Government had decided to appoint a committee to
look into the anomaly in the implementation of OROP and its report was to be
submitted within six months. The features of the policy communication of 7
November 2015 need to be noticed. First, it contains the decision of the Indian
government to implement OROP for ex-servicemen. Second, it specifies the date with
effect from which the decision would be implemented, namely, 1 July 2014. Third, it
embodies the understanding that OROP implies the payment of uniform pension to
defence personnel retiring in the same rank with the same length of service
regardless of the date of retirement. Fourth, it emphasises the need to bridge the gap
between the rates of pension of current and past pensioners at “periodic intervals”.

24 A considerable amount of debate has taken place in these proceedings on whether the expression
“at periodic intervals” was in breach of the original understanding that enhancements in the rates of
pension would be automatically passed on. While dealing with the submission, it is important to
note at the outset that right from the Koshyari Committee Report, it was envisaged that “any future
enhancement in the rates of pension is to be automatically passed on to the past pensioners”. The
statement made by the Union Minister of Finance in the Lok Sabha on 17 February 2014
propounded in principle the decision to implement OROP. At the meeting chaired by the Defence
Minister on 26 February 2014, it PART C was again envisaged that “any future enhancement in the
rates of pension to be automatically passed on to the past pensioners”. The reply furnished in
writing by the Minister of State for Defence to a Member of the Rajya Sabha also similarly indicates
that “future enhancement in the rate of pension to be automatically passed on to the past
pensioners”. The legislative and other material prior to 7 November 2015 proposed that future
enhancements in the rates of pension would be automatically passed on. The expression

19

Indian Ex Servicemen Movement (An All ... vs Union Of India Department Of ... on 16 March, 2022

“automatically” was clearly not linked to a time period for the revision of pensions. None of the
documents on the record prior to the communication dated 7 November 2015 suggests that the
process of revising pensions was to be continued on an ongoing basis as opposed to revision at
periodic intervals. 25 The fallacy in the submission of the petitioners is in the argument that the
policy communication dated 7 November 2015 is contrary to the original decision which was taken
by the Union Government to implement OROP. Implicit in the submission of the petitioners is the
premise that the original decision was based on the Koshyari Committee Report followed by the
statement on the floor of the House by the Minister of Finance (17 February 2014 and 10 July 2014)
and the minutes of the meeting convened by the Defence Minister (26 February 2014). Our analysis
of the underlying document indicates that while a decision to implement OROP was taken in
principle, the modalities for implementation were yet to be chalked out. Thus, there was no
conscious policy decision on the part of the Union Government on the modalities for implementing
OROP until the communication dated 7 November 2015 came into being. The communication of 7
November 2015 cannot be invalidated on the ground that it infringed the PART C ‘original
understanding’ of OROP. A hierarchy in law exists between statutes and rules – a statutory
provision will have precedence over delegated legislation if the latter conflicts with the former.
Similarly, executive instructions cannot override a statute or rules made in pursuance of a statute.
But in the present case the entire canvas is governed by a policy. The terms for implementing the
policy were specified on 7 November 2015. Hence, that element of the policy cannot be challenged
on the notion that there is an inflexible notion of OROP couched in an original understanding.
OROP is itself a matter of policy and it was open to the makers of the policy to determine the terms
of implementation. The policy is of course subject to judicial review on constitutional parameters,
which is a distinct issue.

26 While the petitioners have not adverted to the doctrine of legitimate expectations, they have
implicitly relied on this principle. The doctrine of legitimate expectations can be invoked if a
representation made by a public body leads an individual to believe that they would be a recipient of
a substantive benefit. A part of the petitioners’ grievance stems from the belief that an assurance
made by State functionaries, the Ministers of the Union Government, did not translate into a
conscious policy decision, which is embodied in the communication dated 7 November 2015. We
have stated above that the expression “automatically” was clearly not linked to a time period for the
revision of pensions. But if it is to be assumed that the expression “automatically” meant that the
revision in the rates of pension would take place on an ongoing basis rather than at periodic
intervals, the question arises whether the doctrine of legitimate expectations can be invoked in the
present case. In the State of PART C Jharkhand v. Brahmputra Metallics Ltd., Ranchi15, a two-judge
Bench of this Court, of which one of us (DY Chandrachud, J) was a part, clarified the doctrinal
difference between the concepts of promissory estoppel and legitimate expectations. The Bench
observed that the doctrine of legitimate expectations, a public law concept, is premised on the
principles of fairness and non-arbitrariness in state action. The doctrine of legitimate expectations
emerges as a facet of Article 14 of the Constitution. On the other hand, promissory estoppel, being a
private law concept, can be invoked if the State has entered into a private contract with another
entity but is inapplicable where a representation has been made by the State in the discharge of its
public functions. The doctrine of legitimate expectations is applicable in the latter situation. Noting
that in India, the two doctrines have been conflated, this Court went on to analyse if the change in

20

Indian Ex Servicemen Movement (An All ... vs Union Of India Department Of ... on 16 March, 2022

an existing government policy violates the legitimate expectations of those who were previously
covered by such policy. However, in the present case, there was no concrete government policy in
existence prior to 7 November 2015. There existed only certain assurances that were made by the
Ministers, or which could be deduced from the minutes of a meeting that was chaired by the
Minister of Defence. These assurances were also to the effect that OROP has been accepted in
principle. The implementation was yet to be worked out. In State of Arunachal Pradesh v. Nezone
L a w   H o u s e 1 6 ,   a   t w o - j u d g e   B e n c h   o f   t h i s   C o u r t   h e l d   t h a t   w h e n   t h e   v i e w s   o f   v a r i o u s
departments/Ministries are involved, an oral promise by a Minister does not bind the government.
In that case, a law publisher had contended that the then Law Minister had assured the publisher
that certain 2020 SCC OnLine SC 968 (2008) 5 SCC 609 PART C books will be purchased from it.
The document that was relied upon by the publisher was a departmental note which indicated that
the decision regarding the purchase was subject to the concurrence of other departments and
Ministries. This Court observed:

“8. As noted above the factual scenario is interesting. The document relied upon by
the respondent and the High Court refers to some oral expression of desire by the
then Law Minister. When the views of several departments were involved the
question of any oral view being expressed by a Minister is really not relevant.
Further, the document relied upon was nothing but a departmental note which itself
clearly indicated that the views of various departments/Ministries were to be taken
and their concurrence was to be obtained. Apart from that, undisputedly there was
some factual dispute as to whether the intended purchase was of volumes or of sets.
There is conceptual difference between the two. The books were not even printed at
the relevant point of time. The High Court has noticed only one volume had been
printed. Further the need for the purchase of the books for the judicial officers was to
be assessed in consultation with the High Court. The Law Minister could not have,
without taking the view of the High Court, placed orders. In any event the dispute as
to the volumes or the sets and the interpolation in the documents were of
considerable relevance. Unfortunately the High Court has lightly brushed aside this
aspect. The doctrines of promissory estoppel and legitimate expectation were not
applicable to the facts of the case.” (emphasis supplied)

27 In the present case, discussions took place within the Government and even as of 26 February
2014, the meeting chaired by the Minister of Defence set out broad parameters of the decision, while
leaving it to the CGDA to ensure necessary steps in consultation with the three services and the
Finance and ESW wings of MOD “to give effect to this decision”. The meeting envisaged that family
pensioners and disabled pensioners would be included and that ex-servicemen may also be properly
consulted as required by the service. All this is clearly PART C suggestive of the fact that in the
evolving decisions which were taking place within the Government, a formulation of the precise
modalities which were to be adopted was yet to take place. This eventually took place on 7
November 2015. The communication dated 7 November 2015 cannot, therefore, be assailed on the
ground that it is contrary to the original intent of the policy formulated by the Union Government.
The policy of the Union Government is what is embodied in the communication dated 7 November
2015. The statements made on the Floor of the House and minutes of ministerial committees are

21

Indian Ex Servicemen Movement (An All ... vs Union Of India Department Of ... on 16 March, 2022

pointers to the fact that the Union Government had in principle decided to implement OROP but the
precise framework of its implementation was a matter of evolving discussion within Government.
The formulation of modalities which took place in the communication dated 7 November 2015
represents the policy choices adopted by the Government.

28 While the communication dated 7 November 2015 is undoubtedly open to be scrutinised on
constitutional parameters, there is no substance in the plea that the decision which was taken on 7
November 2015 is somehow contrary to an original policy decision of the Union Government. The
policy and its modalities for implementation are those which have been embodied in the
communication dated 7 November 2015.

C. 2. Plea of Discrimination 29 The submission of the petitioners on the violation of Article 14 is
premised essentially on three aspects:

PART C

(i) Fixation of the pension as of calendar year 2013 would result in pre 2014 retirees
getting less pension of one increment than a soldier retiring after 2014;

(ii) Fixing the pension based on the mean of minimum and maximum pension of
2013 would result in different pensions for the same ranks and same length of service
depending on whether the personnel retired before or after 31 December 2013. In
effect, a higher ranked soldier would receive lesser pension on comparison to a lower
ranked soldier; and

(iii) As a result of the process of equalisation every five years, persons who have
retired prior in point of time would be placed at a disadvantage as their unequalised
pension would be multiplied by a factor of 2.57 while those who have retired after 1
January 2014 would get the benefit of higher pension which would be multiplied by
2.57.

30 In the course of its comprehensive affidavit, the Union Government attempted to explain the
disparity in the pension payable to a Sepoy with 15 years of qualifying service under OROP and the
actual pension of a Sepoy with 15 years of qualifying service who retired in 2014 before the
application of OROP. The following explanation was offered to the three tabular charts appended as
fixtures 1, 2 and 3 above:

“A. Tabular Chart 1:

(a) In this table, the comparison made by the Petitioner is between pension payable
to a Sepoy with 15 years of qualifying service under OROP and the actual pension of a
PART C Sepoy who retired in 2014 (before application of OROP) after 15 years
qualifying service who is drawing pension in the rank of Naik, due to operation of the
Modified Assured Career Progression Scheme [hereinafter referred to as ‘MACP

22

Indian Ex Servicemen Movement (An All ... vs Union Of India Department Of ... on 16 March, 2022

Scheme’]

(b) The figure of Rs. 6,666 is derived from the Table at Pg. 3 of the Note. The figure of
Rs. 6665 denotes the weighted average pension of the minimum and maximum
pension of 2013 of Sepoys who retired in 2013 with 15 years of qualifying service.

(c) The figure of Rs. 7,605 is derived from the Pension Payment Order annexed at Pg. 5 of the Note.
Pension is calculated on the basis of 50% of the last pay drawn before retirement. This can be
arrived at by the following:-

S.No.                  Particulars                  Amount

1.                     Last Pay                     10,510

2.                     Grade                        2,400
Pay

3.                     MSP                          2,000

Allowance

5.                     TOTAL                        15,210

6.                     Pension                      7,605
(50%      of
last pay)

*figures from Pg. 5 of the Note

(d) The difference in pension between the two pensions in Tabular Chart 1 is due to the applicability
of the MACP Scheme (implemented based on the recommendations of the6th Central Pay
Commission). Under the MACP Scheme, a defence personnel who has not been promoted for
8/16/24 years of regular service, would be eligible for grant of next higher grade pay after
completion of 8/16/14 years of regular service. In other words, a Sepoy who was originally getting
Rs 2,000 as grade pay would after 8 years of service (without promotion) be granted the next higher
grade pay of Rs. 2,400. The grade pay of Rs. 2,400 ordinarily corresponds to the grade pay of Naik.

PART C

(e) Similarly, after 16 years of service (without promotion), such Sepoy would get the next higher
grade pay of Rs. 2,800. The grade pay of Rs 2,800 ordinarily corresponds to the grade pay of
Havildar.

23

Indian Ex Servicemen Movement (An All ... vs Union Of India Department Of ... on 16 March, 2022

(f) As a logical corollary, the pay (and consequently pension) of different Sepoys would differ/vary
depending on whether benefit of the MACP Scheme has been granted to such Sepoy or not.

(g) The applicability of the MACP Scheme on the pension of a retired defense personnel has been
dealt by the Circular No. 555 dated 04.02.2016, wherein at Para 11(C), it has been stated:-

“…11. The provisions of this circular shall be applicable to all Pre-01.07.2014
pensioners /family pensioners and their pension/family pension shall be stepped up
with reference to rank, group and qualifying service in which they were pensioned.

Note:

a)…

b)…

c) A JCOs/ORs pensioner, who has retired with a particular rank and granted ACP-I
will be eligible for revision of pension of a next higher rank; if ACP-II has been
granted, he will be eligible for revision of pension of next higher rank of ACP-I;

and if ACP-III has been granted, he will be eligible for revision of pension of next higher rank of
ACP-II w.e.f. 01.07.2014. For example- a Sepoy granted ACP-I will be eligible for revision of pension
of Naik rank, Sepoy granted ACP-II will be eligible for revision of pension of Havildar rank and
sepoy granted ACP-III will be eligible for revision of pension of Naib Subedar rank […]” Therefore,
the example of two Sepoys drawing different pension amount is due to operation of MACP and is not
due to operation of the OROP Scheme.

(h) It is also important to point out that the MACP Scheme is only one such factor which influences
the pay drawn by a Sepoy. The other factors include promotion, disciplinary proceedings etc. PART
C B. Tabular Chart 2:

(a) In this Chart, the pension of a Naik has been compared with a person drawing
pension of Havildar by virtue of the MACP Scheme.

(b) The figure of Rs. 7,170 is derived from the Table at Pg. 4 of the Note. The figure of
Rs. 7,170 denotes the weighted average pension of the minimum and maximum
pension of 2013.

(c) The figure of Rs. 8,295 is derived from the pension payment order annexed at Pg.
6 of the Note Pension is calculated on the basis of 50% of the last pay drawn before
retirement. This can be arrived at by the following:-

S.No.                       Particulars                Amount

1.                          Last Pay                   11,490

24

Indian Ex Servicemen Movement (An All ... vs Union Of India Department Of ... on 16 March, 2022

2.                          Grade Pay                  2,800

3.                          MSP                        2,000

Allowance

5.                          TOTAL                      16,590

6.                          Pension(50%                8,295
of last pay)

(d) Now, due to the operation of the MACP Scheme, the Naik (grade pay of Rs.
2,400) is actually drawing the next higher grade pay of Rs.2,800, which corresponds
to the grade pay of Havildar. This is the same principle, which was the basis for
difference in pension in Tabular Chart 1.

C. Tabular Chart III

(a) The Tabular Chart III pertains to the rank of Group Captain. As per Column II of this Chart, the
example quoted is that of a 2014 retiree. However, the pension amount quoted is of Group Captain
Daniel Victor, who retired on 28.02.2015. It is important to state that the OROP Scheme was not
applicable to Group Captain Daniel Victor.

(e) Therefore, the Petitioner has misled this Hon’ble Court by relying on the pension of a recent
retiree who has not been covered under the OROP Scheme. The PPO Number of Group Captain
Daniel Victor is 08/14/1/114/2015 PART C

18. It is further submitted that the flaw in pointing out the alleged disparities by referring to the
Tables at Pg. 1 of the Note are due to the following reasons, interalia:-

(i) The comparison as mentioned in the Table is a comparison between
non-comparables. The weighted average pension of the minimum and maximum
pension of 2013 can never be compared with the actual amount being received by a
defence personnel as pension fixed under the rules applicable for retiring pension in
the normal course.

(ii) The weighted average pension signifies the lowest/minimum amount that a
defence personnel retiring upto 2013 is entitled to get as OROP pension. Whereas,
the actual pension of the retired defense personnel in 2014 (without effect of OROP)
is based on pay last drawn. This amount of actual pension may be higher (due to
various factors), but cannot be lower than the weighted average pension, as in that
case, pension would be raised (protected) to the level of the weighted average pension

25

Indian Ex Servicemen Movement (An All ... vs Union Of India Department Of ... on 16 March, 2022

(OROP)

(iii) In other words, the pension amount of Rs. 6,665 is the minimum prescribed
benchmark amount that any Sepoy (with 15 years qualifying service) would get under
OROP as per Table No. 7 at Page 3 of the Note. Therefore, no Sepoy with the same
pay and same length of service will get an amount less than Rs. 6,665 under OROP.
The minimum prescribed benchmark is fixed to ensure that all defense personnel
retiring pre-2013 are pulled up to receive at least the minimum prescribed pension.
The benchmarking to the average of the minimum and maximum ensures upliftment
of those receiving below the benchmark rate, whereas, protection of those who are
receiving a higher pension than the benchmark rate.

(iv) The Petitioner’s interpretation is an attempt to equalize the pension of every defense personnel
with the highest pension drawn by a defense personnel in the same rank with the same length of
service. Such an interpretation is completely arbitrary definition of how OROP should be
implemented.” 31 During the course of the hearing, the Union Government placed on record a
further affidavit. The affidavit places on record the status of the grant of MACP benefits to defence
personnel across the three services. The sample data for 2013 which was the base year for the
calculation has been placed on the record and is reproduced below: -

PART C “….(v) Likewise, a Sepoy who gets promoted at the first instance as Naik in
its natural course but does not get promoted for the subsequent ranks (which may
happen due to non-availability of vacancies or stagnation) would be entitled to the
MACP upgradations of those ranks.

(vi) It is also respectfully submitted that the threshold condition to qualify for MACP
is the completion of the required length of service. Consequently, one who completed
the required length of service would qualify for MACP automatically unless otherwise
barred due to disciplinary proceedings or performance.

(vii) It is also respectfully submitted that the threshold condition to qualify for MACP
is the completion of the required length of service. Consequently, one who completes
the required length of service would qualify for MACP automatically unless otherwise
barred due to disciplinary proceedings or performance.

(viii) It is therefore self-evident that a Sepoy who does not complete the required
length of service of 8 years and one who completed it, cannot be benchmarked
together under any circumstances.

(ix) A Sepoy of 3 years and a Sepoy who had crossed 8 years qualifying for MACP is
not equated even for OROP purpose since they do not qualify the criteria of “same
length of service.” (emphasis supplied) While explaining the difference in pensions of
the two Sepoys, the Union Government stated that this was due to the applicability of
the MACP scheme. In the subsequent affidavit, some of the issues which remained to

26

Indian Ex Servicemen Movement (An All ... vs Union Of India Department Of ... on 16 March, 2022

be explained in the comprehensive affidavit have been attempted to be clarified.

C.2.1 ACP-MACP 32 In 2013, the ACP regime was put into place. In terms of the scheme, a Sepoy
upon completion of ten years of service would be upgraded to a Naik for the purpose of pay, pension
and other special benefits. After completion of 20 years’ service, there would be a further
upgradation to the pay of a Havildar and after 30 years’ service, as a Naib Subedar. Though the
scheme was PART C implemented from 2014, the benefit was extended retrospectively by applying
the norms of 10:20:30 years of service respectively. Hence, a Sepoy in 2013 with thirty years of
service was grouped with a Naib Subedar for pay, pension and other financial benefits. The ACP
scheme thus covered defence personnel tracing back in time to 1973.

33 On 11 October 2008, by Army instruction No 1/S/2008, the MACP Scheme was implemented. In
terms of the scheme, the earlier time line of 10:20:30 years of service for upgradation was modified
to 8:16:24 years for conferment of benefits in terms of pay, pension and other financial benefits. In
view of the decision of this Court in Union of India v. Balbir Singh Turn17, the MACP scheme was
made operational with effect from 1 January 2006. Though the MACP scheme was made operational
from 1 January 2006, it had retrospective effect as a result of which any person who was in service
and qualified with the threshold requirement of 8:16:24 years of service came to be grouped with the
corresponding rank upgradations for the purpose of pay, pension and other benefits. In the above
backdrop, the Union Government has stated before this Court on affidavit that for the purpose of
computing the OROP benefit, it has taken MACP as the base and applied it across the board for all
retirees having the same length of service. In other words, OROP was not calculated in two parts
comprising of the ACP regime and MACP regime. In this context, reliance has been placed on Note
VI appended to the table for working out OROP calculations. Note VI reads as follows: -

(2018) 11 SCC 99 PART C “Pension of JCO/ORS granted upgradation under
ACP/MACP scheme shall be revised with reference to the rank for which ACP/MACP
was granted.”

34 On the above premises, it has been submitted that no disparity on the ground of MACP/ACP has
been introduced and the core value of uniform pension for a person retiring in the same rank with
the same length of service is maintained without disparity.

C.2.2 Financial Implications 35 The Union Government has stated on affidavit that at the time when
OROP was implemented, the annual financial implication was in the amount of Rs 7,123.38 crores.
The actual arrears which had to be paid for the period of 1 July 2014 to 31 December 2015 stood in
the amount of Rs 10,392.35 crores. The table on the status of the grant of MACP benefits to defence
personnel (2013) indicates that 96.4% Sepoys, 72.3% Naiks, 48.9% Havildars and 90.9% Art III-I
(Navy only) represent the percentage of retirees getting MACP benefits. This indicates that MACP
benefit forms a significant portion of the retiring personnel in the above four ranks, the last one
being relevant only for the Navy. The MACP factor is not of much impact in the case of Naib
Subedar, Subedar and Subedar Major, among whom 1.6%, 2.2% and 0.2% of all retiring personnel
are receiving MACP benefits. This is because they would have reached those ranks by regular
promotion. When a Sepoy with eight years of service is upgraded as a Naik and thereafter as a

27

Indian Ex Servicemen Movement (An All ... vs Union Of India Department Of ... on 16 March, 2022

Havildar and Naib Subedar after sixteen and twenty-four years of service, other financial benefits
attached to the higher ranks accrue automatically to an MACP beneficiary. However, if a Sepoy is
promoted to the rank of Naik in the natural course before eight years of service, such a person does
not qualify PART C for MACP and the same principle applies to the further upgradation. Where a
Sepoy is promoted as a Naik in the usual course, but does not get promoted thereafter to subsequent
ranks for non-availability of vacancies, such a Sepoy would be entitled to MACP upgradation only
for those ranks. The threshold requirement for the grant of MACP is completion of a specified length
of service. A Sepoy who does not complete the required length of service cannot hence be
benchmarked with someone who completes the stipulated length of service for the grant of MACP
benefits. In other words, a Sepoy with three years of service and a Sepoy who has acquired eight
years of service thereby qualifying for MACP are not equated even after OROP purposes since they
did not both have the same length of service from the past rank of Naib Subedar. According to the
Union Government, if non MACP personnel are grouped with MACP personnel for the payment of
OROP, the total financial outflow from 2014 would be in the range of Rs 42,776.38 crores. If non
MACP persons were required to be matched with MACP, the financial implication for the period
from 1 July 2014 to 31 December 2015 would stand at Rs 13,731.03 crores. If such a benefit is given,
the financial implication for 2021 under the Seventh Pay Commission would require a conversion
factor of 2.57 besides which 31% DR would be payable. As noted earlier, it has been stated that when
OROP is implemented, the annual financial implication was in the amount of Rs 7,123.38 crores. If
non MACP personnel had to be matched with MACP personnel, this figure would stand increased to
Rs 9,411.71 crores. Based on this, the following tabulation has been submitted by the Union
Government on affidavit indicating a total outflow if non MACP were to be matched with MACP:

PART C Difference of 9,411.71-7123.38 Crores 2288.33 Crores financial implication
per annum Further arrears from 2288.33 Cr x 1.5 years 3432.49 Crores 1.07.2014 to
31.12.2015 Conversion in 7th CPC 2288.33 Cr x. 2.57 times 5881.00 Crores Further
arrears from 5881.00 Cr x 6 years 35,286 Crores 01.01.2016 DR arrears from 5881
Cr/12 x 8.28 4057.89 Crores 01.01.2016 to 31.12.2021 Total Additional arrears
3432.49+35286.00+4057.89 42,776.38 Crores C.2. 3 Average to Maximum 36 The
Court has been apprised of the fact that the CGDA working committee considered
four options for OROP in the year 2013. Of the four options, the fourth option was on
the basis of the maximum pension of current retirees, which was proposed by the
services. The Committee noted that the financial implication of the fourth option
(maximum pension of current retirees) was Rs 14,898.34 crores per annum and the
total arrears which would be payable on PART C this basis would have been in the
amount of Rs 1,45,339.34 crores, as is tabulated below:

Difference of financial 14898.34 Cr -7123.38 7774.96 Cr implication per annum: Cr
Further arrears from 7774.96 Cr x 1.5. years 11662.44 Cr 01.07.2014 to 31.12.2015
Conversion in 7th CPC: 7774.96 Cr x 2.57 times 19981.60 Cr Further arrears from
19981.60 Cr x 6 years 119889.60 Cr 01.01.2016 to 31.12.2021 DR arrears from
19981.60 Cr/12x8.28 13787.30 Cr 01.01.2016 to 31.12.2021 Thus total additional
11662.44 Cr+119889.60 INR 145339.34 Cr arrears Cr+ 13787.30 C.2.4 Periodic
revision every five years 37 The central limb of the submission of the petitioners is

28

Indian Ex Servicemen Movement (An All ... vs Union Of India Department Of ... on 16 March, 2022

that a revision of OROP should be automatic. The Union government has submitted
that besides lacking any prior precedent, in terms of the practice governing pay
scales, pensions and other financial emoluments of government servants, automatic
revision would be impossible to implement. Quite apart from the above PART C
consideration, it is evident that the three documents which have been relied upon by
the petitioners namely (i) the Koshyari Committee Report; (ii) the minutes of the
meeting chaired by the Defence Minister on 26 February 2014; and (iii) the
communication dated 26 February 2014 to CGDA underscore that “any future
enhancement in the rates of pension to be automatically passed on to the past
pensioners”. The expression “to be automatically passed on” immediately follows
upon the words “any future enhancement in the rates of pension”. When read
together contextually, it signifies that the rates of pension would be passed on to past
pensioners without any administrative impediments. The expression ‘automatically
passed on’ cannot be construed as a commitment with reference to any period of time
for the computation of benefits. The manner in which and the period over which
revisions should take place of pensions, salaries and other financial benefits is a pure
question of policy. The decision of the Central Government to revise the pension
every five years cannot be held to violate the precepts underlying Article 14.

38 The policy choices which have been made by the Union Government must also be
understood in the context that the estimated budget allocation for defence pensions
is Rs 1,33,825 crores representing 28.39 per cent of the total defence budget estimate
of Rs 4,71,378 crores for 2020-2021. This does not include budget on salaries which
is of the order of 34.89 per cent of the total defence budget estimates for 2020-2021.
Salaries and pensions thus account for nearly 63 per cent of the total defence budget
estimates for 2020-2021. In making policy choices, the Union Government is entitled
to take into account priorities towards PART C modernization of the armed forces
and to modulate the grant of financial benefits so as to sub-serve and balance distinct
priorities. 39 In the decision of this Court in Nakara (supra), the Constitution Bench
was deciding on the issue of whether the date of retirement would be a relevant
consideration for determining the application of a revised formula for the
computation of pension. The liberalised pension scheme was made applicable
prospectively to those employees who retired on or after March 31, 1979 in the case of
government servants covered by the 1972 Rules and in respect of defence personnel,
those who became non-effective on or after April 1, 1979.

Consequently, those who retired prior to the date were not entitled to the benefits of the liberalised
pension scheme. It was held that payment of pension constitutes a compensation for the service
rendered in the past and as a measure of social welfare for providing socio-economic justice to those
who have rendered service to the State. The Court noted that earlier, the measure of pension was
related to the average emoluments during a period of thirty-six months prior to retirement. By a
liberalized scheme, the period was reduced to an average of ten months preceding the date of
retirement coupled with the above aspects. A slab system for computation was introduced and the
ceiling was raised. This Court held that there was no justification for arbitrarily selecting the criteria

29

Indian Ex Servicemen Movement (An All ... vs Union Of India Department Of ... on 16 March, 2022

for eligibility for the grant of benefits under the scheme based on the date of retirement. Hence, this
Court held that all pensioners formed a homogeneous class and where an existing scheme of
pension was liberalized, a distinction could not be made on the basis of a specified cut-off date. At
the same time, it must also be noted that the decision in Nakara (supra) noted that “the financial
PART C implication in such matters has some relevance.” This Court struck down the portion of the
Memoranda by which the benefit of the liberalised pension scheme was only confined to persons
retiring on or after the specified date which resulted in the benefit being extended to all retirees,
irrespective of the date of retirement. It was observed as follows:

“63. The financial implication in such matters has some relevance. However in this
connection, we want to steer clear of a misconception. There is no pension fund as it
is found either in contributory pension schemes administered in foreign countries or
as in insurance-linked pensions. Non- contributory pensions under 1972 Rules is a
State obligation. It is an item of expenditure voted year to year depending upon the
number of pensioners and the estimated expenditure. Now when the liberalised
pension scheme was introduced, we would justifiably assume that the government
servants would retire from the next day of the coming into operation of the scheme
and the burden will have to be computed as imposed by the liberalised scheme.
Further Government has been granting since nearly a decade temporary increases
from time to time to pensioners. Therefore, the difference will be marginal. Further,
let it not be forgotten that the old pensioners are on the way out and their number is
fast decreasing. While examining the financial implication, this Court is only
concerned with the additional liability that may be imposed by bringing in pensioners
who retired prior to April 1, 1979 within the fold of liberalised pension scheme but
effective subsequent to the specified date. That it is a dwindling number is
indisputable. And again the large bulk comprises pensioners from lower echelons of
service such as Peons, L.D.C., U.D.C., Assistant etc. In a chart submitted to us, the
Union of India has worked out the pension to the pensioners who have retired prior
to the specified date and the comparative advantage, if they are brought within the
purview of the liberalised pension scheme. The difference up to the level of Assistant
or even Section Officer is marginal keeping in view that the old pensioners are getting
temporary increases. Amongst the higher officers, there will be some difference
because the ceiling is raised and that would introduce the difference. It is however
necessary to refer to one figure relied upon by respondents. It was said that if
pensioners who retired prior to March 31, 1979 are brought within the purview of the
liberalised pension scheme, Rs 233 crores would be required for fresh commutation.
The apparent fallacy in the submission is that if the benefit of commutation is already
availed of, it cannot and need not be reopened. And availability of other benefits is
hardly a relevant factor because pension is admissible to all retirees. The figures
submitted are thus neither frightening nor the liability is supposed to be staggering
which would deflect PART C us from going to the logical and of constitutional
mandate. Even according to the most liberal estimate, the average yearly increase is
worked out to be Rs 51 crores but that assumes that every pensioner has survived till
date and will continue to survive. Therefore, we are satisfied that the increase liability

30

Indian Ex Servicemen Movement (An All ... vs Union Of India Department Of ... on 16 March, 2022

consequent upon this judgment is not too high to be unbearable or such as would
have detracted the Government from covering the old pensioners under the Scheme.”
(emphasis supplied) 40 As opposed to the factual matrix in Nakara (supra), where
the liberalised pension scheme was not made applicable to employees who had
retired prior to the cut-off date, in this case the OROP principle is applicable to all
retired army personnel, irrespective of the date of retirement. The cut-off date is only
prescribed for determining the base salary used for computing the pension. While for
those who retired on or after 2014, the last drawn salary is used for computing the
pension; for those who retired prior to 2014, the average of the salary drawn in 2013
is used. This policy only seeks to protect those who retired before 2014 since the last
drawn salary of the prior retirees might be too low and incomparable to the pay of the
2014 retirees. Moreover, if the maximum salary drawn is to be used as the base value
instead of taking the average salary, an additional outlay of Rs 1,45,339.34 crores
would be incurred. The executive is therefore, well within its limits to prescribe a
policy keeping in view the financial implications.

41 In Krishena Kumar (supra), a Constitution Bench of this Court decided on the
issue of whether the prescription of a cut-off date for the eligibility to a pension
scheme was arbitrary and violative of Article 14. Before 1957, the only scheme for
retirement benefits in the Railways was the Provident Fund Scheme.

This scheme was replaced in 1957 by the Pension Scheme. All the employees PART C who served in
the Railways on or after 1 April 1957 were automatically covered by the Pension Scheme. Those who
were in service before 1 April 1957 were given the option to switch over to the Pensionary Benefits. It
was the contention of the appellants that till 1 April 1957, there was no difference between the
benefits receivable under the provident fund scheme and the pension scheme. However, it was
contended that between 1957 and 1987, the pensionary benefits were increased by various methods
while the benefits under the provident fund scheme were not enhanced. Dismissing the petitions,
this Court held that neither the prescription of a cut-off date nor the creation of two classes of
retirees (pensioners and provident fund holders) was contrary to the decision of the Constitution
Bench in Nakara (supra). It was observed thus:

“32. In Nakara [(1983) 1 SCC 305 : 1983 SCC (L&S) 145 :

(1983) 2 SCR 165] it was never held that both the pension retirees and the PF retirees
formed a homogeneous class and that any further classification among them would
be violative of Article 14. On the other hand the court clearly observed that it was not
dealing with the problem of a “fund”.

The Railway Contributory Provident Fund is by definition a fund. Besides, the government's
obligation towards an employee under CPF Scheme to give the matching contribution begins as
soon as his account is opened and ends with his retirement when his rights qua the government in
respect of the Provident Fund is finally crystallized and thereafter no statutory obligation continues.
Whether there still remained a moral obligation is a different matter. On the other hand under the

31

Indian Ex Servicemen Movement (An All ... vs Union Of India Department Of ... on 16 March, 2022

Pension Scheme the government's obligation does not begin until the employee retires when only it
begins and it continues till the death of the employee. Thus, on the retirement of an employee
government's legal obligation under the Provident Fund account ends while under the Pension
Scheme it begins. The rules governing the Provident Fund and its contribution are entirely different
from the rules governing pension. It would not, therefore, be reasonable to argue that what is
applicable to the pension retirees must also equally be applicable to PF retirees. This being the legal
position the rights of each individual PF retiree finally crystallized on his retirement PART C
whereafter no continuing obligation remained while, on the other hand, as regard Pension retirees,
the obligation continued till their death. The continuing obligation of the State in respect of pension
retirees is adversely affected by fall in rupee value and rising prices which, considering the corpus
already received by the PF retirees they would not be so adversely affected ipso facto. It cannot,
therefore, be said that it was the ratio decidendi in Nakara [(1983) 1 SCC 305 : 1983 SCC (L&S) 145 :
(1983) 2 SCR 165] that the State's obligation towards its PF retirees must be the same as that
towards the pension retirees. An imaginary definition of obligation to include all the government
retirees in a class was not decided and could not form the basis for any classification for the purpose
of this case. Nakara [(1983) 1 SCC 305 : 1983 SCC (L&S) 145 :

(1983) 2 SCR 165] cannot, therefore, be an authority for this case.

34. The next argument of the petitioners is that the option given to the PF employees to switch over
to the pension scheme with effect from a specified cut-off date is bad as violative of Article 14 of the
Constitution for the same reasons for which in Nakara [(1983) 1 SCC 305 : 1983 SCC (L&S) 145 :
(1983) 2 SCR 165] the notification were read down. We have extracted the 12th option letter. This
argument is fallacious in view of the fact that while in case of pension retirees who are alive the
government has a continuing obligation and if one is affected by dearness the others may also be
similarly affected. In case of PF retirees each one's rights having finally crystallized on the date of
retirement and receipt of PF benefits and there being no continuing obligation thereafter they could
not be treated at par with the living pensioners. How the corpus after retirement of a PF retiree was
affected or benefitted by prices and interest rise was not kept any tack of by the Railways. It appears
in each of the cases of option the specified date bore a definite nexus to the objects sought to be
achieved by giving of the option. Option once exercised was told to have been final. Options were
exercisable vice versa.” (emphasis supplied) 42 In Indian Ex-Services League (supra), it was
contended that in view of the decision in Nakara (supra), all retirees who held the same rank
irrespective of the date of retirement must receive the same amount of pension. This Court observed
that there was nothing in Nakara (supra) that backed the claim of the PART C appellants that the
same pension must be given to all retirees of the same rank. The Court observed that it was held in
Nakara (supra) that only the same formula for calculation of pension was to be used and nowhere
was the emoluments of the retirees revised. The ratio decidendi in Nakara (supra) was explained in
the following words:

“12. The liberalised pension scheme in the context of which the decision was rendered
in Nakara [(1983) 1 SCC 305 :

32

Indian Ex Servicemen Movement (An All ... vs Union Of India Department Of ... on 16 March, 2022

1983 SCC (L&S) 145 : (1983) 2 SCR 165] provided for computation of pension
according to a more liberal formula under which “average emoluments” were
determined with reference to the last ten months' salary instead of 36 months' salary
provided earlier yielding a higher average, coupled with a slab system and raising the
ceiling limit for pension. This Court held that where the mode of computation of
pension is liberalised from a specified date, its benefit must be given not merely to
retirees subsequent to that date but also to earlier existing retirees irrespective of
their date of retirement even though the earlier retirees would not be entitled to any
arrears prior to the specified date on the basis of the revised computation made
according to the liberalised formula. For the purpose of such a scheme all existing
retirees irrespective of the date of their retirement, were held to constitute one class,
any further division within that class being impermissible. According to that decision,
the pension of all earlier retirees was to be recomputed as on the specified date in
accordance with the liberalised formula of computation on the basis of the average
emoluments of each retiree payable on his date of retirement. For this purpose there
was no revision of the emoluments of the earlier retirees under the scheme. It was
clearly stated that ‘if the pensioners form a class, their computation cannot be by
different formula affording unequal treatment solely on the ground that some retired
earlier and some retired later’. This according to us is the decision in Nakara [(1983)
1 SCC 305 : 1983 SCC (L&S) 145 : (1983) 2 SCR 165] and no more.” (emphasis
supplied) It was observed that the effect of the judgment in Nakara (supra) was that
the same computation according to the liberalised formula must be applicable to pre
and post 1 April 1979 retirees and that the decision cannot be construed to mean that
the same amount of pension must be receivable. PART C

43 In KL Rathee v. Union of India18, the decision in Nakara (supra) was explained in the following
terms :

“6. Nakara case dealt with the manner of calculation of pension on the basis of
average emoluments of a retired government employee. Prior to the liberalisation of
the formula for computation of pension made by the memorandum dated 25-5-1979,
average emoluments of the last thirty months of service of the employee provided
that basis for calculation of pension. The 1970 service of the employee provided that
average emoluments must be calculated on the basis of the emoluments received by a
government servant during the last ten months of the service. That apart, a new slab
system for computation of pension was introduced and the ceiling on pension was
raised […].

7. It is to be seen that the judgment did not strike down the definition of
“emoluments”. It merely held that if pension was to be calculated on the basis of the
last ten months’ emoluments of a government servant, after 1-4-1979, there is no
reason why those who retired before 1-4-1979 should get pension calculated on the
basis of average of last thirty-six months’ emoluments. In other words, the rule of
computation must be the same. The Court did not hold that those who have retired

33

Indian Ex Servicemen Movement (An All ... vs Union Of India Department Of ... on 16 March, 2022

before 1-4-1979 must be treated as having the same emoluments as those who retired
on or after 1-4-1979 for the purpose of calculation of pension. Therefore, on the
strength of Nakara case, the petitioner is not entitled to ask for computation of
pension with reference to emoluments which he never got.”

44 In Col. B.J Akkara (Retd.) v. Government of India19, this Court summarised the principles
relating to pension. Justice RV Raveendran writing for a two-Judge bench observed:

“20. The principles relating to pension relevant to the issue are well settled. They are:

(a) In regard to pensioners forming a class, computation of pension cannot be by
different formula thereby applying an unequal treatment solely on the ground that
some retired earlier and some retired later. If the retiree is eligible for pension at the
time of his retirement and the relevant pension scheme is subsequently amended, he
would become eligible to get enhanced pension as per the new formula of
computation of pension from the date when the amendment takes effect. In such a
situation, the additional benefit under 1991 2 SCC 104 (2006) 11 SCC 709 PART C the
amendment, made available to the same class of pensioners cannot be denied to him
on the ground that he had retired prior to the date on which the aforesaid additional
benefit was conferred.

(b) But all retirees retiring with a particular rank do not form a single class for all
purposes. Where the reckonable emoluments as on the date of retirement (for the
purpose of computation of pension) are different in respect of two groups of
pensioners, who retired with the same rank, the group getting lesser pension cannot
contend that their pension should be identical with or equal to the pension received
by the group whose reckonable emolument was higher. In other words, pensioners
who retire with the same rank need not be given identical pension, where their
average reckonable emoluments at the time of their retirement were different, in view
of the difference in pay, or in view of different pay scales being in force.

[…] One set cannot claim the benefit extended to the other set on the ground that they are similarly
situated. Though they retired with the same rank, they are not of the “same class” or “homogeneous
group”. The employer can validly fix a cut-off date for introducing any new pension/retirement
scheme or for discontinuance of any existing scheme. What is discriminatory is introduction of a
benefit retrospectively (or prospectively) fixing a cut-off date arbitrarily thereby dividing a single
homogeneous class of pensioners into two groups and subjecting them to different treatment.”
(emphasis supplied) 45 The decision in SPS Vains (supra) has been relied upon by the petitioners.
The issue in that case was whether the officers of the rank of Major General, who had retired prior to
1 January 1996, could be given the benefit of the provisions of the revised pay scale, though
according to the policy only those who retired after the said cut-off date would be entitled to such
benefit. The rank of Brigadier is a feeder post for the promotional rank of Major General. A Major
General always drew a higher pension than the pension payable to the officers holding the rank of a
Brigadier, as on the basis of the recommendation of the Fourth Pay Commission, the pension was

34

Indian Ex Servicemen Movement (An All ... vs Union Of India Department Of ... on 16 March, 2022

calculated on the basis of the salary drawn during the last ten months prior to retirement. An
anomaly arose with the acceptance of the recommendation of the Fifth Pay Commission which
created a situation in PART C which a Brigadier began drawing more pension and family pension
than the Major General. The Government increased the pension of Major Generals who had retired
prior to 1996 so that they do not receive lesser pension than the officers of the rank of Brigadier. The
disparity which was noted in that case is evident from the following extract of the judgment:

“23. From the submissions made, the dispute appears to be confined only to the
question whether officers of the rank of Major General in the army and of equivalent
rank in the two other wings of the Defence forces, who had retired prior to 1.1.1996
have been validly excluded from the benefit of the revision of pay scales in keeping
with the recommendations of the fifth Central Pay Commission by virtue of the
Special Army Instruction 2/S/1998.” This Court held that such a disparity in the
pension payable to two groups of officers occupying the same rank of Major General
based on those retiring before or after 1 January 1996 violated Article 14. It was in
this backdrop that this Court directed that the pay of all pensioners in the rank of
Major General and its equivalent rank in the other two wings of the Defence services
should be notionally fixed at the rate given to the similar officers of the same rank
after the revision of pay scales with effect from 1 January 1996, and thereafter to
compute the pensionary benefits with prospective effect from the date of the writ
petition.

The decision in SPS Vains (supra) thus involved a completely different factual
situation. The rank of Brigadier was a feeder post for the rank of Major General.

An anomaly had arisen as a result of which the pay and pension of Brigadier were
higher than of the Major Generals. By increasing the pension of Major General,
distinction was made between those who had retired before and after 1 January 1996.
This was held to be violative of Article 14.

PART C

46 The canvass which is sought to be traversed in these proceedings under Article 32 of the
Constitution trenches upon a domain which is reserved for executive policy. We must remember
that adjudication cannot serve as a substitute for policy. Lon Fuller described public policy issues
that come up in adjudication as “polycentric problems”, that is, they raise questions that have a
“multiplicity of variable and interlocking factors, decisions on each one of which presupposes a
decision on all others”. Such matters, according to Fuller, are more suitably addressed by elected
representatives since they involve negotiations, trade-offs and a consensus-driven decision-making
process. Fuller argues that adjudication is more appropriate for questions that result in “either-or”
answers.20 Most questions of policy involve complex considerations of not only technical and
economic factors but also require balancing competing interests for which democratic reconciliation
rather than adjudication is the best remedy. Further, an increased reliance on judges to solve
matters of pure policy diminishes the role of other political organs in resolving contested issues of

35

Indian Ex Servicemen Movement (An All ... vs Union Of India Department Of ... on 16 March, 2022

social and political policy, which require a democratic dialogue. This is not to say that this Court will
shy away from setting aside policies that impinge on constitutional rights. Rather it is to provide a
clear-eyed role of the function that a court serves in a democracy. The OROP policy may only be
challenged on the ground that it is manifestly arbitrary or capricious. In this regard, we now
evaluate the policy which has been adopted by the Union Government.

Fuller, L. L., & Winston, K. I. (1978). The Forms and Limits of Adjudication. Harvard Law Review,
92(2), 353–

409. PART C 47 The policy of OROP adopted by the Union Government stipulates thus:

(i) The benefits will be effective from 1 July 2014;

(ii) Pensions of past pensioners would be refixed on the basis of the pension of
retirees of calendar year 2013;

(iii) Pension for all pensioners would be protected; and

(iv) In future, the pension would be refixed after every five years.

48 The principles governing pensions and cut-off dates can be summarised as follows:

(i) All pensioners who hold the same rank may not for all purposes form a
homogenous class. For example, amongst Sepoys differences do exist in view of the
MACP and ACP schemes. Certain Sepoys receive the pay of the higher ranked
personnel;

(ii) The benefit of a new element in a pensionary scheme can be prospectively
applied. However, the scheme cannot bifurcate a homogenous group based on a
cut-off date;

(iii) The judgment of the Constitution Bench in Nakara (supra) cannot be interpreted
to read the one rank one pension rule into it. It was only held that the same principle
of computation of pensions must be applied uniformly to a homogenous class; and

(iv) It is not a legal mandate that pensioners who held the same rank must be given
the same amount of pension. The varying benefits that may be applicable to certain
personnel which would also impact the pension payable need not be equalised with
the rest of the personnel.

PART C 49 Applying the above principles to the facts of the case, we find no constitutional infirmity
in the OROP principle as defined by the communication dated 7 November 2015 for the following
reasons:

36

Indian Ex Servicemen Movement (An All ... vs Union Of India Department Of ... on 16 March, 2022

(i) The definition of OROP is uniformly applicable to all the pensioners irrespective of
the date of retirement. It is not the case of the petitioners that the pension is reviewed
‘automatically’ to a class of the pensioners and ‘periodically’ to another class of the
pensioners;

(ii) The cut-off date is used only for the purpose of determining the base salary for the
calculation of pension. While for those who retired after 2014, the last drawn salary is
used to calculate pension, for those who retired prior to 2013, the average salary
drawn in 2013 is used. Since the uniform application of the last drawn salary for the
purpose of calculating pension would put the prior retirees at a disadvantage, the
Union Government has taken a policy decision to enhance the base salary for the
calculation of pension. Undoubtedly, the Union Government had a range of policy
choices including taking the minimum, the maximum or the mean or average. The
Union government decided to adopt the average. Persons below the average were
brought up to the average mark while those drawing above the average were
protected. Such a decision lies within the ambit of policy choices;

PART C

(iii) While no legal or constitutional mandate of OROP can be read into the decisions in Nakara
(supra) and SPS Vains (supra), varying pension payable to officers of the same rank retiring before
and after 1 July 2014 either due to MACP or the different base salary used for the calculation of
pension cannot be held arbitrary; and

(iv) Since the OROP definition is not arbitrary, it is not necessary for us to undertake the exercise of
determining if the financial implications of the scheme is negligible or enormous.

50 In terms of the communication dated 7 November 2015, the benefit of OROP was to be effected
from 1 July 2014. Para 3 (v) of the communication states that “in future, the pension would be
re-fixed every five years”. Such an exercise has remained to be carried out after the expiry of five
years possibly because of the pendency of the present proceedings. 51 We accordingly order and
direct that in terms of the communication dated 7 November 2015, a re-fixation exercise shall be
carried out from 1 July 2019, upon the expiry of five years. Arrears payable to all eligible pensioners
of the armed forces shall be computed and paid over accordingly within a period of three months.

PART C 52 The petition is disposed of in the above terms.

53 Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.

… … … … … … … … . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . J .   [ D r   D h a n a n j a y a   Y   C h a n d r a c h u d ]
.……………………...............................J. [Surya Kant] .……………………...............................J. [Vikram
Nath] New Delhi;

March 16, 2022

37