Indian Overseas Bank vs Om Prakash Lal Srivsatava on 19 January, 2022

Indian Overseas Bank vs Om Prakash Lal Srivsatava on 19
January, 2022

Author: Sanjay Kishan Kaul

Bench: M.M. Sundresh, Sanjay Kishan Kaul

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NO.267 OF 2022

INDIAN OVERSEAS BANK & ORS.                            … Appellants

Versus

OM PRAKASH LAL SRIVASTAVA                        …Respondent

JUDGMENT

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.

1. The appellant-Bank, a nationalised one, took the ultimate step against the respondent as an
employee in pursuance of departmental proceedings having found him guilty on various counts
inter alia including breach of duty as a custodian of public money and dishonesty, fraud or
manipulation of documents. The Industrial Tribunal ultimately upheld the decision of the
appellant-Bank but in terms of the impugned judgment of the Allahabad High Court, five of the
charges were found not proved while qua two of the charges the matter was remitted back to the
Industrial Tribunal with a limited mandate.

2. The said decision was, however, stayed by this Court on 5.3.2019. The facts:

3. The respondent was employed with the appellant-Bank as a clerk- cum-cashier w.e.f. 14.9.1981.
The appellant-Bank received a complaint dated 8.10.1994 from the sister-in-law of the respondent,
Smt. Meera Srivastava, that the respondent had opened and operated a savings account No. 7882 in
the joint name of the respondent and his sister-in- law by forging her signatures, and encashed a
demand draft of Rs. 20,000/- which was issued to her by way of interim relief by Kalyan Nigam
Limited in which her husband was employed as a Junior Engineer, who had unfortunately passed
away in a road accident on 15.4.1994. The respondent was placed under suspension on 5.11.1994 by

1

Indian Overseas Bank vs Om Prakash Lal Srivsatava on 19 January, 2022

the Bank for committing acts of grave misconduct at the Gorakhpur Branch and he was issued a
chargesheet dated 22.3.1995. The charges are as under:

“Charge No.1: On 28.9.94 you went to the clearing house without collecting the
outward clearing cheques from Mr. T.K. Sridhar officer in violation of the specific
instructions of the Branch Manager Mr. R.N. Saxena and thus you committed an act
of wilful insubordination which is a gross misconduct under para 19.5(e) of the
Bipartite Settlement dated 19.10.66.

Charge No.2: You refused to include the outward clearing cheques for Rs.2,21,161.47
for the day’s clearing on 28.9.94 when Mr. A.K. Chakraborthy and Mr. S.N. Pandey
officer handed over the said cheques at the clearing house before 10.30 a.m., despite
the specific instructions given by them, which is an act of wilful insubordination and
is a gross misconduct under para 19.5(e) of the Bipartite Settlement dated 19.10.66.

Charge No.3: By refusing to include the outward clearing cheques for Rs.2,21,161.47
for the day’s clearing on 28.9.94, you caused inconvenience and hardship to the
Bank’s customers concerned and thus acted in a manner prejudicial to the interests of
the Bank, which is a gross misconduct under para 19.5(j) of the Bipartite Settlement
dated 19.10.66.

Charge No.4: You fraudulently and dishonestly opened savings bank account
No.7882 in the joint names of yourself and your sister-in-law Mrs. Meera Srivastava
by forging the signature of the latter which is an act prejudicial to the interests of the
Bank and a gross misconduct under para 19.5(j) of the Bipartite Settlement dated
19.10.66.

Charge No.5: You fraudulently and dishonestly withdrew from the joint account
No.7882 a sum of Rs.20,000/- (being the proceedings of the demand draft issued in
favour of Mrs. Meera Srivastava and credited into the account) in two instalments of
Rs.7,000/- and Rs.13,000/- on 20.5.94 and 13.6.94 respectively by forging the
signature of Mrs. Meera Srivastava in the withdrawal slip which is an act prejudicial
to the interests of the Bank and a gross misconduct under para 19.5(j) of the Bipartite
Settlement dated 19.10.66.

Charge No.6: By Gheraoing the Branch Manager Mr. R.N. Saxena along with a few
outsiders and staff members, by threatening and abusing the Branch Manager I
unparliamentary language and by forcibly taking the copy of the suspension order
after searching the Branch Manager’s brief case, table drawer and his pocket on
9.11.94, you behaved in a riotous, disorderly and indecent manner which is a gross
misconduct under para 19.5(c) of the Bipartite Settlement dated 19.10.66.

Charge No.7: By erasing i) your own acknowledgement contained in the duplicate
copy of the suspension order dated 5.11.94, ii) the narration made against your name

2

Indian Overseas Bank vs Om Prakash Lal Srivsatava on 19 January, 2022

in the attendance register through application of white fluid, you tampered with the
records of the branch and thus acted in a manner prejudicial to the interest of the
Bank which is a gross misconduct under para 19.5(j) of the Bipartite Settlement dated
19.10.66.”

4. The respondent denied the allegations in response to the chargesheet. An inquiry
officer was appointed to adjudicate upon the charges. It is the appellant’s case that all
principles of natural justice were followed and the respondent was supplied with all
documents/material relied upon by the appellant-Bank. The inquiry officer
concluded the inquiry and submitted the report dated 6.12.1995 opining that all
charges stood proved against the respondent.

Consequently, the respondent was served with a show cause notice dated 28.2.1996 by the
Disciplinary Authority proposing the punishment of dismissal from service. The respondent
submitted a reply but the Disciplinary Authority after considering the reply proceeded to uphold the
finding and impose the penalty of dismissal from service vide order dated 11.5.1996.

5. The respondent filed an appeal before the appellate authority but the appellate authority rejected
the appeal vide order dated 10.9.1996.

6. The respondent sought to raise an industrial dispute and the Central Government referred the
d i s p u t e   v i d e   G . O .   d a t e d   3 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 0 3   t o   t h e   P r e s i d i n g   O f f i c e r ,   C e n t r a l   G o v e r n m e n t
Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Kanpur on the issue whether the action of the Management imposing
the penalty of dismissal was justified and legal.

7. The proceedings were contested before the Tribunal and the Tribunal framed a preliminary issue
on the question of fairness of the domestic inquiry. The Tribunal vide order dated 15.11.2011 decided
the preliminary issue against the appellant as the appellant- Management/Bank had failed to
produce original documents and most photocopies of the relevant pages were not readable. It was,
thus, concluded that there was violation of the principles of natural justice. However, the Tribunal
granted an opportunity to the appellant-Bank to prove the charges against respondent by adducing
evidence. The Bank led its evidence by producing five witnesses while the respondent examined
himself. The Tribunal vide award dated 21.2.2013 answered the reference against the respondent
opining that the appellant- Bank/Management had been successful in establishing all the charges
against the respondent. On the issue of quantum of punishment also it was held that the same was
commensurate to the charges levelled and proved against the respondent.

8. The appellant sought to assail this order of the Tribunal by filing writ petition, being WP(C) No.
53458/2013, before the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad. In terms of the impugned judgment
dated 31.5.2018, the said writ petition has been allowed while remitting matter back in respect of
charges 4 & 5. The impugned judgment held that when the earlier departmental proceedings were
found to be violative of the principles of natural justice then no findings vis-a-vis charges 1, 2, 3, 6 &
7 should have been arrived at, based on the plea that the Bank led evidence only in respect of
charges 4 & 5. In respect of charges 4 & 5 it was opined that on the request of the respondent the

3

Indian Overseas Bank vs Om Prakash Lal Srivsatava on 19 January, 2022

signatures of Mrs. Meera Srivastava should have been got compared with her admitted signatures by
an expert and then only a correct conclusion could have been arrived at whether the signatures on
the account opening form or the withdrawal form have been forged by the respondent or not and the
Tribunal should have refrained from acting like an expert. This was so as fraud was alleged and a
degree of investigation should have been a standard which is resorted to by a criminal court.

9. We may notice at this stage that the inquiry officer had opined that while observing the admitted
signatures in comparison with the signatures in question from a banker’s eye it could be said that
there is absence of similarity. Mrs. Meera Srivastava’s claim was that even the account was opened
fraudulently without her ever visiting the bank. The position was the same with respect to two
withdrawal slips of Rs.7,000/- and Rs.13,000/-. Mrs. Meera Srivastava had corroborated this aspect
in her deposition. In the deposition she accepted that both her and the respondent were members of
a joint family but the drafts were given to the respondent for safe-keeping and when after one and a
half month she asked the respondent to return her draft he refused to do so on one pretext or the
other. Thus, two or three months later she complained to the bank on learning that the drafts had
been encashed at the Branch. On making the complaint she got her money from the Bank. In her
cross- examination it was never put to her that she had gone to the Bank to open the account and the
account opening form bears her signatures nor was it put to her that she had gone to the Bank to
withdraw the amounts of Rs.7,000/- and Rs.13,000/-. Her statement was opined to have been
trustworthy by both the inquiry officer and the Industrial Tribunal. Submissions of the Appellant:

10. It was the submission of the learned counsel for the appellant that the High Court fell into an
error in applying the standards of proof of criminal proceedings to disciplinary proceedings as the
misconduct by an employee in disciplinary proceedings is to be evaluated on the basis of
probabilities and preponderance of evidence. There was sufficient evidence to show that the
respondent committed fraud and forgery by manipulating the signatures of the complainant Mrs.
Meera Srivastava, opening an account, operating the account and appropriating the sum of
Rs.20,000/- received through a demand draft as compensation on the demise of her husband. The
respondent took advantage of the complainant being his sister-in-law. The complainant has given
clear and unequivocal testimony on oath before the Tribunal and nothing had come out to the
contrary in her cross-examination. In fact, regarding this aspect, it was submitted that there was no
material cross-examination and there is no reason to doubt her testimony.

11. Insofar as the remaining charges are concerned, the documents led to an irresistible conclusion
that even those charges relating to insubordination, disobeying the orders of the higher authorities,
forging the suspension letters were proved and even by themselves were sufficient to award the
punishment of dismissal from service. Submissions of the Respondent:

12. Learned counsel for the respondent on the other hand pleaded that in terms of the impugned
judgment charges other than charges 4 & 5 were in any case not proved as no evidence had been led
in that behalf and reliance could not be placed only on documents.

13. It was further submitted that charges 4 & 5 were also not proved and sought to refer to the
judgment of this Court in Lalit Popli v. Canara Bank1 more specifically para 13, which reads as

4

under:

Indian Overseas Bank vs Om Prakash Lal Srivsatava on 19 January, 2022

“13. It is to be noted that under Sections 45 and 47 of the Evidence Act, the Court has
to take a view on the opinion of others, whereas under Section 73 of the said Act, the
Court by its own comparison of writings can form its opinion. Evidence of the
identity of handwriting is dealt with in three Sections of the Evidence Act. They are
Sections 45, 47 and 73. Both under Sections 45 and 47 the evidence is an opinion. In
the former case it is by a scientific comparison and in the latter on the (2003) 3 SCC
583 basis of familiarity resulting from frequent observations and experiences. In both
the cases, the Court is required to satisfy itself by such means as are open to conclude
that the opinion may be acted upon. Irrespective of an opinion of the Handwriting
Expert, the Court can compare the admitted writing with disputed writing and come
to its own independent conclusion. Such exercise of comparison is permissible under
Section 73 of the Evidence Act. Ordinarily, Sections 45 and 73 are complementary to
each other. Evidence of Handwriting Expert need not be invariably corroborated. It is
for the Court to decide whether to accept such an uncorroborated evidence or not. It
is clear that even when experts' evidence is not there, Court has power to compare the
writings and decide the matter.

[See Murari Lal vs. State of Madhya Pradesh (1980) 1 SCC 704]” Conclusion:

14. On having considered the rival submissions of the learned counsel for the parties, we are of the
view that the High Court has fallen into an error in coming to the conclusion in the impugned
judgment and directing, once again, the matter to be remitted to the Industrial Tribunal to now seek
opinion of a hand writing expert.

15. We would like to emphasise at the threshold that there are certain inherent legal limitations to
the scrutiny of an award of a Tribunal by the High Court while exercising jurisdiction under Article
226 of the Constitution of India. We may refer to the judgment of this Court in GE Power India Ltd.
(Formerly Known as M/s. Alstom Projects Ltd.) v. A. Aziz2. If there is no jurisdictional error or
violation of natural justice or error of law apparent on the face of the record, there is no occasion for
the High Court to get into the merits of the controversy as an appellate court. That too, on the aspect
of an opinion formed in respect of two sets of signatures where the inquiry was held by an officer of
the bank who came to an opinion on a bare comparison of the signatures that there is a difference in
the same. It has been looked at from the perspective of a “banker’s eye”. This is, of course, apart
from the testimony of the sister- in-law of the respondent.

16. We have in the course of noting the submissions of the learned counsel for the parties in the
context of the factual matrix recorded in para 9 that the Inquiry Officer had himself opined while
observing the admitted signatures in comparison with the signatures in question from a “banker’s
eye”, it was not just the ipse dixit of the Inquiry Officer but was based on the deposition of the
sister-in-law of the respondent, Mrs. Meera Srivastava. The deposition of Mrs. Meera Srivastava was
clear and unambiguous. She was staying in a joint family of which the respondent was a part. She
unfortunately lost her husband in an accident. The two drafts were received from his employer and

5

those drafts were 2020 SCC Online SC 782.

Indian Overseas Bank vs Om Prakash Lal Srivsatava on 19 January, 2022

kept in custody with the respondent, possibly because he was a banker and the elder brother of her
deceased husband. Instead of extending the benefits of the same to her, the respondent went on a
path of opening an account jointly in his and his sister-in-law’s name, presenting the drafts, and
drawing the amounts with appropriation of the same to himself. Mrs. Meera Srivastava had not even
visited the bank to sign the account opening form or the signature cards, nor had she presented the
drafts or signed the encashment vouchers. In fact, it is only when she complained about not
receiving the amount that the bank inquired into it and, at least, the money was transferred to her.
Her cross-examination elicited nothing, nor for that matter was it put to her in cross-examination
that she had ever visited the bank, opened the account or signed the encashment vouchers. The
relationships in the family were not estranged nor was there any endeavour to “fix” the respondent
by a relative. In our view this evidence was enough to implicate the respondent.

17. The High Court appears to have applied the test of criminal proceedings to departmental
proceedings while traversing the path of requirement of a hand writing expert to be called for the
said purpose. This would go contrary to the settled legal position enunciated by this Court. It would
suffice for us to refer to a recent judgment in Ashoo Surendranath Tewari v. Deputy Superintendent
of Police, EOW, CBI 3 where it has been observed while referring to earlier judicial precedents, that
the standard of proof in departmental proceedings, being based on preponderance of probability, is
somewhat lower than the standard of proof in criminal proceedings where the case has to be proved
beyond reasonable doubt.

18. We may also notice that the High Court has opined that only charges 4 & 5 could really have
been gone into by the Industrial Tribunal, which required further evidence in its opinion, of a hand
writing expert. So far as the other charges are concerned, a conclusion was reached that no further
evidence was led.

19. In our view this is neither the correct approach nor borne out of the record. Evidence was led.
Even earlier, the material in respect of other charges emanates from the record of the bank which
shows the conduct of the respondent which are apparent from the manner of framing of the charges
themselves and the material led in support thereof. Thus, even the aspect of the other charges could
not have been brushed aside in the manner it purports to. On the matter being remitted back, two
witnesses (2020) 9 SCC 636 deposed as to these aspects, being MW-3 and MW-4. The respondent
was a clerk-cum-cashier. It is a post of confidence. The respondent breached that confidence. In
fact, the respondent breached the trust of a widowed sister-in-law as well as of the bank, making it
hardly a case for interference either on law or on moral grounds. The punishment imposed on the
respondent could also hardly be said to be disproportionate. The conduct established of the
respondent did not entitle him to continue in service.

20. We are, thus, of the view that the impugned judgment dated 31.5.2018 of the High Court is liable
to be set aside and the challenge to the award of the Industrial Tribunal dated 21.2.2013 is repelled.

21. The appeal is accordingly allowed leaving the parties to bear their own costs.

6

...……………………………J. [Sanjay Kishan Kaul] ...……………………………J. [M.M. Sundresh] New Delhi.

Indian Overseas Bank vs Om Prakash Lal Srivsatava on 19 January, 2022

January 19, 2022.

7