Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

Author: L. Nageswara Rao

Bench: B. R. Gavai, L. Nageswara Rao

Reportable

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 607 of 2021

JACOB PULIYEL                                       …..PETITIONER

Versus
UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                               …..RESPONDENTS

JUDGMENT

L. NAGESWARA RAO, J.

1. The Petitioner was a member of the National Technical Advisory Group on Immunization
(NTAGI) and was advising the Government of India on vaccines. He has filed this Writ Petition in
public interest seeking the following reliefs:

“(a) Direct the respondents to release the entire segregated trial data for each of the
phases of trials that have been undertaken with respect to the vaccines being
administered in India; and

(b) Direct the respondent No 2 to disclose the detailed minutes of the meetings of the
Subject Expert Committee and the NTGAI with regard to the vaccines as directed by
the 59th Parliamentary Standing Committee Report and the members who
constituted 1 | Page the committee for the purpose of each approval meeting; and

(c) Direct the respondent No.2 to disclose the reasoned decision of the DCGI granting
approval or rejecting an application for emergency use authorization of vaccines and
the documents and reports submitted to the DCGI in support of such application;
and

(d) Direct the respondents to disclose the post vaccination data regarding adverse
events, vaccinees who got infected with Covid, those who needed hospitalization and
those who died after such infection post vaccination and direct the respondents to

1

Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

widely publicize the data collection of such adverse event through the advertisement
of toll free telephone numbers where such complaints can be registered; and

(e) Declare that vaccine mandates, in any manner whatsoever, even by way of making
it a precondition for accessing any benefits or services, is a violation of rights of
citizens and unconstitutional; and

(f) Pass any other orders as this Hon'ble Court deems fit.”

2. In the Writ Petition, the Petitioner highlighted the adverse consequences of
emergency approval of vaccines in India, the need for transparency in publishing
segregated clinical trial data of vaccines, the need for disclosure of clinical data, lack
of transparency in regulatory approvals, minutes and constitution of the expert
bodies, imperfect evaluation of Adverse Events Following Immunisation (AEFIs)

2 | Page and vaccine mandates in the absence of informed consent being unconstitutional. The
Petitioner further stated in the Writ Petition that coercive vaccination would result in interfering
with the principle of informed self-determination of individuals, protected by Article 21 of the
Constitution of India.

3. Notice was issued in the Writ Petition on 09.08.2021. An additional affidavit was filed by the
Petitioner on 03.09.2021 raising additional grounds. It was averred in the additional affidavit that
natural immunity is long-lasting and robust in comparison to vaccine immunity and that vaccines
do not prevent infection or transmission of COVID-19. The Petitioner further stated that vaccines
are not effective in preventing against infection from new variants of COVID-19. The Petitioner
relied on news articles on the fourth nationwide serological survey conducted by Indian Council of
Medical Research (ICMR) in June and July, 2021, according to which up to two-thirds of the Indian
population above the age of 6 years had already been infected with COVID-19 and had antibodies
specific to the SARS-CoV-2 virus. The Petitioner relied upon other news articles and research
studies conducted to state that there had been breakthrough infections even amongst vaccinated
people. Urging that 3 | Page research has shown that vaccinated people also transmit the virus, the
Petitioner contended that vaccine mandates are meaningless.

4. The Petitioner filed an Interlocutory Application seeking a direction to restrain all authorities and
institutions, public and private, from mandating the vaccine in any manner whatsoever, on a
precondition of accessing any service or on pain of any penalty. The Petitioner has drawn the
attention of this Court to various restrictions that were placed by State Governments, other
employers and educational institutions on unvaccinated individuals. The Petitioner contended that
mandating vaccination for access to resources, public places and means of earning livelihood would
be in violation of their fundamental rights, especially so, when scientific studies have shown that
unvaccinated persons do not pose more danger of transmission of the virus when compared to
vaccinated persons.

2

Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

5. Respondent No. 1, the Union of India, has raised a preliminary objection regarding the
maintainability of the Writ Petition. The Union of India has further contended that the serious
threat posed by the unprecedented pandemic which had devastating effects on the entire world
called for emergency measures. It is accepted world over that 4 | Page vaccination for COVID-19 is
necessary to avoid infection. India was one of the few countries in the world which succeeded in
manufacturing vaccines for protection from COVID-19, one of which was COVAXIN, India’s
indigenous vaccine and the other being COVISHIELD, which was manufactured by Serum Institute
of India with technology transfer from AstraZeneca / Oxford University. The country started one of
the largest inoculation programmes in the world in larger public interest, while tackling challenges
of vaccine hesitancy, effect of the second wave of the pandemic and other such adverse
circumstances. The Union of India expressed serious doubts about the intention of the Petitioner in
filing this Writ Petition. As we have not seen the end of the pandemic caused due to the COVID-19
virus, any interference with the steps taken by the Union on the basis of the advice given by the
NTAGI and other expert bodies would provide impetus to the already prevailing vaccine hesitancy in
certain sections of the society. In their counter-affidavit, the Union of India reminded us that
decisions of domain experts should not normally be interfered with in judicial review and that this
Court should not sit in appeal over a scientific process undertaken by domain experts on a subject
which is not the expertise of any judicial forum. The long-

5 | Page drawn procedure for making applications for issuance of licenses for manufacturing
vaccines and the statutory regime governing the same have been referred to in the counter- affidavit
to emphasize that the Union of India has not been remiss in grant of emergency licences. There is a
detailed procedure for approval with checks at every stage which has been followed for grant of
emergency approval. In so far as disclosure of clinical trial data is concerned, the Union of India
referred to the National Ethical Guidelines for Biomedical and Health Research involving Human
Participants published by the ICMR, which require privacy and confidentiality of human
participants to be maintained. Accordingly, the Union of India contended that such details
pertaining to identity and records of the participants in the clinical trial data cannot be disclosed to
the public as per the prevailing statutory regime. It was asserted by the Union of India that the
remaining data has already been made available in the public domain.

6. On the subject of monitoring of AEFIs, the Union of India brought to our attention established
procedures and protocols in place for surveillance of AEFIs established under the National Adverse
Event Following Immunisation Surveillance Guideline. Further, the multi-tier structure 6 | Page
comprising AEFI Committees at the state and national levels, providing guidance, carrying out
investigation and causality assessment was elaborated upon. Details of the procedures followed in
accordance with globally accepted practices were highlighted in the counter-affidavit. According to
the Union of India, all cases of serious and severe AEFI, including reported deaths, are subjected to
scientific and technical review process with causality assessments done at the state and national
levels by trained experts to ascertain whether a particular AEFI can be attributed to the vaccine. In
the counter-affidavit, it was also made clear that COVID-19 vaccination is voluntary and that the
Government of India encourages all individuals to take vaccination in the interest of public health,
as the individual’s ill health has a direct effect on the society. It was also made clear that COVID-19
vaccination is not linked to any benefits or services.

3

Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

7. Counter-affidavits have been filed by other Respondents as well. The vaccine manufacturers, i.e.,
Respondents Nos. 4 and 5, have brought to the notice of this Court that approval to their vaccines
was granted after strict compliance of the procedure prescribed. The States of Tamil Nadu,
Maharashtra, Delhi and Madhya Pradesh have also filed counter-affidavits, justifying the
restrictions that were 7 | Page placed on unvaccinated persons in public interest. The details of the
restrictions have been discussed later.

8. We have heard Mr. Prashant Bhushan, learned counsel for the Petitioner, Mr. Tushar Mehta,
learned Solicitor General of the Union of India, Mr. S. Guru Krishnakumar, learned Senior Counsel
for Respondent No. 4, Mr. Amit Anand Tiwari, learned Additional Advocate General for the State of
Tamil Nadu, Mr. Rahul Chitnis, learned counsel for the State of Maharashtra, Ms. Mrinal Gopal
Elker, learned counsel for the State of Madhya Pradesh and Ms. Shyel Trehan, learned counsel for
Respondent No. 5.

Preliminary Issues I. Maintainability

9. The learned Solicitor General raised a preliminary objection as to the maintainability of the Writ
Petition which is filed in public interest. He stated that this Writ Petition, if entertained, would harm
public interest, as any observation made by this Court against vaccination would result in potential
threat of vaccine hesitancy.

10. The Petitioner is a paediatrician, who was a member of the NTAGI earlier. It has been stated in
the Writ Petition that he has a number of publications in internationally peer- reviewed medical
journals to his credit. The Petitioner 8 | Page strongly believes that there cannot be coercive
vaccination, especially of inadequately tested vaccines, which amounts to an intrusion into the
individual’s personal autonomy. He is also of the firm opinion that an individual is deprived of the
opportunity to give informed consent in the absence of availability of segregated data of clinical
trials of the vaccines. He has also aired further grievances pertaining to poor evaluation and
reporting of AEFIs.

11. This Court is entitled to entertain a public interest litigation moved by a person having
k n o w l e d g e   i n   t h e   s u b j e c t - m a t t e r   o f   t h e   l i s   a n d ,   t h u s ,   h a v i n g   a n   i n t e r e s t   t h e r e i n ,   a s
contradistinguished from a busybody, in the welfare of people1. The Union of India has objected to
the maintainability of the Writ Petition on the ground that the questions raised by the Petitioner
may result in raising doubts in the minds of the citizenry about the vaccination, adding to the
already existing vaccine hesitancy in the country. The consequence would be a debilitating effect on
public health and therefore, the petition cannot be said to be in public interest. In other words, the
maintainability of the Writ Petition is raised on the ground that the sensitive issue of vaccination
should not be dealt with by this Court, as it 1 Indian Banks’ Association, Bombay v. Devkala
Consultancy Service (2004) 11 SCC 1 9 | Page has the propensity of fuelling doubts about the efficacy
of the vaccines.

12. From the rejoinder affidavit submitted by the Petitioner, we note that a petition had been filed by
the Petitioner earlier, during his tenure as a member of the NTAGI, with respect to the Rotavac

4

Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

vaccine claiming that adequate data from the clinical trials had not been provided to the NTAGI.
The rejoinder affidavit further states that the petition was dismissed by this Court, on the ground
that the Petitioner could not have filed the said petition while being a member of the NTAGI. The
enthusiasm of the Petitioner in approaching this Court has not gone unobserved. However, as the
issues raised by the Petitioner have a bearing on public health and pertain to the fundamental rights
of the country’s populace, we are of the opinion that they warrant due consideration by this Court.
Therefore, we are not inclined to entertain the challenge mounted by the Union of India to the
maintainability of the Writ Petition. II. Judicial review of executive decisions based on expert
opinion

13. Yet another ground taken by the Union of India is that this Court has to yield to executive
decision and action in the matter of administration of drugs / vaccines. The existence 10 | P a g e of
any other possible view cannot enable this Court to interfere in matters relating to opinion of
domain experts by sitting in appeal over such decisions, while adjudicating a writ petition filed
under Article 32 of the Constitution. The learned Solicitor General supported the stand of the Union
of India with reference to the law laid down by this Court in Academy of Nutrition Improvement v.
Union of India 2, G. Sundarrajan v. Union of India 3 and Shri Sitaram Sugar Company Ltd. v. Union
of India 4. Further, the learned Solicitor General relied upon the judgments of the Supreme Court of
the United States (hereinafter, the “US Supreme Court”) in Henning Jacobson v.

Commonwealth of Massachusetts5, Zucht v. King6 and in Docket No. 21A240 titled Joseph R. Biden
v. Missouri dated 13.01.2022 and the judgment of the Supreme Court of New South Wales
(hereinafter, the “NSW Supreme Court”) in Kassam v. Hazzard; Henry v. Hazzard 7 to bolster his
submissions that courts should not lightly interfere with matters of policy concerning the safety and
health of the people and it is not the court’s function to determine the 2 (2011) 8 SCC 274 3 (2013) 6
SCC 620 4 (1990) 3 SCC 223 5 197 US 11 (1905) 6 260 US 174 (1922) 7 [2021] NSWSC 1320 11 | P a g
e merits of the exercise of power by the executive. The learned Solicitor General was joined by Mr.
Amit Anand Tiwari, learned Additional Advocate General for the State of Tamil Nadu, in
emphasising the limited scope of judicial review in matters of policy framed on the basis of expert
opinion.

14. In opposition, the Petitioner argued that matters of public importance involving invasion of
fundamental rights of individuals cannot be brushed aside by this Court on the ground that they are
beyond the jurisdiction of this Court. This Court has a duty to safeguard the fundamental rights of
individuals and issues raised herein are of seminal importance which ought to be decided after
assessing the relevant material placed before this Court by both sides. Mr. Bhushan referred to the
judgement of the High Court of New Zealand in Ryan Yardley v. Minister for Workplace Relations
and Safety8 in support of his submission that the scientific data and evidence that was produced
before the High Court of New Zealand was assessed to adjudge the efficacy of vaccines in preventing
transmission of the COVID- 19 virus.

8 [2022] NZHC 291 12 | P a g e

5

Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

15. It was further argued by Mr. Bhushan that the judgments relied upon by the Union of India are
not applicable to the facts of this case. He relied upon the judgments of this Court in Delhi
Development Authority v. Joint Action Committee, Allottee of SFS Flats 9, Directorate of Film
Festivals v. Gaurav Ashwin Jain 10 and an order of this Court in Distribution of Essential Supplies
and Services During Pandemic, In re 11 and submitted that policy decisions taken by the executive
are not beyond the scope of judicial review, if they are manifestly arbitrary or unreasonable.

16. Before examining the parameters of judicial review in this case, it is profitable to refer to
judgments from beyond our borders which have dealt with the scope of judicial review in matters
relating to public health and vaccinations, in particular. Compulsory vaccination against small pox
was the subject-matter of Jacobson (supra) decided in 1905. The US Supreme Court was of the
opinion that the mandate of the local government for compulsory vaccination was binding on every
individual. The safety and health of the people has to be protected by the government and the
judiciary is not 9 (2008) 2 SCC 672 10 (2007) 4 SCC 737 11 (2021) 7 SCC 772 13 | P a g e competent
to interfere with decisions taken in the interest of public health. The Court can interfere by way of
judicial review of legislative action in matters of public health only when there is no real or
substantial relation to the object of the legislation or when there is plain, palpable invasion of rights
secured by fundamental law and thereby, give effect to the Constitution.

17. In the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic, restrictions on attendance at religious services in areas
classified as ‘red’ or ‘orange’ zones were imposed by an executive order issued by the Governor of
New York. The said restrictions were challenged on the ground that they violate the free exercise
clause of the First Amendment of the Constitution of the United States. By a majority of 6:3, the US
Supreme Court in Roman Catholic Diocese v. Cuomo12 granted injunctive relief on being satisfied
that the executive order struck at the very heart of the First Amendment’s guarantee of religious
liberty. While doing so, the US Supreme Court observed that the members of the Court are not
public health experts and they should respect the judgment of those with special expertise and
responsibility in this area. However, the Constitution cannot be put away and forgotten even in a 12
141 S. Ct. 63 (2020) 14 | P a g e pandemic. Gorsuch, J., who wrote a concurring opinion, observed
that Jacobson (supra) hardly supports cutting the Constitution loose during a pandemic. Jacobson
(supra) was distinguished by Gorsuch, J., who held that the Court did not interfere with the
challenged law in Jacobson (supra) only because it did not “ contravene the Constitution of the
United States” or “infringe any right granted or secured by ” it. A word of caution sounded by
Gorsuch, J. is to the effect that the Court cannot stay out of the way in times of crisis, when the
Constitution is under attack. In his dissent, Roberts, C.J. held that the injunction sought would not
be in public interest, especially when it concerns public health and safety needs which calls for swift
government action in everchanging circumstances. He relied upon the earlier order passed by the
US Supreme Court in South Bay United Pentecostal Church v. Newsom 13 wherein it was recognised
that courts must grant elected representatives broad discretion when they undertake to act in areas
fraught with medical and scientific uncertainties.

18. Biden v. Missouri (supra) related to vaccine mandates for healthcare providers. The Secretary of
Health and Human Services issued a rule on being convinced that vaccination of 13 140 S. Ct. 1613
(2020) 15 | P a g e healthcare workers in facilities in the Medicare and Medicaid Programs against

6

Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

COVID–19 was “necessary for the health and safety of individuals to whom care and services are
furnished”. The said rule was challenged and the US District Courts for the Western District of
Louisiana and the Eastern District of Missouri each entered preliminary injunctions against its
enforcement. The appeals filed against the said injunction were rejected by the Fifth Circuit in
Louisiana and the Eighth Circuit in Missouri. Aggrieved thereby, the Government moved the US
Supreme Court seeking for a stay on the preliminary injunctions passed by the US District Courts.
While granting stay of the preliminary injunctions, by its plural opinion the US Supreme Court held
that the role of courts in reviewing decisions taken by the executive should be to ensure that the
executive “ has acted within a zone of reasonableness”.

19. Having been aggrieved by certain orders of the Minister for Health and Medical Research that
required people working in the construction, aged care and education sectors to be compulsorily
vaccinated, Al-Munir Kassam and three others, along with Natasha Henry and five others,
approached the NSW Supreme Court challenging the 16 | P a g e constitutional validity of the
decision. While considering the grounds of challenge, the NSW Supreme Court in Kassam v.
Hazzard (supra) was of the view that “it is not the Court’s function to determine the merits of the
exercise of the power by the Minister to make the impugned orders, much less for the court to
choose between plausible responses to the risks to the public health posed by the Delta variant ”.
The NSW Supreme Court further observed that it is not the court’s function to conclusively
determine the effectiveness of some of the alleged treatments for those infected or the effectiveness
of COVID-19 vaccines, especially their capacity to inhibit the spread of the disease, which are all
matters of merits, policy and fact for the decision maker and not the court. The NSW Supreme Court
emphasised that its only function is to determine the legal validity of the impugned orders. The said
view of the NSW Supreme Court was approved by the New South Wales Court of Appeal in Kassam
v. Hazzard; Henry v. Hazzard14.

20. The Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety passed COVID-19 Public Health Response
(Specified Work Vaccinations) Order 2021, by which it was determined that work carried out by
certain police and defence force 14 [2021] NSWCA 299 17 | P a g e personnel could only be
undertaken by workers who have been vaccinated. Three police and defence force workers who did
not wish to be vaccinated sought judicial review of the said order before the High Court of New
Zealand (hereinafter, the “NZ High Court”). While adjudicating the dispute, the NZ High Court in
Ryan Yardley (supra) expressed its opinion that the choices made by governments on their response
to COVID-19 involve wide policy questions, including decisions on the use of border closures,
lockdowns, isolation requirements, vaccine mandates and many other measures, which are
decisions for the elected representatives to make. The NZ High Court made it clear that the Court
addresses narrower legal questions and the Court’s function is not to address the wider policy
questions. While referring to the evidence of experts, the NZ High Court stressed on the institutional
limitations on the Court’s ability to reach definitive conclusions but clarified that the Court must
exercise its constitutional responsibility to ensure that decisions are made lawfully. While relying
upon a judgment of the Court of Appeal of New Zealand in Ministry of Health v. Atkinson15, the NZ
High Court held that the Crown has the burden to demonstrate that a limitation of a fundamental 15
[2012] NZCA 184 18 | P a g e right is demonstrably justified. We have come to know that in the time
since the judgment in this matter was reserved, the decision of the NZ High Court in Ryan Yardley

7

(supra) has been appealed by the Government of New Zealand before the New Zealand Court of
Appeal.

Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

21. We shall now proceed to analyse the precedents of this Court on the ambit of judicial review of
public policies relating to health. It is well settled that the Courts, in exercise of their power of
judicial review, do not ordinarily interfere with the policy decisions of the executive unless the policy
can be faulted on grounds of mala fide, unreasonableness, arbitrariness or unfairness etc. Indeed,
arbitrariness, irrationality, perversity and mala fide will render the policy unconstitutional16. It is
neither within the domain of the courts nor the scope of judicial review to embark upon an enquiry
as to whether a particular public policy is wise or whether better public policy can be evolved. Nor
are the courts inclined to strike down a policy at the behest of a petitioner merely because it has
been urged that a different policy would have been fairer or wiser or more scientific or more
logical17. Courts do not and cannot act as 16 Ugar Sugar Works Ltd. v. Delhi Administration (2001)
3 SCC 635 17 Villianur Iyarkkai Padukappu Maiyam v. Union of India (2009) 7 SCC 561 19 | P a g e
appellate authorities examining the correctness, suitability and appropriateness of a policy, nor are
courts advisors to the executive on matters of policy which the executive is entitled to formulate. The
scope of judicial review when examining a policy of the Government is to check whether it violates
the fundamental rights of the citizens or is opposed to the provisions of the Constitution, or opposed
to any statutory provision or manifestly arbitrary 18.

22. This Court in a series of decisions has reiterated that courts should not rush in where even
scientists and medical experts are careful to tread. The rule of prudence is that courts will be
reluctant to interfere with policy decisions taken by the Government, in matters of public health,
after collecting and analysing inputs from surveys and research. Nor will courts attempt to
substitute their own views as to what is wise, safe, prudent or proper, in relation to technical issues
relating to public health in preference to those formulated by persons said to possess technical
expertise and rich experience19. Where expertise of a complex nature is expected of the State in
framing rules, the exercise of that power not demonstrated as arbitrary must be presumed to 18
Directorate of Film Festivals v. Gaurav Ashwin Jain (2007) 4 SCC 737 19 Academy of Nutrition
Improvement v. Union of India (2011) 8 SCC 274 20 | P a g e be valid as a reasonable restriction on
the fundamental right of the citizen and judicial review must halt at the frontiers. The Court cannot
re-weigh and substitute its notion of expedient solution. Within the wide judge-proof areas of policy
and judgment open to the government, if they make mistakes, correction is not in court but
elsewhere. That is the comity of constitutional jurisdictions in our jurisprudence. We cannot evolve
a judicial policy on medical issues. All judicial thought, Indian and Anglo-American, on the judicial
review power where rules under challenge relate to a specialised field and involve sensitive facets of
public welfare, has warned courts of easy assumption of unreasonableness of subordinate legislation
on the strength of half-baked studies of judicial generalists aided by the ad- hoc learning of counsel.
However, the Court certainly is the constitutional invigilator and must act to defend the citizen in
the assertion of his fundamental rights against executive tyranny draped in disciplinary power.20

23. There is no doubt that this Court has held in more than one judgment that where the decision of
the authority is in regard to a policy matter, this Court will not ordinarily interfere since decisions
on policy matters are taken based 20 Pyarali K. Tejani v. Mahadeo Ramchandra Dange (1974) 1 SCC

8

Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

167 21 | P a g e on expert knowledge of the persons concerned and courts are normally not equipped
to question the correctness of a policy decision. However, this does not mean that courts have to
abdicate their right to scrutinise whether the policy in question is formulated keeping in mind all the
relevant facts and the said policy can be held to be beyond the pale of discrimination or
unreasonableness, bearing in mind the material on record.21 In Delhi Development Authority
(supra), this Court held that an executive order termed as a policy decision is not beyond the pale of
judicial review. Whereas the superior courts may not interfere with the nitty- gritty of the policy, or
substitute one by the other but it will not be correct to contend that the court shall lay its judicial
hands off, when a plea is raised that the impugned decision is a policy decision. Interference
therewith on the part of the superior court would not be without jurisdiction as it is subject to
judicial review. It was further held therein that the policy decision is subject to judicial review on the
following grounds:

a) if it is unconstitutional;

b) if it is dehors the provisions of the Act and the regulations;

21 Union of India v. Dinesh Engineering Corporation (2001) 8 SCC 491 22 | P a g e

c) if the delegatee has acted beyond its power of delegation;

d) if the executive policy is contrary to the statutory or a larger policy.

24. During the second wave of COVID-19 pandemic, this Court in Distribution of Essential Supplies
& Services during Pandemic (supra), to which one of us was a party (L Nageswara Rao, J.), dealt
with issues of vaccination policy, pricing and other connected issues. While doing so, this Court held
that policy-making continues to be the sole domain of the executive and the judiciary does not
possess the authority or competence to assume the role of the executive. It was made clear that the
Court cannot second guess the wisdom of the executive when it chooses between two competing and
efficacious policy measures. However, it continues to exercise jurisdiction to determine if the chosen
policy measure conforms to the standards of reasonableness, militates against manifest
arbitrariness and protects the right to life of all persons.

25. There can be no ambiguity in the principles of law relating to judicial review laid down by this
Court. A perusal of the judgments referred to above would clearly show that this Court would be
slow in interfering with matters of policy, 23 | P a g e especially those connected to public health.
There is also no doubt that wide latitude is given to executive opinion which is based on expert
advice. However, it does not mean that this Court will not look into cases where violation of
fundamental rights is involved and the decision of the executive is manifestly arbitrary or
unreasonable. It is true that this Court lacks the expertise to arrive at conclusions from divergent
opinions of scientific issues but that does not prevent this Court from examining the issues raised in
this Writ Petition, especially those that concern violation of Article 21 of the Constitution of India.

26. Identifying the issues in the present matter, they can be divided as follows:

9

I. Vaccine mandates being violative of Article 21 of the Constitution of India.

Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

II. Non-disclosure of segregated clinical trial data in public domain.

III. Improper collection and reporting of AEFIs.

IV.    Vaccination of children.
I. Vaccine Mandates

A. Submissions

27. Mr. Bhushan submitted that there is nothing wrong in the Government
encouraging the people to get vaccinated.

However, coercive vaccination from the pain of denial of essential services is plainly
unconstitutional, being violative 24 | P a g e of the principle of bodily autonomy and the right to
access one’s means of livelihood. Though the Union of India has made a categorical submission that
vaccines are voluntary, the State Governments have been placing restrictions on unvaccinated
people by denying them access to public places and services. He referred to: (i) an order passed by
the Government of NCT of Delhi on 08.10.2021 by which government employees, including
frontline workers and healthcare workers, as well as teachers and staff working in schools and
colleges were not to be allowed to attend their respective offices and institutions without the first
dose of vaccination with effect from 16.10.2021; (ii) a directive issued by the Government of Madhya
Pradesh on 08.11.2021 stating that it was mandatory to be vaccinated with two doses of the vaccine
to get food grains at fair price shops;

(iii) an order passed by the Government of Maharashtra dated 27.11.2021 requiring persons to be
fully vaccinated if they are connected with any program, event, shop, establishment, mall and for
utilising public transport; (iv) an order issued by the Government of Tamil Nadu dated 18.11.2021
permitting only vaccinated people into open, public places, schools, colleges, hostels, boarding
houses, factories and shops; and other instances where students in 25 | P a g e the age group of 15 to
18 years were not permitted to appear for their examinations without being vaccinated.

28. Mr. Bhushan contended that there is need to balance individuals’ rights with public interest
concerning health. According to him, vaccine mandates can be on the basis of efficacy and safety of
vaccination and prevention of transmission. He submitted that there is sufficient evidence to the
effect that natural immunity acquired from a COVID-19 infection is long-lasting and robust in
comparison to vaccine immunity. Studies also indicate that vaccines do not prevent infection from
the virus or transmission amongst people. Vaccines are also ineffective in preventing infection from
new variants. According to serological studies, 75 per cent of the Indian population has already been
infected and is seropositive and, therefore, they have better immunity to infection than what is
provided by the vaccines. The vaccines which are being administered in this country are only
authorised for emergency use and the procedure for clinical trials of such vaccines has not been fully
complied with. In view of the lack of transparency in disclosure of trial data resulting in absence of

10

Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

informed consent, any vaccine mandate would be unconstitutional. Mr. Bhushan contended that
every individual has personal autonomy and cannot be 26 | P a g e forced to be vaccinated against
his will. For the said proposition, he relied on the judgments of Common Cause (A Registered
Society) v. Union of India 22, Aruna Ramachandra Shanbaug v. Union of India 23 and K. S.
Puttaswamy v. Union of India24. Imposing restrictions on the rights of persons who are
unvaccinated is totally unwarranted as there is no basis for discriminating against unvaccinated
persons. He relied upon scientific studies, opinions of experts and news articles to contend that
vaccinated people are also prone to infection and there is no difference between a vaccinated
individual and an unvaccinated person with respect to transmission of the virus. As there is no
serious threat of spread of the virus by an unvaccinated person in comparison to a vaccinated
person, placing restrictions on unvaccinated persons is meaningless.

29. Per contra, the learned Solicitor General of India contended that more than 180 crore doses had
been administered, resulting in a substantial number of individuals in the country being vaccinated.
He submitted that the vaccines have proved to be effective and safe and any indulgence by this Court
would result in vaccine hesitancy. 22 (2018) 5 SCC 1 23 (2011) 4 SCC 454 24 (2017) 10 SCC 1 27 | P a
g e The Government had taken extra care to appoint various committees to examine the efficacy,
safety, immunogenicity, pharmacodynamics of the vaccines before granting approvals. Some of the
material placed before this Court to bolster the Union of India’s submissions have been listed below:

(a) ‘Science Brief: SARS-CoV-2 Infection-induced and Vaccine-induced immunity’ of
the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) updated as on
29.10.2021, which in its conclusion states that:

“Numerous immunologic studies and a growing number of epidemiologic studies
have shown that vaccinating previously infected individuals significantly enhances
their immune response and effectively reduces the risk of subsequent infection,
including in the setting of increased circulation of more infectious variants. Although
the Delta variant and some other variants have shown increased resistance to
neutralization by both post-infection and post-vaccination sera in laboratory studies,
observed reduction in effectiveness has been modest, with continued strong
protection against hospitalization, severe disease and death.”

28 | P a g e

(b) A study conducted by researchers of Christian Medical College, Vellore25, wherein it has been
concluded as follows: “Among symptomatic COVID-19 patients, prior vaccination with either
Covishield™ or Covaxin® impacted the severity of illness and reduced mortality when compared
with unvaccinated patients. Full vaccination conferred a substantially higher protective effect over
partial vaccination.” The results of the study also indicate that compared with unvaccinated
patients, partially vaccinated patients had milder disease, reduced requirement of oxygen, hospital
admission, ICU admission and mortality. Again, when fully vaccinated patients were compared with
unvaccinated individuals, full vaccination was associated with significantly less disease severity,
requirement of respiratory supports, hospital admission, ICU admission and mortality. The study

11

further showed that majority of the patients screened who required hospitalisation were
unvaccinated.

Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

25 Abhilash, Kundavaram Paul Prabhakar et al. “Impact of prior vaccination with CovishieldTM and
Covaxin® on mortality among symptomatic COVID-19 patients during the second wave of the
pandemic in South India during April and May 2021: a cohort study.” Vaccine vol. 40,13 (2022):
2107-2113 29 | P a g e

(c) A study conducted by researchers of All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New
Delhi26, which states that:

“We evaluated the association between COVID-19 vaccination status (the number of
vaccine shots received and time interval since the last dose) and the vaccines’ clinical
efficacy in India in preventing the disease and its severity. This study has several
noteworthy findings.

Firstly, both the Indian vaccines provided a significant protective role in preventing
the disease among people who had a clinical suspicion of COVID-19. Secondly, These
vaccines protected from progression to a severe form of the disease among the
patients who turned RT-

PCR positive despite getting vaccinated. The probability of hospitalisation was about
eight times less, and ICU admission/death was about fourteen times lesser among
fully vaccinated patients in comparison to unvaccinated RT-PCR positive patients.
Thirdly, the protective efficacy of the vaccines had a dose-dependent effect. The
effectiveness is maximum among individuals who 26 Aakashneel Bhattacharya,
Piyush Ranjan, Tamoghna Ghosh, Harsh Agarwal, Sukriti Seth, Ganesh Tarachand
Maher, Ashish Datt Upadhyay, Arvind Kumar, Upendra Baitha, Gaurav Gupta, Bindu
Prakash, Sada Nand Dwivedi, Naveet Wig “Evaluation of the dose-

effect association between the number of doses and duration since the last dose of COVID-19
vaccine, and its efficacy in preventing the disease and reducing disease severity: A single centre,
cross-sectional analytical study from India” Diabetes & Metabolic Syndrome: Clinical Research &
Reviews Volume 15, Issue 5 (2021), 102238 30 | P a g e received both doses of vaccination at least
two weeks before the onset of their symptoms.”

(d) A study conducted by researchers of AIIMS, Patna 27, which concludes as follows: “COVID-19
vaccination was found to be effective in infection prevention. One out of two and four out of five
individuals were found to be protected against SARS-CoV-2 infection following partial and full
vaccination, respectively. The vaccinated individuals had lesser LOS compared to unvaccinated
ones. Additionally, the fully vaccinated individuals were less likely to develop severe disease. ” LOS
herein refers to the length of hospital stays.

12

Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

30. On behalf of the State of Tamil Nadu, Mr. Amit Anand Tiwari, learned Additional Advocate
General, submitted that the restrictions placed by way of the circular dated 18.11.2021 are within the
competence of the State in exercise of its powers under the Disaster Management Act, 2005
(hereinafter, the “DM Act”) and the Tamil Nadu Public Health Act, 1939. Section 76(2)(b) thereof
empowers the State Government to make vaccinations compulsory, in the event of a declaration by
the Government of an outbreak of a 27 Singh C, Naik BN, Pandey S, et al. “Effectiveness of
COVID-19 vaccine in preventing infection and disease severity: a case-control study from an Eastern
State of India.” Epidemiology and Infection. 2021;149:e224 31 | P a g e notified disease. He
submitted that the restrictions placed by the circular dated 18.11.2021 are in larger public interest
and cannot be said to be unreasonable restrictions, as these were an essential facet of the
precautionary approach adopted by the State of Tamil Nadu in dealing with the unprecedented
pandemic. According to Mr. Tiwari, these restrictions were in furtherance of the State realising the
importance of curtailing the spread of COVID-19. The unchecked spread of the virus could lead to
further dangerous mutations. While referring to opinions of experts in the field of health, including
that of the World Health Organization (WHO), the United Nations International Children’s
Emergency Fund (UNICEF) and the Oxford Vaccine group, as well as scientific studies published in
the New England Journal of Medicine, the Lancet and the International Journal of Scientific
Studies, it was submitted on behalf of the State of Tamil Nadu that vaccination prevents severe
disease and significantly reduces hospitalisation and mortality and that vaccines continued to be
highly effective in preventing severe disease and death. The measures were justified on the ground
that they were not only aimed for the safety of a particular individual but also served a greater
purpose of ensuring safety of the community at large.

32 | P a g e

31. Mr. Rahul Chitnis, learned counsel appearing for the State of Maharashtra, referred to the
information provided by the WHO to contend that vaccines save infected individuals from “life
threatening complications, … and consequential untimely death” and therefore, vaccine mandate
issued by the State of Maharashtra is in the interest of general public. The restrictions that are
imposed are reasonable and cannot be said to “manifestly arbitrary” as they are issued only for a
temporary period with exclusions and are reviewed periodically by the State to assess if relaxations
can be granted. He submitted that there is no compulsion to get vaccinated, however, in view of the
serious threat that not being vaccinated poses to the right of life and personal liberty of the larger
population, certain unavoidable restrictions have been imposed, especially given that strict
adherence to social distancing and masking is significantly compromised in bigger cities.

32. The complaint of the Petitioner in relation to prevention of access to essential resources in the
State of Madhya Pradesh pertains to ration not being provided to unvaccinated persons through the
public distribution system. We were informed by the learned counsel for the State of 33 | P a g e
Madhya Pradesh that the order dated 08.11.2021, by which vaccination was made mandatory for
receiving ration from fair price shops, was not implemented and was eventually withdrawn on
07.01.2022.

13

Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

33. In the counter-affidavit filed on behalf of the Government of NCT of Delhi, it was submitted that
the order dated 08.10.2021 was issued by the Delhi Disaster Management Authority after due
application of mind, to control the spread of COVID-19 and mitigate its effects. Under Section
6(2)(i) of the DM Act, the National Disaster Management Authority has been issuing orders from
time to time directing State Governments and Union Territories, amongst other authorities, to take
effective measures to prevent the spread of COVID-19, and in furtherance of this, also permitted
States to impose further local restrictions. The Delhi Disaster Management Authority, in a meeting
held on 29.09.2021, decided to ensure 100 per cent vaccination of all Government employees,
frontline workers, healthcare workers as well as teachers and staff working in schools and colleges,
on the advice of medical and other experts. It was considered necessary as these individuals have
frequent interaction with the general public and vulnerable sections of the society and therefore,
pose greater risk of spreading the 34 | P a g e virus. While an individual may have a right to decide
against getting vaccinated, the State, however, has a statutory duty to regulate the interaction of
unvaccinated persons within the society in the interest of public health.

34. In his rejoinder, Mr. Bhushan, while reiterating his submissions, took exception to the
contradictory stand taken by the Union of India on COVID-19 vaccination being voluntary and not
mandatory. On one hand, the Union of India made it clear in the counter-affidavit that vaccination
is voluntary and on the other, a series of advisories and material had been filed by the Union of
India, supporting the claim of vaccination being mandatory. Mr. Bhushan submitted that the Union
of India has not provided any material to the Court contrary to what has been supplied by the
Petitioner furthering his scientific and legal contention that unvaccinated people pose no greater
danger than vaccinated individuals in the matter of transmission of the COVID-19 virus, and
therefore, there is no public health rationale in vaccine mandates. In addition to the various points
raised in his submissions, the learned counsel for the Petitioner relied upon the opinion of Dr. Aditi
Bhargava, who is a professor at University of California, San Francisco and a molecular biologist
with 33 years of research experience, 35 | P a g e from her presentation made before the US Senate
on 02.11.2021. Her opinion is to the effect that vaccines do not prevent infection and transmission.
She is of the further belief that natural immunity is the gold standard. According to Dr. Bhargava,
there has been no documented case of a naturally immune person getting reinfected with severe
disease or hospitalised, despite the first case reported nearly two years ago, whereas, there have
been thousands of cases of severe infection, hospitalisation, and deaths in fully vaccinated people.
Mr. Bhushan concluded by submitting that any restrictions placed on personal autonomy of
individuals would be violative of Article 21, unless the criteria laid down in K. S. Puttaswamy (supra)
is met. B. Evolution of COVID-19 and vaccines

35. COVID-19 emerged in late 2019. The WHO officially declared the novel coronavirus outbreak as
a pandemic on 11.03.2020. The virus was detected in the country in the last week of January, 2020
and spread rapidly. As the threat of infections from the virus loomed large, an unprecedented
national lockdown was announced on 24.03.2020, which extended for a few months, with
restrictions being removed thereafter in a phased manner. India was not alone in this;

36 | P a g e several countries imposed lockdowns to arrest the spread of the deadly disease, which
has led to a drastic loss of human life worldwide and presented a threat of extraordinary proportions

14

Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

to public health, food systems, economic and social conditions. Scientific studies and research for
manufacture of vaccines to prevent severe infections were undertaken on an emergency basis.
Towards the end of 2020, emergency vaccines came to be administered in the western part of the
world. However, by then, the spread of COVID-19 around the globe was considerable. Around the
same period, a variant called B.1.1.7 was found in the United Kingdom. The said variant was
renamed as Alpha, as per the naming scheme recommended by the expert group convened by the
WHO, which also includes scientists from the WHO’s Technical Advisory Group on Virus Evolution
(TAG- VE). Another variant, called B.1.351 and later renamed as Beta, was found to be linked to a
second wave of infections in South Africa. Both these variants were identified as Variants of Concern
(VOC) by the WHO on 18.12.2020, meaning that they were variants with genetic changes that would
affect virus characteristics such as transmissibility, disease severity or immune escape and through a
comparative assessment, are found to be associated with an 37 | P a g e increase of transmission or
increase in virulence or decrease in effectiveness of public health measures such as vaccines,
therapeutics etc. Soon thereafter, the highly transmissible variant called Gamma was found in Brazil
and was identified as a VOC by the WHO on 11.01.2021.28

36. In the first half of 2021, the Delta variant was identified as the predominant variant in India and
was believed to be 60 per cent more transmissible than the Alpha variant. Thereafter, Delta rapidly
spread beyond the borders to other countries. Another variant, Omicron, surfaced in November,
2021, whose spread was much more accelerated than earlier variants, including that of Delta. On the
basis of the evidence available as on 21.01.2022, the WHO was of the opinion that the Omicron has a
significant growth advantage over Delta, leading to rapid spread in the community with higher
levels of incidence than previously seen in the pandemic. It was further observed that despite a
lower risk of severe disease and death following infection, the very high levels of transmission
nevertheless have resulted in significant increases in hospitalisation and continue to pose
overwhelming demands on health care systems in most 28 Tracking SARS-CoV-2 variants, World
H e a l
l a b l e   a t
https://www.who.int/en/activities/tracking-SARS-CoV-2-variants/ (last accessed on 01.05.2022)
38 | P a g e countries. It was found that because of the 26-32 mutations that it has in the spike
protein, Omicron has infected even those who have been previously infected or vaccinated. 29
Though the infections and transmission from Omicron at present within the country are not as
serious as they were in the first two months of 2022, expert opinion is to the effect that Omicron
might not be the last of the variants, as we have since witnessed.

t h   O r g a n i

a v a i

i o n ,

z a t

37. The WHO established the Technical Advisory Group on COVID-19 Vaccine Composition
(TAG-CO-VAC) in September, 2021. According to the statement made by the said group on
11.01.2022 in the context of circulation of the Omicron variant, the group reviews and assesses the
public health implications of emerging VOCs on the performance of COVID- 19 vaccines and
provides recommendations on COVID-19 vaccine composition. The said group is developing a
framework to analyse the evidence on emerging VOCs in the context of criteria that would trigger a
recommendation to change COVID-19 vaccine strain composition and will advise the WHO on
updated vaccine compositions, as required. The group has spelt out in their statement that at
present, with 29 Statement by Dr Hans Henri P. Kluge, WHO Regional Director for Europe,
1 1 . 0 1 . 2 0 1 1 ,   a v a i l a b l e   a t   h t t p s : / / w w w . e u r o . w h o . i n t / e n / m e d i a -

15

Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

c e n t r e / s e c t i o n s / s t a t e m e n t s / 2 0 2 2 / s t a t e m e n t - u p d a t e - o n - c o v i d - 1 9 - o m i c r o n - w a v e -
threatening-to-overcome-health-workforce (last accessed on 01.05.2022) 39 | P a g e the available
COVID-19 vaccines, the focus is on reducing severe disease and death, as well as protecting health
systems. According to the TAG-CO-VAC, vaccines, which have received WHO Emergency Use
Listing across several vaccine platforms, provide a high level of protection against severe disease
and death caused by VOCs. The group takes note of data which indicates that vaccine effectiveness
will be reduced against symptomatic disease caused by the Omicron variant but at the same time, it
was of the opinion that protection against severe disease is more likely to be preserved. Along with
the Strategic Advisory Group of Experts on Immunization (SAGE) and its Working Group on
COVID-19 vaccines, TAG-CO-VAC has recommended COVID- 19 vaccines for priority populations
worldwide to provide protection against severe disease and death globally and, in the longer term, to
mitigate the emergence and impact of new VOCs by reducing the burden of infection.30

l

l

i

e

v

a

a

a

b

38. With the outbreak of the devastating pandemic, as many as 5,23,843 lives have been lost in this
country, as per the latest data available on the website of the Ministry of 30 Interim Statement on
COVID-19 vaccines in the context of the circulation of the Omicron SARS-CoV-2 Variant from the
WHO Technical Advisory Group on COVID-19 Vaccine Composition (TAG-CO-VAC), 11.01.2022,
t
a
https://www.who.int/news/item/11-01-2022-interim-statement-on-covid-19-vaccines-in-
t h e - c o n t e x t - o f - t h e - c i r c u l a t i o n - o f - t h e - o m i c r o n - s a r s - c o v - 2 - v a r i a n t - f r o m - t h e - w h o -
technical-advisory-group-on-covid-19-vaccine-composition (last accessed on 01.05.2022) 40 | P a g
e Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW). Initially, efforts made by the Government of India were to
protect people by arresting serious infection. With treatment protocol and clinical management
protocol for COVID-19 being revised periodically as more and more data and research on the virus
came to be known, persons affected by the virus were treated with the information that was
available at the point. Using whatever little was known about the virus in the initial stages, dedicated
efforts have been made to save countless lives in this country. With the approval of vaccines on an
emergency basis in January, 2021, there was some hope about preventing infections from the virus.
Inoculation, which commenced slowly in view of the non-availability of sufficient doses of vaccines,
gained pace with the increase in manufacture by Respondent Nos. 4 and 5. With the Government
embarking upon extensive awareness drives encouraging vaccination, more than 189 crore doses of
vaccine have been administered within the country till date, as per the data available on the website
of the MoHFW.

39. With the introduction of vaccines, it was understood that vaccines would aid in preventing
infections. To protect their populace from infection, countries worldwide promoted 41 | P a g e
vaccination as, needless to say, an uninfected person will not transmit the disease. Thereafter, with
the mutation of the virus eventually resulting in multiple VOCs, breakthrough infections were
noticed. Vaccinated people were found to be infected with the virus and could also act as carriers,
transmitting the virus to others. Even in such a situation, there is no question of whether
vaccination for COVID-19 should be continued. The recommendations of the WHO’s TAG-CO-VAC
and SAGE make it amply clear that vaccines, which have received emergency use approvals, provide
strong protection against serious illness, hospitalisation and death and getting vaccinated is one of
the most crucial steps towards protecting oneself from COVID-19, stopping new variants from

16

Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

emerging and helping end the pandemic. It should be noted that the advice of the WHO with respect
to COVID-19 has been consistent since the time vaccines became available, even after recognising
that it was still possible to get infected and spread the infection to others despite being vaccinated,
as is evident from the latest version of the WHO’s ‘COVID-19 advice for the public:

Getting vaccinated’ as of 13.04.2022 31. The Union of India has placed considerable
m a t e r i a l   o n   r e c o r d   i n   t e r m s   o f   3 1   A v a i l a b l e   a t
https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-

2019/covid-19-vaccines/advice (last accessed on 01.05.2022) 42 | P a g e scientific briefs and
published studies which stand testimony to the significance of vaccination as a crucial public health
intervention in this pandemic and its continued benefits to individual health as well as public health
infrastructure. Vaccination of a majority of the population of this country has undoubtedly been
instrumental in preventing severe disease, hospitalisation and deaths, and benefited the community
at large, especially those members with co-morbidities, the elderly and sick persons. Even the
Petitioner is not opposed to the vaccination programme and does not challenge the vaccination
drive of the Government of India, as has been reiterated by him during the course of his arguments.
Exception to the vaccination programme taken by the Petitioner is only to coercive vaccination
through vaccine mandates, which place unjustifiable restrictions on those who wish to not be
vaccinated.

40. In light of the virulent mutations of the COVID-19 virus and advice of experts from the WHO as
well as common findings of several studies on this subject, the vaccination drive that is being
undertaken by the Government of India in the interest of public health cannot be faulted with. C.
Personal autonomy and public health 43 | P a g e

41. Before dealing with the issue of coercive vaccination, it is necessary to consider whether the right
of privacy of individuals can override public health, more so, when the submission on behalf of the
Respondents is that steps taken to restrict the rights of individuals are in the larger interest of public
health. It is true that to be vaccinated or not is entirely the choice of the individual. Nobody can be
forcefully vaccinated as it would result in bodily intrusion and violation of the individual’s right to
privacy, protected under Article 21 of the Constitution of India. Personal autonomy was read into
Article 21 by this Court in Common Cause (supra), by placing reliance on National Legal Services
Authority v. Union of India 32, and Aruna Ramachandra Shanbaug (supra). This Court, in Common
Cause (supra), emphasized the right of an individual to choose how he should live his own life,
without any control or interference by others. It recognised the right of an individual to refuse
unwanted medical treatment and to not be forced to take any medical treatment that is not desired.
In view of the categoric statement of the Union of India that vaccination of COVID-19 is voluntary,
the question of any intrusion into bodily integrity does not arise for consideration in this case. 32
(2014) 5 SCC 438 44 | P a g e However, the Petitioner has asserted that limitations placed on access
to public places and public resources for unvaccinated persons result in coercive vaccination, and
therefore, limit the right of unvaccinated persons to refuse medical treatment.

17

Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

42. Disclosure of data of a patient suffering from AIDS was the subject matter of a decision of this
Court in X v. Hospital ‘Z’33. Placing reliance on Kharak Singh v State of U.P.34, Gobind v. State of
M.P.35 and a judgment of the US Supreme Court in Jane Roe v. Henry Wade36, this Court held that
though non-disclosure of medical information of an individual can be traced to the right to privacy
protected under Article 21, it is not absolute and is subject to action lawfully taken for protection of
health or morals or protection of rights and freedoms of others.

43. In Association of Medical Super Speciality Aspirants and Residents v. Union of India 37, to
which one of us was a party (L Nageswara Rao, J.), this Court, while considering validity of service
bonds to be executed at the time of admission to postgraduate and superspeciality courses in
medical science, held as follows:

33 (1998) 8 SCC 296 34 (1964) 1 SCR 332 35 (1975) 2 SCC 148 36 410 US 113 (1973)
37 (2019) 8 SCC 607 45 | P a g e “33. The above discussion leads us to the conclusion
that right to life guaranteed by Article 21 means right to life with human dignity.
Communitarian dignity has been recognised by this Court. While balancing
communitarian dignity vis-à-vis the dignity of private individuals, the scales must tilt
in favour of communitarian dignity. The laudable objective with which the State
Governments have introduced compulsory service bonds is to protect the
fundamental right of the deprived sections of the society guaranteed to them under
Article 21 of the Constitution of India. The contention of the appellants that their
rights guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of India have been violated is
rejected.”

44. Strong reliance was placed by the Petitioner on the judgment of the High Court of New Zealand
in Ryan Yardley (supra). The principal contention of the applicants therein was that the impugned
order, requiring police and defence force personnel to be vaccinated, placed unjustified limitation
on the rights protected by the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990 (hereinafter, the “NZ Bill of
Rights”), particularly the right to refuse to undergo medical treatment, the right to manifest religion,
the right to be free from discrimination and other rights under Section 28 of the said Act (including
the right to work, and of minority groups to enjoy their culture and practice their religion). The
purpose of 46 | P a g e the order, as clarified by the Minister by way of an amendment order in
February, 2022 is as below:

“(a) avoid, mitigate, or remedy the actual or potential adverse effects of the COVID-19
outbreak (whether direct or indirect); and

(b) ensure continuity of services that are essential for public safety, national defence,
or crisis response; and

(c) maintain trust in public services.”

45. Considering the submissions of the applicants therein that the order placed
unjustified limitations on fundamental rights protected by the NZ Bill of Rights, the

18

Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

NZ High Court held that the impugned order limits the right of affected workers to
refuse to undergo a medical treatment as well as the right (or significant interest) to
retain employment. While examining the question of whether the limitation of the
said rights was justified, the NZ High Court noted that the order mandating
vaccinations for the police and defence personnel was imposed to ensure the
continuity of services that are essential for public safety, national defence, or crisis
response, and to promote public confidence in those services, rather than to stop the
spread of COVID-19. The NZ High Court further took note of the fact that by October,
2021, 83.1 per cent of police personnel had received at least one or more doses of the
vaccination, and 70.1 per cent had received both doses. By the time the order took
effect on

47 | P a g e 17.01.2022, there were only 164 unvaccinated staff members in an overall workforce of
15,682 staff. It was found that the position within the New Zealand Defence Forces (NZDF) was
similar. From a total of 15,480 NZDF personnel, 3,048 are civil staff. As on 01.02.2022, 99.2 per
cent of the regular forces were fully vaccinated, leaving aside 75 members and 98.7 per cent of the
civil staff were fully vaccinated, leaving 40 who were not. The NZ High Court was of the view that
the relatively low number of unvaccinated police and NZDF personnel impacted by the order may
not, by itself, mean that the order was not a reasonable limit on rights that can be demonstrably
justified, if there was evidence to establish that the presence of unvaccinated personnel, even in
small numbers, created a materially higher risk to the remaining workforce. While observing that
the evidence on this issue is sparse, the NZ High Court referred to the evidence of Dr. Petrovsky,
who deposed that vaccination has potential benefit in reducing the severity of disease, even with the
Omicron variant. However, in his view, mandatory vaccination did not assist in preventing workers
in affected roles from contracting COVID- 19, or transmitting it to others. The NZ High Court
further considered the evidence of Dr. Town, the Ministry’s Chief 48 | P a g e Science Adviser, who,
according to the NZ High Court, did not directly respond to Dr. Petrovsky’s analysis of the
effectiveness of the vaccine to inhibit the spread of COVID-19 in a workforce, but instead provided
his more generalised opinions. In his evidence, Dr. Town stated that vaccines show reduced
effectiveness compared with Delta in terms of becoming infected with and transmitting Omicron.

46. After weighing the evidence, the NZ High Court was of the view that vaccination may still be
effective in limiting infection and transmission, but at a significantly lower level than was the case
with the earlier variants. It was further concluded that vaccination does not prevent persons
contracting and spreading COVID-19, particularly with the Omicron variant. The NZ High Court
referred to an earlier judgment in Four Aviation Security Service Employees v. Minister of
COVID-19 Response 38, where the precautionary principle had been applied, to make the point that
even a modest vaccination protection on a modest number of personnel needs to be considered in
the context of potential effects of a pandemic. The NZ High Court referred to a judgment of the
Federal Court of Ontario in 38 [2021] NZHC 3012 49 | P a g e Spencer v. Attorney General of
Canada 39 to elaborate on the precautionary principle, as “a foundational approach to
decision-making under uncertainty, that points to the importance of acting on the best available
information to protect the health of” the citizens. In Four Aviation Security Service Employees
(supra), which dealt with restrictions placed on aviation security workers, the NZ High Court held

19

Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

that even though the applicants therein were not being forcibly treated, they were required to be
vaccinated as a condition of their employment, refusal of which led to termination. Observing that a
right does not need to be taken away in its entirety before it is regarded as having been limited, the
NZ High Court opined that the level of pressure in that case was significant and amounted to
coercion, and therefore, the applicants’ right to refuse to undergo medical treatment was limited.
However, the said limitation was held to be justified. From the evidence adduced before the NZ
High Court, it concluded that the vaccine was effective at reducing the transmission of the earlier
variants of the virus and that it was also effective at reducing symptomatic infection and detrimental
effects of the Delta variant. As the applicants were border workers 39 [2021] FC 361 50 | P a g e
interacting with international travellers who may be carrying the virus and given the likelihood of
vaccines contributing to preventing the risk of transmission, the NZ High Court held that a
precautionary approach, in doing everything that can be reasonably done to minimise risk of the
outbreak or spread in strong public interest, is justified. Further, the curtailment of the right to
refuse to undergo medical treatment was found to be proportionate to the objective, as the
applicants, who worked as aviation workers, were situated in a key location where COVID-19 might
enter New Zealand.

47. In Ryan Yardley (supra), the NZ High Court held that the principle in Four Aviation Security
Service Employees (supra) is not directly applicable as the order was not promulgated to contain the
spread of the virus but for the purpose of ensuring continuity of, and confidence in, essential
services. Additionally, there was no evidence of a threat to the continuity of the police and NZDF
services, which would enable the NZ High Court to give the benefit of the doubt to the New Zealand
Crown in imposing measures to address that risk. Placing reliance on the evidence adduced as well
as the public health advice which was to the 51 | P a g e effect that vaccine mandates were not
considered necessary for addressing the risk of the outbreak or spread of COVID- 19, the High Court
made it clear that while vaccination significantly improved the prospects of avoiding illness and
death even with the Omicron variant, given the variant’s propensity to break through vaccination
barriers, it concluded that there was no real threat to the continuity of these essential services that
the impugned order sought to address. Further, finding that suspension of the unvaccinated would
address any potential problems, the terminations arising from the order in light of the temporary,
albeit significant, period of peak impact of the infection, were found to be disproportionate and
unjustified. While the Petitioner has sought support from this judgment to demonstrate how courts
in other jurisdictions have struck down vaccine mandates taking into account Omicron’s impact on
the effectiveness of vaccines in addressing spread, we believe that this judgment may not be of much
assistance to us for determining the issue at hand for two reasons. First, the judgment expressly
recognised that the impugned vaccine mandate was not brought about to suppress the spread of the
virus but to ensure continuity of, and confidence in, essential services, such as the police and the 52
| P a g e defence personnel, which we are not concerned with in the present case. Second, while the
NZ High Court looked into depositions of expert witnesses to come to its own conclusion on efficacy
of vaccines vis-à-vis the Omicron variant, the scope of our review does not entail assessment of
competing scientific opinions, as the judiciary is not equipped to decide issues of medical expertise
and epidemiology.

20

Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

48. The crucial point that requires to be considered by us is whether limitations placed by the
Government on personal autonomy of an individual can be justified in the interest of public health
in the wake of the devastating COVID-19 pandemic. As stated, personal autonomy has been
recognized as a critical facet of the right to life and right to self-determination under Article 21 of the
Constitution, by this Court in Common Cause (supra). In K.S. Puttaswamy (supra), this Court laid
down three requirements to be fulfilled by the State while placing restraints on the right to privacy
to protect legitimate State interests. It was held:

“310. … The first requirement that there must be a law in existence to justify an
encroachment on privacy is an express requirement of Article 21. For, no person can
be deprived of his life or personal liberty except in accordance with the procedure
established by law. The 53 | P a g e existence of law is an essential requirement.
Second, the requirement of a need, in terms of a legitimate State aim, ensures that
the nature and content of the law which imposes the restriction falls within the zone
of reasonableness mandated by Article 14, which is a guarantee against arbitrary
State action. The pursuit of a legitimate State aim ensures that the law does not suffer
from manifest arbitrariness. Legitimacy, as a postulate, involves a value judgment.
Judicial review does not reappreciate or second guess the value judgment of the
legislature but is for deciding whether the aim which is sought to be pursued suffers
from palpable or manifest arbitrariness. The third requirement ensures that the
means which are adopted by the legislature are proportional to the object and needs
sought to be fulfilled by the law. Proportionality is an essential facet of the guarantee
against arbitrary State action because it ensures that the nature and quality of the
encroachment on the right is not disproportionate to the purpose of the law. Hence,
the threefold requirement for a valid law arises out of the mutual interdependence
between the fundamental guarantees against arbitrariness on the one hand and the
protection of life and personal liberty, on the other. The right to privacy, which is an
intrinsic part of the right to life and liberty, and the freedoms embodied in Part III is
subject to the same restraints which apply to those freedoms.” While the judgment is
in context of the right to privacy, the analysis with respect to the threefold
requirement for curtailment of such right is on the anvil of the protection guaranteed
to fundamental freedoms under Article 21, and 54 | P a g e therefore, would also be
the litmus test for invasion of an individual’s bodily autonomy under Article 21.

49. The upshot of the above discussion leads to the following conclusions:

a) Bodily integrity is protected under Article 21 of the Constitution of India and no
individual can be forced to be vaccinated.

b) Personal autonomy of an individual involves the right of an individual to
determine how they should live their own life, which consequently encompasses the
right to refuse to undergo any medical treatment in the sphere of individual health.

21

Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

c) Persons who are keen to not be vaccinated on account of personal beliefs or
preferences, can avoid vaccination, without anyone physically compelling them to be
vaccinated. However, if there is a likelihood of such individuals spreading the
infection to other people or contributing to mutation of the virus or burdening of the
public health infrastructure, thereby affecting communitarian health at large,
protection of which is undoubtedly a legitimate State aim of paramount significance
in this collective battle against the pandemic, the Government can regulate such
public 55 | P a g e health concerns by imposing certain limitations on individual
rights that are reasonable and proportionate to the object sought to be fulfilled.

50. The submission made on behalf of the Petitioner is that the Delta and Omicron variants have
shown breakthrough infections and it is clear from the scientific data that, an unvaccinated person
does not pose a greater risk than a vaccinated person in terms of transmission of the infection.
While this submission has been dealt with subsequently, we believe that as long as there is a risk of
spreading the disease, there can be restrictions placed on individuals’ rights in larger public interest.
Further, extensive material from experts has been placed before this Court, which extol the benefits
of vaccination in tackling the severe and life- threatening impact of the infection, specifically in
terms of reduction in oxygen requirement, hospitalisation, ICU admissions and mortality, thereby
easing the disproportionate burden from the upsurge of severe cases on the health infrastructure,
which has already been witnessed by the country during the second wave of the pandemic where
resources were woefully inadequate to stem the impact of the Delta variant on a then scarcely
vaccinated population. We hasten to add that restrictions that are 56 | P a g e placed by the
Government should not be unreasonable and are open to scrutiny by constitutional courts. It is
difficult for us to envisage the myriad situations in dealing with the evolving pandemic that may call
for restraint on individual rights in larger public interest and therefore, as and when such
limitations are challenged, they can be assessed by constitutional courts to see whether they meet
the threefold requirement laid down in K.S. Puttaswamy (supra). D. Assessment of the vaccine
mandates imposed by State Governments

51. The grievance of the Petitioner pertains to the vaccine mandates imposed by various State
Governments and private organisations, resulting in restrictions on fundamental freedoms of
persons who have chosen not to be vaccinated. The Petitioner has alleged duality in the stand of the
Respondents, as on one hand, the Union of India has categorically stated that vaccines are voluntary
and on the other, the State Governments have imposed and defended restrictions on access to public
places and resources for persons who are unvaccinated. The Petitioner contested the vaccine
mandates on the following grounds:

57 | P a g e

(a) Natural immunity acquired from COVID-19 infection is more long-lasting and
robust as compared to vaccine immunity.

(b) Serological studies show that more than 75 per cent of the Indian population has already been
infected and is seropositive and therefore, has better immunity to the infection than that which can

22

be provided by the vaccine.

Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

(c) Vaccines do not prevent infection from or transmission of COVID-19 and are especially
ineffective in preventing against infection from new variants.

52. In support of the above grounds, other than on the aspect of transmission of the virus, the
Petitioner has relied on individual opinions of doctors and other advisors, news articles and findings
from research studies, some of which are preprints meaning they have not been peer-reviewed and
report new medical research which has yet to be evaluated and therefore, should not be used to
guide clinical practice, as explained by medRxiv, a platform where several preprint articles in the
field of health sciences are published. Some of the material relied on by the Petitioner has been
listed below:

58 | P a g e

(a) An article in the scientific journal Nature40, which states that “studies have
shown that memory plasma cells secreted antibody specific for the spike protein
encoded in SARS-CoV-2 even 11 months after the infection and further that, immune
memory to many viruses is stable over decades, if not for a lifetime”.

(b) A study published in the European Journal of Epidemiology41, which has analysed data from 68
countries available as of 03.09.2021 and has found that “at the country level, there appears to be no
discernible relationship between percentage of population fully vaccinated and new COVID-19
cases”. It is further stated therein that in fact higher percentage of population fully vaccinated have
higher COVID-19 per 1 million people.

(c) The United Kingdom’s COVID-19 vaccine surveillance report, Week 40, which appears to
indicate negative efficacy against infection amongst all ages above 30 years, on the basis of data
between week 36 and week 39 in 2021.

40 Andreas Radbruch and Hyun-Dong Chang, “A long-term perspective on immunity to Covid”
Nature 595, 359-360 (2021) 41 Subramanian, S.V., Kumar, A. “Increases in COVID-19 are unrelated
to levels of vaccination across 68 countries and 2947 counties in the United States” Eur J Epidemiol
36, 1237–1240 (2021) 59 | P a g e

53. While we are aware that courts cannot decide whether natural immunity is more resilient as
compared to vaccine- acquired immunity and we do not seek to substitute our own views in matters
of differences in scientific opinion, we cannot help but notice that in the first article referred to
above, published in Nature, it has been noted that immunity in convalescent individuals (i.e., those
who have recovered from COVID-19) can be boosted further by vaccinating them after a year.
According to the said article, this results in the generation of more plasma cells, together with an
increase in the level of SARS-CoV-2 antibodies that was up to 50 times greater than before
vaccination. In the second article referred to above, published in the European Journal of
Epidemiology, it has been mentioned therein that the interpretation of the findings should be as

23

Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

follows: “ The sole reliance on vaccination as a primary strategy to mitigate COVID-19 and its
adverse consequences needs to be re- examined, especially considering the Delta (B.1.617.2) variant
and the likelihood of future variants. Other pharmacological and non-pharmacological interventions
may need to be put in place alongside increasing vaccination rates.” We do not see how these
conclusions and interpretations are in favour of an argument that natural 60 | P a g e immunity has
proven to be better in protection against COVID-19 infection, as compared to vaccine-acquired
immunity.

54. In any event, what we have to assess, in accordance with the law laid down by this Court, is
whether the Union of India has taken note of scientific and medical inputs and research findings in
putting together its policy advocating vaccination for the entire eligible population. Article 47 of the
Constitution of India imposes an obligation on the Union of India to improve public health. It is the
obligation of the State to ensure the creation and the sustaining of conditions congenial to good
health. From the several obligations of the State enshrined in Part IV of the Constitution,
maintenance and improvement of public health rank high as these are indispensable to the very
physical existence of the community.42

55. It should be noted that the submission made on behalf of the Petitioner championing natural
immunity is from the perspective of a healthy person. Even the Petitioner does not dispute the fact
that the same standard is not applicable to persons with co-morbidities, the sick and elderly people.
A cursory glance at the data recorded in the India Fact Sheet 42 Vincent Panikurlangara v. Union of
India (1987) 2 SCC 165 61 | P a g e on the basis of the National Family Health Survey – 5 (2019-

21) shows that (i) in the age group of 15-49 years, 57 per cent of women and 25 per cent of men are
anaemic, (ii) amongst individuals aged above 15 years, 13.5 per cent of women and 15.6 per cent of
men have high or very high blood sugar level or take medicines to control blood sugar level, (iii)
amongst individuals aged above 15 years, 21.3 per cent of women and 24 per cent of men have
hypertension or elevated blood pressure or take medicines to control blood pressure. Further, as per
the 75 th Round National Sample Survey (NSS), conducted from July 2017 to June 2018, the
average age of the elderly population in India was 67.5 years, with 67.1 per cent of India’s elderly
living in rural areas. A study was conducted 43 on the basis of the data from the NSS, aiming to
highlight the vulnerability of the aged amidst the COVID-19 pandemic. According to the study, out
of every 100 elderly, 27.7 persons reported ailments during the previous 15 days, with cardiovascular
conditions including hypertension (32.0%), endocrine conditions including diabetes (22.5%),
musculoskeletal conditions (13.9%), infectious diseases (10.0%), and 43 Ranjan, A., Muraleedharan,
V.R. “Equity and elderly health in India: reflections from 75th round National Sample Survey,
2017–18, amidst the COVID-19 pandemic” Global Health 16, 93 (2020) 62 | P a g e respiratory
ailments (7.3%) being the top five conditions for seeking outpatient care among the elderly in the
preceding 15 days. The Constitution, through Article 41, mandates the State to make available to the
elderly the right to live with dignity and to provide the elderly, ill and disabled with assistance,
medical facilities and geriatric care 44.

56. Surely, the Union of India is justified in centering its vaccination policy around the health of the
population at large, with emphasis on insulating the weaker and more vulnerable sections from the

24

Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

risk of severe infection and its consequences, as opposed to basing its decision keeping in mind the
interests of a healthy few. Given the considerable material filed before this Court reflecting the
near-unanimous views of experts on the benefits of vaccination in dealing with severe disease,
reduction in oxygen requirement, hospital and ICU admissions and mortality and stopping new
variants from emerging, this Court is satisfied that the current vaccination policy of the Union of
India, formulated in the interest of public health, is informed by relevant considerations and cannot
be said to be unreasonable. Whether there is contrasting scientific opinion supporting the argument
of natural immunity offering better protection 44 Ashwani Kumar v. Union of India (2019) 2 SCC
636 63 | P a g e against infection from COVID-19 and whether these scientific opinions can be
substantiated are not pertinent for determination of the issue before this Court.

57. We now come to the crux of the challenge against coercive vaccine mandates, with respect to
which the Petitioner has argued that they amount to restrictions on the fundamental rights of
unvaccinated individuals and cannot be said to be proportionate, as according to the Petitioner, with
the prevalence of the Omicron variant, unvaccinated people pose no greater danger to the
transmission of the virus in comparison to vaccinated persons. It was claimed by the Petitioner that
even if the vaccines reduced the severity of the disease, it was up to the individual to decide whether
they wanted to be the beneficiary of vaccines. The State’s lookout was the protection of larger public
health and with both the vaccinated and unvaccinated posing nearly equal risks in transmission of
the infection to others around them, the State cannot impose restrictions targeting only the
unvaccinated and impeding their right to access public resources. The Petitioner has thus, alleged
discrimination against the unvaccinated, who in the present situation, are placed more or less on the
same footing as vaccinated individuals with respect to the transmission of the virus. In 64 | P a g e
support of his submissions, the Petitioner has relied on scientific studies and reports, some of which
are listed below:

(a) A letter published in the Lancet, Regional Health45, which states: “In the UK it
was described that secondary attack rates among household contacts exposed to fully
vaccinated index cases was similar to household contacts exposed to unvaccinated
index cases (25% for vaccinated vs 23% for unvaccinated). 12 of 31 infections in fully
vaccinated household contacts (39%) arose from fully vaccinated epidemiologically
linked index cases.

Peak viral load did not differ by vaccination status or variant type….The US Centres for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC) identifies four of the top five counties with the highest percentage of
fully vaccinated population (99.9–84.3%) as “high” transmission counties. Many decisionmakers
assume that the vaccinated can be excluded as a source of transmission. It appears to be grossly
negligent to ignore the vaccinated population as a possible and relevant source of transmission
when deciding about public health control measures.” 45 Gunter Kampf, Letter titled “The
Epidemiological relevance of the COVID-19 vaccinated population is increasing” Lancet Regional
Health Vol. 11, 100272, December 01, 2021 65 | P a g e

(b) A study conducted on breakthrough infection in Massachusetts in July, 2021 and reported in the
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report46, which investigated 469 COVID-19 cases that had been

25

Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

identified among the Massachusetts residents who had travelled to a town where multiple large
public events had been held and 346 cases, i.e., 74 per cent of the infections occurred in fully
vaccinated individuals. Findings from the investigation suggest that even jurisdictions without
substantial or high COVID-19 transmission might consider expanding prevention strategies,
including masking in indoor public settings regardless of vaccination status, given the potential risk
of infection during attendance at large public gatherings that include travelers from many areas with
differing levels of transmission.

The Petitioner has also cited various news articles reporting instances of breakthrough infections in
fully vaccinated people, carrying as much virus as those who were unvaccinated, abroad as well as
within India. 46 Brown CM, Vostok J, Johnson H, et al. “Outbreak of SARS-CoV-2 Infections,
Including COVID-19 Vaccine Breakthrough Infections, Associated with Large Public Gatherings —
Barnstable County, Massachusetts, July 2021”. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2021;70:1059-1062
66 | P a g e

58. We have already referred to the material placed by the Union of India and the States appearing
before this Court. While there is abundant data to show that getting vaccinated continues to be the
dominant expert advice even in the face of new variants, no submission nor any data has been put
forth to justify restrictions only on unvaccinated individuals when emerging scientific evidence
appears to indicate that the risk of transmission of the virus from unvaccinated individuals is almost
on par with that from vaccinated persons. To put it differently, neither the Union of India nor the
State Governments have produced any material before this Court to justify the discriminatory
treatment of unvaccinated individuals in public places by imposition of vaccine mandates. No doubt
that when COVID-19 vaccines came into the picture, they were expected to address, and were indeed
found to be successful in dealing with, the risk of infection from the variants in circulation at the
time. However, with the virus mutating, we have seen more potent variants surface which have
broken through the vaccination barrier to some extent. While vaccination mandates in the era of
prevalence of the variants prior to the Delta variant may have withstood constitutional scrutiny, in
light of the data presented by the Petitioner, which has not been 67 | P a g e controverted by the
Union of India as well as the State Governments, we are of the opinion that the restrictions on
unvaccinated individuals imposed through vaccine mandates cannot be considered to be
proportionate, especially since both vaccinated and unvaccinated individuals presently appear to be
susceptible to transmission of the virus at similar levels.

59. Details of the vaccine mandates passed by the States of Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Madhya
Pradesh and Delhi have been discussed earlier. It has come to our knowledge that since the
judgment in this matter was reserved, the National Disaster Management Authority took a decision
that there may not be any further need to invoke provisions of the DM Act for COVID-19
containment measures, taking into consideration the overall improvement in the situation. Further,
the States of Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu, taking into account the present situation in which
near-normalcy has been restored, have rolled back the restrictions placed on unvaccinated persons.
The State of Madhya Pradesh had withdrawn the restrictions imposed on unvaccinated individuals
in terms of withholding distribution of food grains from fair price shops and had notified this Court
of the same during the hearing. Till the infection rate and spread 68 | P a g e remains low, as it is

26

Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

currently, and any new development or research finding comes to light which provides the
Government due justification to impose reasonable and proportionate restrictions on the rights of
unvaccinated individuals in furtherance of the continuing efforts to combat this pandemic, we
suggest that all authorities in this country, including private organisations and educational
institutions, review the relevant orders and instructions imposing restrictions on unvaccinated
individuals in terms of access to public places, services and resources.

60. While we appreciate that it is the domain of the executive to determine how best to encourage
vaccination without unduly encroaching into the fundamental rights of unvaccinated individuals, we
wish to highlight the mechanism of the “health pass” employed in France, as an apt example of a
proportionate measure intended to cope with the perils of the spread of the virus. We understand
that a “health pass” may take the form of either the results of a viral screening test not concluding
that a person has been infected with COVID-19, or proof of vaccination status, or a certificate of
recovery following an infection. In a referral by the Prime Minister to review the law on managing
the public health state of emergency, the Constitutional 69 | P a g e Council in France, in Decision
no. 2021-824 DC dated 05.08.2021, determined that the “health pass” did not infringe the right to
personal privacy guaranteed by Article 2 of the Declaration of Human and Civic Rights of 1789 as
the requirement did not introduce an obligation to vaccinate.

61. Having expressed our opinion on the vaccine mandates in the prevailing context, we reiterate
that vaccines effectively address severe disease arising from COVID-19 infections, are instrumental
in reducing oxygen requirement, hospital and ICU admissions and mortality and continue to be the
solution to stopping new variants from emerging, as per the advice of the WHO. Since the time
arguments were heard in the matter, we have come to know of more variants that have now come
into circulation. Given the rapidly- changing nature of the virus and the clear purpose served by the
approved vaccines in terms of restoration and protection of public health, our suggestions with
respect to review of vaccine mandates are limited to the present situation alone. This judgment is
not to be construed as impeding, in any manner, the lawful exercise of power by the executive to
take suitable measures for prevention of infection and transmission of the virus in public interest,
which may also take the form of restrictions on unvaccinated people in the 70 | P a g e future, if the
situation so warrants. Such restrictions will be subject to constitutional scrutiny to examine if they
meet the threefold requirement for intrusion into rights of individuals, as discussed earlier.

II. Non-disclosure of segregated clinical trial data in public domain

62. It is the complaint of the Petitioner that the COVID-19 vaccines, manufactured by Respondent
Nos. 4 and 5, have been given restricted emergency approval by the Drugs Controller General of
India (DCGI) in a hurried and opaque manner. Mr. Bhushan argued that clinical trials in respect of
the vaccines had not been completed and at present, the vaccines are only authorised for emergency
use. According to the Petitioner, while clinical trials are scheduled to be completed in the year 2023,
even the full dataset from the interim analysis conducted has not been made public. The disclosure
of segregated data of clinical trials is essential to determine the adverse effects, if any, across various
age groups and diverse populations and accordingly, enable individuals to make more informed
decisions on whether to be vaccinated. Reliance was placed on an order of this Court in Aruna

27

Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

Rodrigues (4) v. Union of India 47 and a 47 (2011) 12 SCC 481 71 | P a g e judgment of the Delhi
High Court dated 15.01.2019 in W.P. (C) No. 343 of 2019 titled Master Hridaan Kumar (minor) v.
Union of India with respect to the importance of disclosure of relevant technical data and informed
consent. Additionally, the last amended version of the Declaration of Helsinki – Ethical principles
from medical research involving human subjects (hereinafter, the “Declaration of Helsinki”) and a
statement by the WHO dated 09.04.2015 on ‘public disclosure of clinical trial results’ (hereinafter,
the “WHO Statement on Clinical Trials”) were pressed into service to establish the significance of
disclosure of data of clinical trials, so as to enable the data to be assessed independently, and not
only by the vaccine manufacturer who has a commercial interest in production of the vaccines. Mr.
Bhushan submitted that there would be no invasion of privacy of individuals, if personal
identification data and past medical history of the trial participants was redacted and the raw data
pertaining to clinical trials is made public. The further grievance of the Petitioner pertained to lack
of transparency in regulatory approvals, minutes of meetings and constitution of expert bodies. The
Petitioner has sought for clear detailing of the information furnished before, and evidence relied on
by, the expert bodies such as the NTAGI 72 | P a g e and the Subject Expert Committee (SEC), the
body which sends recommendations to the Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation, while
deliberating on the applications and data of the vaccine manufacturers, and the names and
institutional relationships of the experts who participated in each of these meetings. Mr. Bhushan
relied on the 59 th Report of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare,
in support of his submission on a need for transparency in the decision-making of the CDSCO and
other regulatory authorities.

63. In response, the Union of India submitted that the procedure prescribed under the statutory
regime was scrupulously followed before granting emergency approval of the vaccines manufactured
by Respondent Nos. 4 and 5. As per the extant statutory regime, permission to import or
manufacture new drugs including vaccines or to undertake clinical trials is granted by the Central
Drugs Standard Control Organisation (CDSCO). The CDSCO, in consultation with the SEC,
evaluates the applications for grant of such permission, which are to be accompanied with data as
required under the Second Schedule to the New Drugs and Clinical Trials Rules, 2019 (hereinafter,
the “2019 Rules”) framed under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. The SEC 73 | P a g e is a
statutory body, constituted by the CDSCO under Rule 100 of the 2019 Rules, comprising group of
experts with specialisation in relevant fields. According to the Union of India, the SEC looks into the
details of trials and results presented before it and examines them, interacts with the developers of
the vaccines and gives them appropriate directions and eventually makes recommendations in
writing, by way of a resolution, reflecting the collective opinion of all the domain experts. We were
informed that the trials have been registered on the database of the Clinical Trials Registry – India,
which is hosted at the ICMR’s National Institute of Medical Statistics. The provisions in relation to
‘Accelerated Approval Process’ under the Second Schedule to the 2019 Rules were pointed out to
this Court, which stipulate that “accelerated approval process may be allowed to a new drug for a
disease or condition taking into account its severity, rarity, or prevalence and the availability or lack
of alternative treatments, provided that there is a prima facie case of the product being of
meaningful therapeutic benefit over the existing treatment”. It is further stated that “ After granting
accelerated approval for such drug, the post marketing trials shall be required to validate the
anticipated clinical benefit .” It was submitted that applying these provisions on 74 | P a g e

28

Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

Accelerated Approval Process, the CDSCO, in detailed consultation with the SEC and after
examining the efficacy of the vaccine and its effects, granted permission for restricted emergency
use of COVAXIN and COVISHIELD, as manufactured by Respondent Nos. 4 and 5, respectively.

64. As regards COVAXIN (Whole Virion Inactivated Corona Virus Vaccine), the Union of India
stated that application for permission to manufacture the vaccine was made by Bharat Biotech on
23.04.2020. The CDSCO, in consultation with the SEC, granted permission to Bharat Biotech for
conducting Phase I/II clinical trials on 29.06.2020 and Phase III clinical trials on 23.10.2020.
Respondent No. 4 submitted interim safety and immunogenicity data of Phase I and Phase II
clinical trials carried out in the country, along with safety data, including Serious Adverse Events
data, of the ongoing Phase III clinical trial in the country. The data provided by Respondent No.4
from the various phases were evaluated and analysed by the SEC, which consisted of eminent
experts from the fields of microbiology, medicine, pulmonary medicine, paediatrics and
immunology and immunogenetics. The resolutions of the various meetings of the SEC, which also
required the presence of the developer / manufacturer with the necessary information, have been
put up on the 75 | P a g e website of the MoHFW at every stage. In its meeting dated 02.01.2021,
observing that on receiving further updated data, justification and request for consideration of the
proposal in the wake of a new mutation of the COVID-19 virus, and on recognising that the data
generated till then showed that the vaccine had the potential to target mutated coronavirus strains,
the SEC recommended for grant of permission for restricted use in emergency situation in public
interest in clinical trial mode, as an abundant precaution. While granting such permission,
Respondent No. 4 was directed to continue the ongoing Phase III clinical trial and submit data from
the trial, as and when available. Approval for restricted use in emergency situation in clinical trial
mode with various conditions / restrictions was granted by the CDSCO to Respondent No. 4 to
manufacture COVAXIN on 03.01.2021.

65. Thereafter, Respondent No. 4 submitted the interim safety and efficacy data of Phase III clinical
trial, which was reviewed by the SEC in meetings held periodically. In its meeting conducted on
10.03.2021, the SEC, after detailed deliberation on the updated interim safety and efficacy data of
the phase III clinical trial, recommended omission of the condition of the use of the vaccine in
clinical trial mode.

76 | P a g e However, it was recommended that the vaccine be continued to be used under restricted
use in emergency situation condition. Following expansion of the Government’s vaccination drive to
include individuals in the age group of 18-45 years, in its meeting held on 23.04.2021, the SEC
considered Bharat Biotech’s proposal to unblind the trial participants in the said age group. After
detailed deliberations, the SEC recommended the unblinding of the participants in the said age
group, upon the request of the participants or the principal investigator after completion of two
months from the second dose. Eventually, on consideration of relevant data of Phase I and Phase II
clinical trials along with safety data of 6 months’ Phase III clinical trial, including data of serious
adverse events till the date, the SEC in its meeting dated 19.01.2022 noted that there had been no
safety issues and the vaccine maintained its efficacy, specially to avoid hospitalisation and severe
infections in the existing situation as well. Accordingly, the SEC recommended that the status of
approval of COVAXIN from the restricted use in emergency situation to the New Drug permission

29

Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

be updated, along with the condition that the firm shall continue to submit data of ongoing clinical
trial and monitor AEFIs. The Union of India pointed out that 77 | P a g e Phase I and Phase II
clinical trial reports were published in the Lancet Infectious Diseases Journal, which was publicly
available. Further, to the knowledge of the Union of India, Phase III trial publication had been
submitted to the Lancet journal by Respondent No. 4 on 02.07.2021, a copy of the manuscript of
which has been provided to this Court.

66. COVISHIELD (ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 Corona Virus Vaccine (Recombinant)) manufactured by
Respondent No. 5 was developed by the Serum Institute of India in collaboration with Oxford
University and AstraZeneca under technology transfer. As the clinical development of the said
vaccine, including Phase I clinical trial, was conducted in other countries, Phase II / III clinical trials
were conducted by Respondent No. 5 in the country. Application for permission to manufacture
COVISHIELD for test, examination and analysis was first made by Respondent No. 5 on
03.05.2020. The safety, immunogenicity and efficacy data of Phase II / III clinical trials of the
AstraZeneca vaccine carried out in the United Kingdom, Brazil and South Africa were submitted to
the SEC, along with the safety and immunogenicity data from the ongoing Phase II / III clinical
trials in India. On reviewing this data as well as the approval dated 30.12.2020 granted by the
United Kingdom’s Medicines and Healthcare Products 78 | P a g e Regulatory Authority
(hereinafter, the “UK-MHRA”) for the AstraZeneca vaccine along with its conditions / restrictions,
the SEC, in its meeting dated 01.01.2021, noted that the safety and immunogenicity data from the
Indian study was comparable with that of the overseas clinical trial data. After detailed deliberation
and taking into account the emerging situation, the SEC recommended grant of permission for
restricted emergency use of the vaccine, subject to various regulatory provisions and conditions,
including requirement to submit relevant data from the ongoing clinical trials nationally and
internationally at its earliest. Eventually, in its meeting dated 19.01.2022, the SEC considered the
request of Respondent No. 5 to grant permission to manufacture the vaccine, excluding the
conditions for restricted use in emergency situation and other conditions, on the lines of Marketing
Authorisation by the UK-MHRA for the parent vaccine. After detailed deliberation and
consideration of safety, immunogenicity and efficacy data from Indian and overseas clinical trials,
amongst other data, the SEC recommended grant of New Drug permission or regular approval, with
conditions that data of ongoing clinical trials and vaccine shall continue to be supplied and AEFIs
shall continue to be monitored.

79 | P a g e

67. We were directed to Rule 25 of the 2019 Rules, framed under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act,
1940, which provides that the clinical trial shall be conducted in accordance with approved clinical
trial protocol and other related documents as per the requirements of Good Clinical Practices (GCP)
guidelines and the other rules. The expert committee set up by the CDSCO under Rule 25(vi) in
consultation with clinical experts formulated the GCP guidelines for generation of data on drugs.
The ‘Ethical Principles’, which are part of the said guidelines, protect principles of privacy and
confidentiality of human subjects of research. The learned Solicitor General also relied upon para
2.4.4 of the GCP guidelines, which require safeguarding of the confidentiality of research data that
might lead to identification of individual subjects. He further referred to the important role played

30

Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

by the Ethics Committee under Rule 11 of the 2019 Rules, which includes safeguarding the rights,
safety and well-being of trial subjects in accordance with the said rules. The 2019 Rules also
empower the Ethics Committee to discontinue or suspend the clinical trial in case it concludes that
the trial is likely to compromise the right, safety or well-being of the trial subject. As per the ICMR’s
National Ethical Guidelines 80 | P a g e for Biomedical and Health Research involving Human
Participants, the four basic ethical principles for conducting biomedical and health research are (i)
respect for persons (autonomy), (ii) beneficence, (iii) non-malfeasance and (iv) justice. These four
basic principles have been expanded into 12 general principles, including the ‘principle of ensuring
privacy and confidentiality’ which requires maintaining the privacy of potential participants, her /
his identity and records, with access given to only those authorised. As regards transparency of
functioning of expert bodies, it was submitted by the Union of India that recommendations of the
SEC in all its meetings are uploaded on the website of the CDSCO. Additionally, the detailed
minutes of NTAGI meetings were already available in public domain, which can be downloaded
from both the ICMR and the MoHFW websites.

68. The contention of Respondent No. 4 is that COVAXIN has undergone all clinical trials. In Phase
III, trials revealed a 77.8% efficacy against symptomatic COVID-19 disease. The findings of the
clinical trials have been published in reputed peer-reviewed journals and are readily available on the
website of Respondent No.4. A reference was made by Respondent No. 4 to the WHO Statement on
Clinical Trials, to submit that it is only the key outcomes and findings which 81 | P a g e are required
to be made publicly available. It was contended that Respondent No. 4 is in compliance with the
WHO Statement on Clinical Trials as the key outcomes and results of the Phase III clinical trial have
been published in the Lancet. On behalf of Respondent No. 5, it was submitted that the clinical data
generated during the trials had been submitted to the regulatory authorities for obtaining
permissions / licences etc. Further, the peer-reviewed study of the partial clinical data of Phase II /
III trials had already been published in reputed scientific journals, which included all the
information necessary for safeguarding the public as well as informing them of the credibility and
efficacy of the vaccine. According to Respondent No. 5, the raw data of the clinical trials served no
greater public purpose than the data which was already available in the public domain. All
applicable medico-legal, scientific and ethical requirements had been strictly adhered to by
Respondent No. 5.

69. In rejoinder, the learned counsel for the Petitioner argued that there is no transparency in the
process of approvals of vaccines and relevant data is not always placed before the NTAGI. He
referred to a news article in The Wire, according to which Jayaprakash Muliyil, a member of the
NTAGI had stated that the NTAGI had not recommended 82 | P a g e vaccination of children in the
age group of 12-14 years. He also drew the attention of this Court to non-supply of relevant data to
the NTAGI at the time of approval of the Rotavac vaccine against rotavirus. The Petitioner further
complained of the haste shown in grant of emergency approval to Respondent No. 4. The Petitioner
has sought support of a decision of the United States District Court for the Northern District of
Texas dated 06.01.2022 in Public Health and Medical Professionals for Transparency v. Food and
Drug Administration, which highlighted the need for transparency in disclosure of clinical trial data.
It was reiterated by the Petitioner that privacy of individuals would not be at risk as their personal
identification data can be redacted before disclosing segregated data of clinical trials.

31

Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

70. It is settled law that courts cannot take judicial notice of facts stated in a news item published in
a newspaper. A statement of fact contained in a newspaper is merely hearsay and therefore,
inadmissible in evidence, unless proved by the maker of the statement appearing in court and
deposing to have perceived the fact reported. 48 In the absence of anything on record in the present
case to substantiate the statement made by Mr. Jayaprakash Muliyil, 48 Laxmi Raj Shetty v. State of
Tamil Nadu (1988) 3 SCC 319 83 | P a g e member of the NTAGI, we are not inclined to take judicial
notice of the news article reported in The Wire, even more so in light of the affidavit filed on behalf
of the Union of India stating that the relevant data was examined by the expert bodies at all stages
before granting emergency use approval to the vaccines. We are also of the opinion that the evidence
relating to the approval process of the Rotavac vaccine has no relevance to the dispute in this case.
On the basis of the said two incidents, it cannot be concluded that the emergency use approval to
COVISHIELD and COVAXIN recommended by the SEC are not in accordance with the statutory
regime.

71. At this stage, it is worthwhile to refer to the statutory regime in place. According to Rule 19 of the
2019 Rules, no person, institution or organisation shall conduct clinical trial of a new drug or
investigational new drug, except in accordance with the permission granted by the Central Licensing
Authority (i.e., the CDSCO) and without following the protocol approved by the Ethics Committee
for clinical trial, registered in accordance with the provisions of Rule 8. Rule 19 (2) of the 2019 Rules
provides that every person associated with the conduct of clinical trial of a new drug or
investigational new drug shall follow the general principles 84 | P a g e and practices as specified in
the First Schedule. The methodology to be adopted in a clinical trial is provided for in the First
Schedule to the 2019 Rules, relevant clauses of which are as under: -

“GENERAL PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR CLINICAL TRIAL

1. General Principles.― (1) The principles and guidelines for protection of trial
subjects as described in Third Schedule as well as Good Clinical Practices guidelines
shall be followed in conduct of any clinical trial. xxx

4. Conduct of Clinical Trial.― Clinical trial should be conducted in accordance with
the principles as specified in Third Schedule. Adherence to the clinical trial protocol
is essential and if amendment of the protocol becomes necessary the rationale for the
amendment shall be provided in the form of a protocol amendment. Serious adverse
events shall be reported during clinical trial in accordance with these Rules.

xxx

6. Reporting.― Report of clinical trial shall be documented in accordance with the
approaches specified in Table 6 of the Third Schedule. The report shall be certified by
the principal investigator or if no principal investigator is designated then by each of
the participating investigators of the study.” It is clear from the above, that there are
stringent statutory requirements which have to be complied with by the
manufacturers of vaccines and other participants, during different stages of clinical

32

trials of vaccines. Further, we also

Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

85 | P a g e note that the GCP guidelines are statutorily required to be followed.

72. The GCP guidelines further elaborate on the role of the Ethics Committee. According to the GCP
guidelines, the Ethics Committee is an independent review board or a committee comprising of
medical / scientific and non-medical / non-scientific members, whose responsibility it is to verify
the protection of the rights, safety and well-being of human subjects involved in a study. The
independent review provides public reassurance by objectively, independently and impartially
reviewing and approving the “Protocol”, the suitability of the investigator(s), facilities, methods and
material to be used for obtaining and documenting “Informed Consent” of the study subjects and
adequacy of confidentiality safeguards. Para 2.4 of the GCP guidelines deal with ethical and safety
considerations, which provide that all research involving human subjects should be conducted in
accordance with the ethical principles contained in the current version of the Declaration of
Helsinki, as annexed to the guidelines. Amongst the principles to be followed, the GCP guidelines
require adherence to the “principles of accountability and transparency” and “principles of public
domain”:

86 | P a g e “Principles of accountability and transparency, whereby the research or
experiment will be conducted in a fair, honest, impartial and transparent manner,
after full disclosure is made by those associated with the Study of each aspect of their
interest in the Study, and any conflict of interest that may exist; and whereby, subject
to the principles of privacy and confidentiality and the rights of the researcher, full
and complete records of the research inclusive of data and notes are retained for such
reasonable period as may be prescribed or considered necessary for the purposes of
post-research monitoring, evaluation of the research, conducting further research
(whether by the initial researcher or otherwise) and in order to make such records
available for scrutiny by the appropriate legal and administrative authority, if
necessary.

xxx Principles of public domain, whereby the research and any further research, experimentation or
evaluation in response to, and emanating from such research is brought into the public domain so
that its results are generally made known through scientific and other publications subject to such
rights as are available to the researcher and those associated with the research under the law in force
at that time.”

73. The GCP guidelines have been formulated following the Declaration of Helsinki. The relevant
portion of the said Declaration is as follows: -

“Privacy and Confidentiality

24. Every precaution must be taken to protect the privacy of research subjects and
the confidentiality of their personal information.

33

87 | P a g e Research Registration and Publication and Dissemination of Results …

Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

36. Researchers, authors, sponsors, editors and publishers all have ethical obligations
with regard to the publication and dissemination of the results of research.

Researchers have a duty to make publicly available the results of their research on human subjects
and are accountable for the completeness and accuracy of their reports. All parties should adhere to
accepted guidelines for ethical reporting. Negative and inconclusive as well as positive results must
be published or otherwise made publicly available. Sources of funding, institutional affiliations and
conflicts of interest must be declared in the publication. Reports of research not in accordance with
the principles of this Declaration should not be accepted for publication.” It is profitable to refer to
the relevant portion of the WHO Statement on Clinical Trials, which is as under: -

“Reporting timeframes for clinical trials Clinical trial results are to be reported
according to the timeframes outlined below. Reporting is to occur in BOTH of the
following two modalities.

1. The main findings of clinical trials are to be submitted for publication in a peer
reviewed journal within 12 months of study completion and are to be published
through an open access mechanism unless there is a specific reason why open access
cannot be used, or otherwise made available publicly at most within 24 months of
study completion.

2. In addition, the key outcomes are to be made publicly available within 12 months
of study completion by posting to the results section of the primary clinical trial 88 |
P a g e registry. Where a registry is used without a results database available, the
results should be posted on a free-to-access, publicly available, searchable
institutional website of the Regulatory Sponsor, Funder or Principal Investigator.”

74. The GCP guidelines are being scrupulously followed, according to the Union of India. The
principles of “public domain” in the GCP guidelines provide for research, experimentation or
evaluation in response to the research to be brought into the public domain. The results of the
clinical trials are generally to be made known through scientific and other publications. The
requirement of publication, according to the WHO, also relates to the main findings of clinical trials
to be published in a peer-reviewed journal and the key outcomes to be made publicly available,
within 12 months of study completion. The Petitioner complains of opaqueness in clinical trials as
the general public do not have access to, and the opportunity to be aware of, all the necessary details
by segregated clinical trial data (primary datasets) not being available. There is no challenge by the
Petitioner to the GCP guidelines. As required by the WHO Statement on Clinical Trials and the GCP
guidelines, findings of the clinical trials and the key outcomes of the trials have been published. In
light of the existing statutory regime, we do not see it fit to 89 | P a g e mandate the disclosure of
primary clinical trial data, when the results and key findings of such clinical trials have already been
published.

34

Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

75. After examining the judgment of the United States District Court for the Northern District of
Texas (hereinafter, the “US District Court”), we are afraid that the said decision cannot be said to be
relevant for adjudication of the dispute in the present case. The grievance of the plaintiff in the said
case pertained to all data and information for the Pfizer vaccine, enumerated under the relevant
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act, not being provided by the United States Food and
Drug Administration. The US District Court referred to the Freedom of Information Act to hold that
the citizenry has a right to be provided with the relevant information pertaining to the Pfizer vaccine
and that such ‘information is often useful only if it is timely’. The US District Court directed
expeditious completion of the plaintiff’s request after concluding that the request under the
Freedom of Information Act was of paramount importance. We note that with respect to COVAXIN
and COVISHIELD, results of clinical trials have been published in accordance with our statutory
regime in place. Reliance placed by the Petitioner on European Medicines Agency policy on 90 | P a
g e publication of clinical data for medicinal products for human use is also not relevant as the GCP
guidelines relating to the disclosure of clinical trial data, framed under the 2019 Rules, currently
govern the field of disclosure of clinical trial data in India.

76. An analysis of the submissions made by the learned counsel appearing for the parties and a close
scrutiny of the material placed on record would show that there is a strict statutory regime in force
for grant of approvals to vaccines. Specialist bodies established under the provisions of the Drugs
and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the rules framed thereunder comprise of domain experts in the
relevant field, who conduct a thorough scrutiny of the material produced by the manufacturers
before granting approval. The information provided on behalf of the Union of India substantiates
that the data provided by the vaccine manufacturers was considered by the SEC over a period of
time and several conditions were imposed at the time of recommending approvals, which have been
modified or lifted subsequently on availability of further data arising from the clinical trials before
the SEC, as can be seen from the minutes of the meetings of the SEC, available on the website of the
MoHFW.

91 | P a g e We do not agree with the submission on behalf of the Petitioner that emergency
approvals to the vaccines were given in haste, without properly reviewing the data from clinical
trials. We are also of the opinion that the Parliamentary Standing Committee report relied upon by
Mr. Bhushan is not relevant and the lapses pointed out therein pertain to the year 2011, which have
no obvious connection to the grant of approval to Respondent Nos. 4 and 5 for the restricted
emergency use of their respective vaccines. As long as the relevant information relating to the
minutes of the meetings of the regulatory bodies and the key outcomes and findings of the trials are
available in public domain, the Petitioner cannot contend that every minute detail relating to clinical
trials be placed in public domain to enable an individual to take an informed, conscious decision to
be vaccinated or not. Given the widespread affliction caused by the virus, there was an imminent
need of manufacturing vaccines which would keep the infection at bay. We would like to highlight
that both the vaccines have been approved by the WHO as well. A perusal of the material placed on
record would show that there is material compliance with the procedure prescribed under the Drugs
and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the 2019 Rules, before grant of approval for the 92 | P a g e emergency
use of the two vaccines. However, it is made clear that subject to the protection of privacy of
individual subjects and to the extent permissible by the 2019 Rules, the relevant data which is

35

Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

required to be published under the statutory regime and the WHO Statement on Clinical Trials shall
be made available to the public without undue delay, with respect to the ongoing post-marketing
trials of COVAXIN and COVISHIELD as well as ongoing clinical trials or trials that may be
conducted subsequently for approval of other COVID- 19 vaccines / vaccine candidates.

III. Improper collection and reporting of AEFIs

77. The contention of the Petitioner is that there have been several adverse effects from vaccines,
including deaths. The Petitioner has sought to fault the Government’s mechanisms in place for
handling of the adverse events. According to the Petitioner, during Phase III trials, where small
controlled trials of a limited number of participants are conducted, a significant increase in adverse
events may not be seen. But after licensure, when the vaccines are administered to the masses, rare
reactions show up, which is why Phase IV post-marketing trials are legally mandated. It was pointed
out by the Petitioner that there has been a 93 | P a g e revision of the rules by the WHO for
classifying AEFIs in 2018. As per the revised mechanism, only reactions that are previously
acknowledged to be caused by the vaccine are classified as vaccine-related reactions. Reactions
observed during post-marketing surveillance are not considered as ‘consistent with causal
association with vaccine’, if a significant increase in such reactions during Phase III trials had not
been recorded. According to the Petitioner, this acquires significance in the context of trials
conducted in this country, as the control trial in Phase III did not go on in the manner intended,
with several members of the original control group prematurely unblinded and offered the vaccine.
The Petitioner contends that owing to ‘dilution of Phase III control trials prematurely’, there are no
controls to compare against, making it difficult to ascertain which adverse events are caused by the
vaccine. Therefore, reactions which are not “known reactions” to the vaccine are not considered
AEFIs. In light of this, it is necessary for the authorities to carefully monitor all vaccine recipients
and publicly record all adverse events.

78. Taking this argument further, the Petitioner contended that the adverse events reporting system
in India is not transparent, with obscure investigation and follow-up of 94 | P a g e deaths and other
serious adverse events after COVID-19 vaccination. The Petitioner relied on a letter published in The
Hindu on 17.03.2021, written by a group of experts in public health, ethics, medicine, law, and
journalism to the Minister for Health & Family Welfare and the DCGI, appealing for “time-bound
and transparent investigation” following deaths and serious adverse effects after COVID-19
vaccination. A presentation made by the National AEFI Committee in a meeting held on 31.03.2021
was referred to by the Petitioner to claim that complete documentation was not available for all the
severe and serious adverse events (including deaths) that had occurred till the time. Additionally, it
was contended that no data pertaining to the AEFIs already classified nor any analysis of the same
had been published publicly till date. The Petitioner also drew the attention of this Court to the
Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS) in place in the United States, which published all
vaccine injury reports every Friday, received till about a week prior to the release date. It was
brought to the notice of this Court that 77,314 adverse events have been reported in India as on
12.03.2022, amounting to 0.004% of the total vaccination. The Petitioner has pointed out that the
percentage of adverse events 95 | P a g e reported in Europe is much larger than the percentage
identified in India, which would show that correct figures are not being published by the

36

Government.

Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

79. On behalf of the Union of India, the procedures and protocols for monitoring of adverse event
following immunisation under the National Adverse Event Following Immunisation Surveillance
Guideline were elaborated upon. The National Adverse Event Following Immunisation Surveillance
Secretariat, established in the Immunisation Technical Support Unit in 2012, had staff dedicated for
managing Adverse Event Following Immunisation surveillance system. It was further strengthened
by the National Adverse Event Following Immunisation Surveillance Technical Collaborating
Centre, comprising of experts from Lady Hardinge Medical College and Allied Hospitals in New
Delhi. Adverse Event Following Immunisation Committees were formed at the national and state
levels to provide guidance to the National AEFI Surveillance and carry out documentation,
investigation and causality assessment, besides training and orientation of health care workers and
others involved in AEFI. According to the Union of India, a foolproof protocol for reporting and
causality assessment for any AEFI with Universal Immunisation Program (UIP) and 96 | P a g e
Non-UIP vaccines has been established. The National AEFI Committee gets periodical reports
regarding ‘minor AEFIs’, ‘severe AEFIs’ and ‘serious AEFIs’. Online reporting of all serious and
severe AEFIs at the district level to be communicated to relevant authorities at the state / national
level is done on a web-based portal, SAFEVAC (Surveillance and Action for Events Following
Vaccination). All serious and severe adverse events following vaccination even at district level are
uploaded online on SAFEVAC. It was submitted on behalf of the Union of India that case details,
scanned copies of reports are uploaded on SAFEVAC, which also has facilities for generating
dashboards and line-lists at different levels.

80. Further, a similar feature of reporting of all AEFIs (including minor) by the vaccinator was made
available on the Co-WIN portal. District Immunisation Officers (DIOs) were given the facility to
report AEFI cases about which they have information from such individuals who do not have access
to Co-WIN. Departmental orders and standard operating procedures have been issued for further
investigations and sharing of hospital records by the DIOs through Co-WIN. The Union of India has
brought to the notice of this Court that an alignment with the Pharmacovigilance Programme of
India (PvPI) under Indian 97 | P a g e Pharmacopoeia Commission has been developed for receipt of
information regarding AEFI cases from around 300 Adverse Drug Reaction Monitoring Centers in
medical colleges and large hospitals. The Union of India has highlighted that information from the
PvPI and the CDSCO are collated and studied, in case of any new, previously unknown events
identified through AEFI surveillance. A press release of the MoHFW dated 17.02.2017 titled
‘Maximum Possible Marks to Indian NRA in WHO Assessment’ has been placed before this Court to
state that the AEFI Surveillance System in India (which is in use for COVID-19 vaccination) has
been approved by global experts in an assessment conducted by the WHO in 2017. Given the novel
nature of the virus, membership of the National AEFI Committee has been expanded to include
neurologists, cardiologists, respiratory medicine specialists and medical specialists, with even States
/ Union Territories requested to expand their AEFI Committees on a similar scale to strengthen
AEFI surveillance for COVID-19 vaccines. Causality assessment of AEFI cases is conducted at the
state and the national levels by experts trained as per the causality assessment checklist, based on
the definition and algorithm developed by the WHO. Once approved by experts of the National AEFI
Committee, results of causality 98 | P a g e assessment of AEFI cases are made available in the

37

public domain and are shared with the CDSCO, amongst other authorities, for appropriate
regulatory action.

Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

81. As regards the present status of AEFI surveillance for COVID-19 vaccination, it was submitted
that as the causality assessment of reported AEFI cases is a time-consuming process, a method of
rapid review and assessment had been initiated at the national level to quickly review available
information in each case and look for trends in reporting of specific events or unusual cases
requiring further early investigation and assessment. All cases of serious and severe AEFIs,
including reported deaths, are subjected to rapid reviews, analysis and causality assessment done by
a team of trained subject experts. It was clarified that mere reporting of AEFI case should not be
attributed to the vaccine unless proved by the causality assessment analysis. The National Expert
Group on Vaccine Administration for COVID- 19 (NEGVAC), an additional body of experts, is also
involved in providing guidance on vaccine safety and surveillance, thus, aiding in the prompt
identification of AEFIs for the purpose of identifying and understanding evolving trends in the
disease and taking prompt action. 2,116 serious and severe AEFIs have been reported from
1,19,38,44,741 doses 99 | P a g e of COVID-19 vaccine administered till 24.11.2021. While a report of
rapid review and analysis completed for 495 cases had been submitted, a further report of 1,356
serious and severe AEFI cases had been presented to the NEGVAC and the rapid review and analysis
of balance cases was underway. Press releases around a report on bleeding and clotting events
following COVID-19 vaccination being submitted to the MoHFW by the National AEFI Committee
and on clarification on deaths following vaccination and process of causality assessment were placed
before this Court. Therefore, the Union of India submitted that there was continuous monitoring
and examination of AEFI cases in India and there is no basis for the allegations around AEFIs not
being properly collected and lack of transparency in their investigation.

82. From the material placed before us, we note that the National AEFI Surveillance Secretariat has
been functioning for 10 years and as has been pointed out, there is a well- established protocol in
place for identification and monitoring of AEFIs. The website of the MoHFW carries the results of
causality assessment of AEFI cases, from which the public can obtain relevant information
pertaining to AEFIs. We have been informed that a thorough causality assessment analysis 100 | P a
g e of AEFIs is carried out by experts and not every severe disease and death can be attributed to
vaccination. Reactions are examined by experts specifically trained to undertake causality analysis
before notifying such reactions as adverse events arising from vaccination. There is a well- defined
mechanism for collection of data relating to adverse events that occur due to COVID-19 vaccines and
the Government of India has taken steps to direct all concerned medical professionals at the ground
level to report adverse events. Even medical practitioners at private hospitals are associated with
reporting of adverse events. Therefore, we are not inclined to accept the broad-strokes challenge
mounted by the Petitioner that the surveillance system of AEFIs in this country is faulty and the
correct figures of those who have suffered any side effects, severe reactions or deaths
post-inoculation have not been disclosed.

83. As regards the contention of the Petitioner on abandoning of Phase III trials, we note that
unblinding of participants during the Phase III trial was done on the recommendation of the SEC.
The Union of India has emphasized that at every stage, the deliberations of domain experts, which

38

Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

involved discussions with the manufacturers, focused on safety and immunogenicity of the vaccines
and it 101 | P a g e was only when there was consensus among domain experts that it was safe to
extend the immunisation drive beyond the category of ‘healthcare workers / frontline workers’, the
appropriate decisions were taken. In doing so, the available trial data, trajectory of the pandemic,
evidence, future contingencies and several other factors have always been heeded. There is no
challenge to the decision of the SEC, a body of domain experts, as being unreasonable or arbitrary,
nor have we been called upon to determine whether adequate time was devoted to recognise all
relevant reactions as vaccine-related reactions prior to such unblinding. What the Petitioner seeks is
the monitoring of all adverse events and publication of the results of investigation. The Union of
India has painstakingly taken this Court through the details of the procedure followed to closely
monitor, review and escalate the incidence of AEFIs to appropriate authorities. As regards
previously unknown / unidentified reactions seen during the monitoring of AEFIs at the time of
vaccine administration, the Union of India has elaborated on the role of the PvPI and the CDSCO,
which collate and study such reactions. We believe this adequately addresses the Petitioner’s
concerns, as this Court has been informed that previously unidentified events are also being 102 | P
a g e taken into consideration and investigated. We trust the Union of India to have the appropriate
authorities ensure that this leg of the AEFI surveillance system is not compromised with while
meeting the requirements of the rapid review and assessment system followed at the national level.

84. The Petitioner had taken issue with the present system to the extent it allows only DIOs or the
vaccinators to report AEFIs. According to the Petitioner, the repository of AEFIs should be as
detailed as the VAERS in the United State of America. The Petitioner further submitted that
individuals and doctors must be able to report adverse events, with the reporter being given a
unique identification number and the reports being openly accessible. The response of the Union of
India on this issue is that the DIOs have been instructed to set up a network with private hospitals to
report AEFIs. Training has been provided to state officers, medical officers, private practitioners and
frontline health workers on their role in AEFI surveillance. Even auxiliary nurse midwives have been
instructed to notify all AEFIs. However, we are in agreement with the suggestion made by the
Petitioner that there should be a mechanism by which individuals and private doctors should be
permitted to report suspected 103 | P a g e adverse events. Information relating to adverse effects
following immunisation is crucial for the purpose of understanding the safety of the vaccines that
are being administered, apart from being instrumental in further scientific studies around the
pandemic. There is an imminent need for collection of requisite data of adverse events and wider
participation of people in reporting the adverse events is necessary for the purpose of gathering
correct information. Thus, the Union of India is directed to facilitate the reporting of suspected
adverse events by individuals and private doctors on a virtual platform and the reports so made
shall be publicly accessible after being given unique identification numbers, without listing any
personal or confidential data of the persons reporting. All necessary steps to create awareness of,
and to navigate, this platform for self-reporting shall be effectuated by the Government, roping in
and training relevant participants right from the ground level of vaccine administration.

IV. Vaccination of Children

39

Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

85. The opinion of the Petitioner is that children are at almost no risk from COVID-19 and instances
of previously healthy children requiring hospitalisation due to COVID-19 are exceedingly rare.
While referring to articles in the Nature 104 | P a g e and the Lancet, the Petitioner contended that
scientific evidence shows that risk of administering vaccines to children outweigh the benefits
offered by the vaccine in children. The Petitioner further submitted that serological studies would
show that a large number of children have already acquired antibodies to COVID-19. The Petitioner
has highlighted the risk of myocarditis associated with the mRNA vaccines, on the basis of which,
several European countries have recently stopped the use of Moderna vaccines for those under the
age of 30. He has also pointed out that these risks had not been identified in the initial vaccine trials
as the trial size was too small to uncover rare risks, which were discovered after mass vaccination.
The Petitioner has sought for results as well as the primary data of clinical trials conducted on the
paediatric population to be made public.

86. In response thereto, the Union of India contended that paediatric vaccination is advised by
global agencies such as the WHO, the UNICEF and the CDC. Expert opinion in India is in tune with
global consensus in favour of vaccination of children. We are informed that 8,91,39,455 doses of
COVAXIN have been administered to individuals in the age group of 15 to 18 years as on
12.03.2022. The AEFIs 105 | P a g e reported are 1,739 minor complaints, 81 serious complaints and
6 severe. According to the Union of India, the said data would show that the vaccine does not pose
threat to the safety of children. As regards the clinical trials, para 2.4.6.2 of the GCP guidelines were
relied on to show that children are not required to be involved in research that could be carried out
equally well with adults and further that, for the clinical evaluation of a new drug, study in children
should be carried out after the Phase III clinical trials in adults. It has been stated that paediatric
vaccination was considered at a stage where more than substantial data on safety and
immunogenicity of COVAXIN in adults was available. To avoid any risks, clinical trials were also
conducted on a limited number of children as per the protocol approved by domain experts. Having
found no serious adverse event in the said trials, paediatric vaccination was initiated in a phased
manner, starting from the eldest paediatric age group of 15 to 18 years. On 12.05.2021, on the basis
of recommendations of the SEC, the CDSCO granted permission to Respondent No. 4 to conduct
Phase II / Phase III clinical trials of COVAXIN for the age group of 2 to 18 years. Thereafter,
Respondent No. 4 had submitted an application for grant of permission to manufacture COVAXIN
paediatric 106 | P a g e vaccines for emergency use, which was subsequently granted by the CDSCO.
It was argued on behalf of the Union of India that expert opinion is to the effect that paediatric
vaccinations are always preventive in nature and are administered to avoid any risk of infection and
of prolonged clinical symptoms.

87. This Court cannot sit in judgment of leading scientific analysis relating to the safety of paediatric
vaccination. Experts in science may themselves differ in their opinions while taking decisions on
matters related to safety and allied aspects, but that does not entitle the Court to second-guess
expert opinion, on the basis of which the Government has drawn up its policies. The decision taken
by the Union of India to vaccinate paediatric population in this country is in tune with global
scientific consensus and expert bodies like the WHO, the UNICEF and the CDC have also advised
paediatric vaccination. It would not only be beyond our jurisdiction but also hazardous if this Court
were to examine the accuracy of such expert opinion, based on competing medical opinions. As

40

Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

already stated, the scope of judicial review does not entail the Court embarking upon such
misadventures. Therefore, we reject the contention of the 107 | P a g e Petitioner that this Court has
to intervene in paediatric vaccination on the ground that it is unscientific.

88. With respect to results of clinical trials, we note that the Union of India has stated that the
results of clinical trials of COVAXIN for paediatric population have already been published. We also
note that for the age group of 12 to 14 years, Biological E’s Corbevax is being administered. Keeping
in line with the WHO Statement on Clinical Trials, the Declaration of Helsinki and the GCP
guidelines, we direct the Union of India to ensure that key findings and results of the clinical trials of
Corbevax be published at the earliest, if not already done. Neither vaccine is an mRNA vaccine and
to this extent, the apprehensions of the Petitioner with respect to the associated risks of mRNA
vaccines are unfounded in the present situation.

Conclusion

89. In conclusion, we have summarised our findings on the various issues considered by us, below:

(i) Given the issues urged by the Petitioner have a bearing on public health and
concern the fundamental rights of individuals in this country, we are not inclined to
108 | P a g e entertain any challenge to the maintainability of the Writ Petition.

(ii) As far as judicial review of policy decisions based on expert opinion is concerned, there is no
doubt that wide latitude is provided to the executive in such matters and the Court does not have the
expertise to appreciate and decide on merits of scientific issues on the basis of divergent medical
opinion. However, this does not bar the Court from scrutinising whether the policy in question can
be held to be beyond the pale of unreasonableness and manifest arbitrariness and to be in
furtherance of the right to life of all persons, bearing in mind the material on record.

(iii) With respect to the infringement of bodily integrity and personal autonomy of an individual
considered in the light of vaccines and other public health measures introduced to deal with the
COVID-19 pandemic, we are of the opinion that bodily integrity is protected under Article 21 of the
Constitution and no individual can be forced to be vaccinated. Further, personal autonomy of an
individual, which is a recognised facet of the protections guaranteed under Article 21, encompasses
the right to refuse to undergo any medical treatment in 109 | P a g e the sphere of individual health.
However, in the interest of protection of communitarian health, the Government is entitled to
regulate issues of public health concern by imposing certain limitations on individual rights, which
are open to scrutiny by constitutional courts to assess whether such invasion into an individual’s
right to personal autonomy and right to access means of livelihood meets the threefold requirement
as laid down in K.S. Puttaswamy (supra), i.e., (i) legality, which presupposes the existence of law; (ii)
need, defined in terms of a legitimate State aim; and (iii) proportionality, which ensures a rational
nexus between the objects and the means adopted to achieve them.

(iv) On the basis of substantial material filed before this Court reflecting the near-unanimous views
of experts on the benefits of vaccination in addressing severe disease from the infection, reduction in

41

Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

oxygen requirement, hospital and ICU admissions, mortality and stopping new variants from
emerging, this Court is satisfied that the current vaccination policy of the Union of India is informed
by relevant considerations and cannot be said to be unreasonable or manifestly arbitrary.
Contrasting scientific opinion coming forth from certain quarters to 110 | P a g e the effect that
natural immunity offers better protection against COVID-19 is not pertinent for determination of
the issue before us.

(v) However, no data has been placed by the Union of India or the States appearing before us,
controverting the material placed by the Petitioner in the form of emerging scientific opinion which
appears to indicate that the risk of transmission of the virus from unvaccinated individuals is almost
on par with that from vaccinated persons. In light of this, restrictions on unvaccinated individuals
imposed through various vaccine mandates by State Governments / Union Territories cannot be
said to be proportionate. Till the infection rate remains low and any new development or research
finding emerges which provides due justification to impose reasonable and proportionate
restrictions on the rights of unvaccinated individuals, we suggest that all authorities in this country,
including private organisations and educational institutions, review the relevant orders and
instructions imposing restrictions on unvaccinated individuals in terms of access to public places,
services and resources, if not already recalled. It is clarified that in the context of the
rapidly-evolving situation presented 111 | P a g e by the COVID-19 pandemic, our suggestion to
review the vaccine mandates imposed by States / Union Territories, is limited to the present
situation alone and is not to be construed as interfering with the lawful exercise of power by the
executive to take suitable measures for prevention of infection and transmission of the virus. Our
s u g g e s t i o n   a l s o   d o e s   n o t   e x t e n d   t o   a n y   o t h e r   d i r e c t i o n s   r e q u i r i n g   m a i n t e n a n c e   o f
COVID-appropriate behaviour issued by the Union or the State Governments.

(vi) As regards non-disclosure of segregated clinical data, we find that the results of Phase III
clinical trials of the vaccines in question have been published, in line with the requirement under the
statutory regime in place, the GCP guidelines and the WHO Statement on Clinical Trials. The
material provided by the Union of India, comprising of minutes of the meetings of the SEC, do not
warrant the conclusion that restricted emergency use approvals had been granted to COVISHIELD
and COVAXIN in haste, without thorough review of the relevant data. Relevant information relating
to the meetings of the SEC and the NTAGI are available in public domain and therefore, challenge to
the procedures adopted by the expert 112 | P a g e bodies while granting regulatory approval to the
vaccines on the ground of lack of transparency cannot be entertained. However, we reiterate that
subject to the protection of privacy of individual subjects, with respect to ongoing clinical trials and
trials that may be conducted subsequently for COVID-19 vaccines, all relevant data required to be
published under the extant statutory regime must be made available to the public without undue
delay.

(vii) We do not accept the sweeping challenge to the monitoring system of AEFIs being faulty and
not reflecting accurate figures of those with severe reactions or deaths from vaccines. We note that
the role of the Pharmacovigilance Programme of India and the CDSCO, as elaborated upon by the
Union of India, collates and studies previously unknown reactions seen during monitoring of AEFIs
at the time of vaccine administration and we trust the Union of India to ensure that this leg of the

42

AEFI surveillance system is not compromised with, while meeting the requirements of the rapid
review and assessment system followed at the national level for AEFIs.

Jacob Puliyel vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

113 | P a g e

(viii) We are also of the opinion that information relating to adverse effects following immunisation
is crucial for creating awareness around vaccines and their efficacy, apart from being instrumental
in further scientific studies around the pandemic. Recognising the imperative need for collection of
requisite data of adverse events and wider participation in terms of reporting, the Union of India is
directed to facilitate reporting of suspected adverse events by individuals and private doctors on an
accessible virtual platform. These reports shall be made publicly accessible, without compromising
on protecting the confidentiality of the persons reporting, with all necessary steps to create
awareness of the existence of such a platform and of the information required to navigate the
platform to be undertaken by the Union of India at the earliest.

(ix) On paediatric vaccination, we recognise that the decision taken by the Union of India to
vaccinate children in this country is in tune with global scientific consensus and expert bodies like
the WHO, the UNICEF and the CDC and it is beyond the scope of review for this Court to second-
guess expert opinion, on the basis of which the Government has drawn up its policy. Keeping in line
with 114 | P a g e the WHO Statement on Clinical Trials and the extant statutory regime, we direct
the Union of India to ensure that key findings and results of the relevant phases of clinical trials of
vaccines already approved by the regulatory authorities for administration to children, be made
public at the earliest, if not already done.

90. We express our gratitude to the learned counsel on either side for their able assistance in
enabling this Court to reach the above conclusion.

91. The Writ Petition is disposed of accordingly.

.....................................J. [ L. NAGESWARA RAO ] .....................................J. [ B. R. GAVAI ] New
Delhi, May 2, 2022 115 | P a g e

43