Jafarudheen vs State Of Kerala on 22 April, 2022

Jafarudheen vs State Of Kerala on 22 April, 2022

Author: M. M. Sundresh

Bench: M.M. Sundresh, Sanjay Kishan Kaul

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 430-431 OF 2015

JAFARUDHEEN & ORS.                                                ... APPELLANTS

VERSUS

STATE OF KERALA                                                   ... RESPONDENT

WITH

CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 450-451 OF 2015

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 959 OF 2015

JUDGMENT

M. M. SUNDRESH, J.

1. Convictions confirmed and acquittals reversed at the hands of the Division Bench of the High
Court of Kerela are under challenge before us. The accused, who got their acquittal confirmed, stand
as freemen with no further challenge. Appropriately, our common judgment disposes of these
appeals emanating from the same occurrence.

BRIEF FACTS:

2. The deceased and the accused belong to two different political parties – one affiliated to CPI (M)
and the other NDF (National Development Front). There was an altercation between the affiliated
political members of CPI (M) and NDF on 17.07.2002 at about 4:00 p.m. with the deceased and
P.W.8 as the CPI(M) members, and A-3 and A-10 as that of NDF. In the altercation the deceased
had reportedly assaulted A-3.

1

Jafarudheen vs State Of Kerala on 22 April, 2022

3. Seeking to avenge, the accused, being 16 in numbers, assembled at the family house of A-5 on the
same day (i.e.17.07.2002) at about 7:00 p.m. and hatched a conspiracy to take out the life of the
deceased. In pursuance to the aforesaid decision, A-1 to A-13 went to the residence of the deceased
on 18.07.2002 at about 9:30 p.m. in three material objects, namely, - (i) an auto-rickshaw, (ii) a
motorbike, and (iii) a jeep, armed with deadly weapons like swords, knives, chopper, etc. While four
of them (A-7, A-10, A-12, and A-13) waited outside, the others (A-1 to A-6, A-8, A-9, and A-11)
barged in and indiscriminately attacked the deceased. In the process, they also exploded country
bombs on two occasions.

4. The occurrence was witnessed by P.W.1, the author of the First Information Report – Ext. P-1 and
others. For the occurrence, which took place at about 9.30 p.m. on 18.07.2002, the registration of
FIR/complaint was done in Crime No. 237/2002 at about 11.00 p.m. against six named accused and
other identifiable ones for the offences punishable under Sections 143, 147, 148, 427, 452, 302 read
with 149 of the Indian Penal Code (for short ‘IPC’) and Section 3 of the Explosives Substances Act.
The registered complaint reached the jurisdictional Magistrate at about 4.15 p.m. the next day.

5. P.W.64 took up the investigation, and accordingly arrested the accused, A-10, A-12 and A-13 on
31.07.2002. Thereafter, recoveries were made pursuant to their arrest. A-11 surrendered before the
Judicial First Class Magistrate, Punalur, on 05.08.2002. Recoveries have been made from A-10,
A-12 and A-13 on 01.08.2002. From A-11, recoveries were made on 13.08.2002.

6. On completion of the investigation, a charge sheet was laid against 16 accused. Charges were
framed against A2, A-4, A-5, A-8, A-9 to A-16 for the offences punishable under Sections 120-B, 143,
147, 148, 427, 460, 302 read with 149 IPC and Sections 3 and 5 of the Explosives Substances Act. As
A-1, A-3, A-6 and A-7 were absconding, the case against them got split up.

7. The prosecution examined 66 witnesses in total while marking Ext. P-1 to P-97. On behalf of the
defence, particularly A-8 & A-9, one witness was examined as DW-1, while Ext. D-1 to D-18 were
marked. The material objects 1 to 54 were exhibited and identified before the Court.

8. The learned Additional District and Sessions Judge, Court I, Kollam, while acquitting A-10 to
A-16, convicted the others for the following offences:

(cid:131) A-2, A-4, A-5, A-8, A-9 – U/s 302 r/w 149 IPC and sentenced to life imprisonment
(cid:131) A-2, A-4, A-5, A-8, A-9 – U/s 147 r/w 149 IPC for 1 year S.I. and fine of Rs.5000 (cid:131)
A-2, A-4, A-5, A-8, A-9 – U/s 148, 149 IPC for 2 years S.I. and fine of Rs.10,000 (cid:131)
A-2, A-4, A-5, A-8, A-9 – U/s 460 IPC for 3 years R.I. and fine of Rs.15,000 (cid:131) A-4 –
U/s 427 IPC for 6 months S.I. and a fine of Rs.5,000

9. Appeals and revisions were filed by both the prosecution and the de facto complainant, on the one
hand, and the convicted accused, on the other. The High Court of Kerala upheld the conviction and
the sentence imposed upon A-2, A-4, A-5, A-8, and A-9 for offences under Sections 460, 148, 302
read with 149 IPC and further convicted them under Section 427 IPC and Section 3 of the Explosives
Substances Act. The appeal filed by the State against the order of acquittal in favour of A-14 to A-16

2

was dismissed, while it was accordingly allowed by overturning the acquittal qua A-10 to A-13. As
the legal battle against A-14 to A-16 attained finality, the convicted accused have filed these appeals.

Jafarudheen vs State Of Kerala on 22 April, 2022

EVIDENCE BEFORE THE COURT

10. P.W.1 is the relative of the deceased who had seen the occurrence from inside the house, hiding
behind the chairs. All the accused are known to him. He attributed specific overt acts against a few
accused and identified a few of them. However, this witness could not identify A-11, not even named
in Ext. P-1, i.e. first information report, despite being a known person. Similarly, he does not
identify A-10.

11. P.W.2 is the father of the deceased, who also took cover protecting himself by staying in a nearby
room. Despite being an eye-witness and knowing the accused, he wrongly identified A-10 as A-5.
P.W.2 also does not identify A-11 and A-12.

12. P.W.3 is the maid-servant working at the residence of the deceased at the relevant point of time.
She also wrongly identified A-4 as A-10, notwithstanding her claim that she knew him prior to the
occurrence. This witness did not say anything about the presence of A-11, A-12 and A-13, though she
speaks of the other accused, as deposed by P.W.1 and P.W.2. Both these witnesses do not make any
reference to A-13.

13. P.W.4 is the neighbour of the deceased, having witnessed the occurrence from outside. He
identified A-10 and A-12 by deposing that they were standing on the south-western corner of the
house. However, he did not speak of A-11 and A-13.

14. P.W.21 is the employee (worker) in the ASR Theatre, Thadikkad situated nearer to the deceased's
house. He had seen the occurrence from the theatre. He identified A-10, having seen him near the
vicinity of the deceased's house. His statement under Section 161 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
(for short ‘Cr.PC’) was recorded nine days after the incident. Incidentally, the blood- stained clothes
of A-10 were recovered from his house, he being not a party to the recovery mahazar. He also
similarly identified A-11 and A-12. He attributes the specific overt act against A-13 of throwing a
bomb. Though he states that he saw the occurrence along with C.W.22, the said person was not
examined.

15. P.W.46 saw the incident while returning home. He heard the gunshot and attributes overt act as
against A-10, A-12 and A-13. His statement was also recorded only on 20.07.2002. He wrongly
identified A-10 as A-7 while unable to identify A-12. He has not expressed anything about A-11.

16. The doctor who has been examined as P.W.15 has issued Ext. P-45 – the post- mortem certificate
which, on perusal, indicates about 30 ante-mortem injuries, of which the majority of them are
incised.

17. A-8 and A-9 got injuries and took treatment in the hospital. The injuries were found to be incised
and thus contrary to the statement made by them to P.W.45, corroborated with the entry of Accident

3

Jafarudheen vs State Of Kerala on 22 April, 2022

Register of Medical Trust Hospital. The cause of the injury, as informed by A-8 and A-9, was that
they sustained the injury when the lorry tyre fell upon them by accident when they tried to replace it
with another. But, in his evidence, P.W. 45 has stated that it is unlikely, and the injury could only be
due to a sharp-edged hard object.

TRIAL COURT

18.The Trial Court rendered its judgment as aforesaid by undertaking a thorough analysis through a
laborious process. It took into consideration each and every aspect of evidence before rendering its
decision. Perhaps, the only exercise not done was with respect to the recovery qua A-10 to A-13,
particularly on the evidentiary value.

19. It found that A-2, A-4, A-5, A-8, and A-9 have clinching evidence staring at them. The evidence
of eye-witnesses, as well as that of experts, was taken into account. The contentions regarding the
delay in sending Ext.P-1 – first information report and the injuries suffered by A-8 and A-9 were
duly considered. These two accused took the same plea under Section 313 Cr.PC questioning,
denying their existence at the place of occurrence. The case projected by the defense that the
witnesses are either set up by the prosecution or interested in securing the conviction was not
accepted by giving adequate reasoning. After concluding that there is insufficient evidence to
support the charge attracting Section 120B of the IPC, A-14 to A-16 were acquitted.

20. It acquitted A-10 to A-13 based on the inconsistencies in eye-witness statements. Two material
objects, a motorbike and an auto-rickshaw were found unrelated to the occurrence of the event or
the evidentiary value of the accused. As such, it granted acquittal to A-10 to A-13. The reasoning of
the Trial Court is elucidated hereunder:

“….Though PW1 would depose that accused Nos. 1 to 6 and 8 to 10 get down from the
vehicle parked on the road he did not say that A13 was among them. He did not
depose that A13 exploded Bomb. From the deposition of PW1 it is brought out that A
1 to A9 and A 11 entered into hall room first and inflicted injuries and on getting the
cut injury of A4 on the left cheek Ashrar fell down. Before getting injury of A4 Ashraf
suffered cut injury with sword on his right leg. Thereafter A7, A10, A12 entered into
the hall room inflicted cut injuries on various parts· of. the person of Ashraf. Ext.
A45 and the deposition of PW58 proved that corresponding injuries found on the
dead body of Ashraf. Though PW1 could depose the names of A1 to A12 he could not
identify A 1, A3, A6, A7 and A 10, A 11, he could identify A2, A4, A5, AS and A9. His
evidence shows that A11 did not inflict any injury on Ashraf. PW2 also stated the
name of the assailants came inside the house and caused injury on the person of
Ashraf. Though PW2 stated the names of A2, A4, A5, AS, A9, A 11 he could identify
only AS andA9. No overt act stated by PW2 against A 11 and on analyzing the
evidence of PW2 it is seen that A11 was armed with sword and it was catched by
Ashraf and attacked the assailants. Thus PW2 has identified accused 8 and 9 only.
The evidence of PWs 1 and 2 and PW58 and Ex. P45 proved that the version of PWs 1
and 2 is credible probable to believe. The victim sustained 20 incised wounds, on the

4

Jafarudheen vs State Of Kerala on 22 April, 2022

right side of vertex, right eye brow, left cheek and also on various parts of his body.
The evidence of PW58 and Ext. P45 corroborate the testimony of PWs 1 and 2. The
other witnesses especially .PW4, PW7, PW21 and PW32 and PW46 have deposed
about the incident they have seen outside the house.

Since I have discussed in the earlier paragraphs not reproducing. PW4 identified A4,
A8, A9, A10 and A12. As per the evidence he saw A4 took A8 and A9 through the
kitchen door on the southern side of the house. A 10 and A 12 were in front of the
house of Ashraf. No overt act stated. PW7 through hostile witness his evidence shows
that A4 was driving jeep towards the house of Ashraf and A5 was in the jeep.
According to him he was relation with A5. There is no evidence to corroborate his
testimony that A11 has driven motor cycle towards the house of Ashraf. PW21 though
narrated the presence of accused NOs.2,4,5,8,9, 11 and 13 he says that 4 accused has
broken the glasses of motor cycle and car. He also stated that A4 took A8 and A9 in
front of the house were A11 and A 13 were present. No overt act stated against A 11.
He could identify A2, A4, A5, A8 and A9, stated that A13 Kochansar exploded bomb.
As per the prosecution records no accused named Kochansar. The name of A13 is
Ansarudheen. The prosecution failed to prove that A13 Ansarudheen is also known as
Kochansar. Therefore the evidence of PW21, PW32 and PW46 that A13 exploded
bomb at the yard of the house cannot be believed. The prosecution could not prove
that impact of Explosion at the yard or nearby place. Hence it cannot be held that the
accused are guilty of offence U/s 3 and 5 Explosive Substance Act. The above
witnesses not properly identified A13. The above prosecution witnesses properly
identified A2, A4, A5, A8 and A9. The prosecution evidence proved that the accused
Nos. 2,4,5,8 and 9 formed an unlawful assembly at the yard of the house committed
rioting and trespassed in to the house of Ashraf by break opening the front door with
the intention to commit the murder of Ashraf. The prosecution not succeeded to
prove the offence alleged against the accused NOs, A10, A11 and A12. The prosecution
has not succeeded to prove that the accused were formed conspiracy at the house of
A5 and taken decision to commit the murder of Ashraf. None of the accused are guilty
of offence U/s 120B.” HIGH COURT

21. The High Court confirmed the order of acquittal against A-14 to A-16 and confirmed the
conviction against the other accused, namely, A-2, A-4, A-5, A-8, and A-9. However, it overturned
the order of acquittal of A-10, A-11, A-12, and A-13 granted by the Trial Court on the premise that
the witnesses who spoke about these accused's presence failed to consider the import of Section 149
IPC. These minor discrepancies ought to have been ignored, and the prosecution case is supported
by both recoveries and medical, forensic, and scientific evidence. SUBMISSIONS

22. Counsel appearing for A-2, A-4, A-5, A-8, and A-9 contended that the first information report
registered as Ext. P-1 is an after-thought, created subsequently and thus ante-dated. There is no
proper explanation for referring the jeep with the registration number, which is one of the material
objects recovered under Ext.P-1, when P.W.1 states that he came to know about it only the next day
of the occurrence. Though Ext. P-1 was sent after its registration at about 11.00 p.m., it did reach the

5

Jafarudheen vs State Of Kerala on 22 April, 2022

jurisdictional Magistrate only at about 4.15 p.m. the next day. This delay has not been examined
properly. The witnesses are either interested or chance and, therefore, the courts ought to have
rejected their testimonies. They are not only the members of the deceased's family but also members
of a particular party. The injuries suffered by A-8 and A-9 have not been considered in the correct
perspective.

23. Mr. R. Basant, learned senior counsel appearing for A-10 to A-13, has taken us through the law
governing the cases pertaining to appeals filed against orders of acquittal as there is an enlarged
presumption of innocence. The High Court has committed a jurisdictional error in reversing the
well-merited judgment of the Trial Court by replacing its views with that of the Trial Court. What is
required to be seen is whether the view of the Trial Court is a possible one. The High Court has
committed an error in placing reliance upon recoveries. It did not go into the manner in which the
recoveries have been made. Section 149 IPC though being a substantive offence, is to be proved in
the manner known to law. There must be a proof of common object. When the witnesses are not
able to identify the accused, the testimonies rendered would become highly doubtful. The learned
senior counsel took us through the law laid down by this Court in Mohan @ Srinivas @ Seena
@Tailor Seena v. State of Karnataka, 2021 SCC OnLine SC 1233, wherein it was held that when after
due examination and review of evidence, the Trial Court has passed an order of acquittal, the
exercise of the power of the High Court as imposed by the code must be with circumspect.

SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE STATE

24. It is submitted that in the absence of any apparent illegality, the concurrent decisions rendered
by the courts do not warrant any interference. Both the Courts below considered all the evidence,
eye-witnesses, material objects and recoveries while also taking into account the scientific evidence.
The motive has also been proved through the prior occurrence. The High Court rightly considered
the recoveries made along with the oral evidence. It has given its reasons for reversing the order of
acquittal passed by the Trial Court. The Trial Court did not even consider the evidentiary value of
the recoveries. There is no need for any interference in such a case, particularly when the
contentions raised were noted. On the issue qua the mentioning of the number of the vehicle in the
FIR, it is submitted that it has not been placed before the Court and, in any case, the conviction was
rendered based on the materials available on record. DISCUSSION Scope of Appeal filed against the
Acquittal:

25. While dealing with an appeal against acquittal by invoking Section 378 of the Cr.PC, the
Appellate Court has to consider whether the Trial Court's view can be termed as a possible one,
particularly when evidence on record has been analyzed. The reason is that an order of acquittal
adds up to the presumption of innocence in favour of the accused. Thus, the Appellate Court has to
be relatively slow in reversing the order of the Trial Court rendering acquittal. Therefore, the
presumption in favour of the accused does not get weakened but only strengthened. Such a double
presumption that enures in favour of the accused has to be disturbed only by thorough scrutiny on
the accepted legal parameters. Precedents:

6

Jafarudheen vs State Of Kerala on 22 April, 2022

(cid:131) Mohan @Srinivas @Seena @Tailor Seena v. State of Karnataka, [2021 SCC OnLine
SC 1233] as hereunder: – “20. Section 378 CrPC enables the State to prefer an appeal
against an order of acquittal. Section 384 CrPC speaks of the powers that can be
exercised by the Appellate Court. When the trial court renders its decision by
acquitting the accused, presumption of innocence gathers strength before the
Appellate Court. As a consequence, the onus on the prosecution becomes more
burdensome as there is a double presumption of innocence. Certainly, the Court of
first instance has its own advantages in delivering its verdict, which is to see the
witnesses in person while they depose. The Appellate Court is expected to involve
itself in a deeper, studied scrutiny of not only the evidence before it, but is duty
bound to satisfy itself whether the decision of the trial court is both possible and
plausible view. When two views are possible, the one taken by the trial court in a case
of acquittal is to be followed on the touchstone of liberty along with the advantage of
having seen the witnesses. Article 21 of the Constitution of India also aids the accused
after acquittal in a certain way, though not absolute. Suffice it is to state that the
Appellate Court shall remind itself of the role required to play, while dealing with a
case of an acquittal.

21. Every case has its own journey towards the truth and it is the Court's role
undertake. Truth has to be found on the basis of evidence available before it. There is
no room for subjectivity nor the nature of offence affects its performance. We have a
hierarchy of courts in dealing with cases. An Appellate Court shall not expect the trial
court to act in a particular way depending upon the sensitivity of the case. Rather it
should be appreciated if a trial court decides a case on its own merit despite its
sensitivity.

22. At times, courts do have their constraints. We find, different decisions being
made by different courts, namely, trial court on the one hand and the Appellate
Courts on the other. If such decisions are made due to institutional constraints, they
do not augur well. The district judiciary is expected to be the foundational court, and
therefore, should have the freedom of mind to decide a case on its own merit or else it
might become a stereotyped one rendering conviction on a moral platform.

Indictment and condemnation over a decision rendered, on considering all the materials placed
before it, should be avoided. The Appellate Court is expected to maintain a degree of caution before
making any remark.

23. This court, time and again has laid down the law on the scope of inquiry by an Appellate court
while dealing with an appeal against acquittal under Section 378 CrPC. We do not wish to multiply
the aforesaid principle except placing reliance on a recent decision of this court in Anwar Ali v. State
of Himanchal Pradesh, (2020) 10 SCC 166:

14.2. When can the findings of fact recorded by a court be held to be perverse has
been dealt with and considered in paragraph 20 of the aforesaid decision, which

7

Jafarudheen vs State Of Kerala on 22 April, 2022

reads as under : (Babu case [Babu v. State of Kerala, (2010) 9 SCC 189 : (2010) 3 SCC
(Cri) 1179]) “20. The findings of fact recorded by a court can be held to be perverse if
the findings have been arrived at by ignoring or excluding relevant material or by
taking into consideration irrelevant/inadmissible material. The finding may also be
said to be perverse if it is “against the weight of evidence”, or if the finding so
outrageously defies logic as to suffer from the vice of irrationality.

(Vide Rajinder Kumar Kindra v. Delhi Admn. [Rajinder Kumar Kindra v. Delhi Admn., (1984) 4 SCC
635 : 1985 SCC (L&S) 131], Excise & Taxation Officer-cum-Assessing Authority v. Gopi Nath & Sons
[Excise & Taxation Officer-cum-Assessing Authority v. Gopi Nath & Sons, 1992 Supp (2) SCC 312],
Triveni Rubber & Plastics v. CCE [Triveni Rubber & Plastics v. CCE, 1994 Supp (3) SCC 665], Gaya
Din v. Hanuman Prasad [Gaya Din v. Hanuman Prasad, (2001) 1 SCC 501], Aruvelu [Arulvelu v.
State, (2009) 10 SCC 206 : (2010) 1 SCC (Cri) 288] and Gamini Bala Koteswara Rao v. State of A.P.
[Gamini Bala Koteswara Rao v. State of A.P., (2009) 10 SCC 636 : (2010) 1 SCC (Cri) 372] )” It is
further observed, after following the decision of this Court in Kuldeep Singh v. Commr. of Police
[Kuldeep Singh v. Commr. of Police, (1999) 2 SCC 10 : 1999 SCC (L&S) 429], that if a decision is
arrived at on the basis of no evidence or thoroughly unreliable evidence and no reasonable person
would act upon it, the order would be perverse. But if there is some evidence on record which is
acceptable and which could be relied upon, the conclusions would not be treated as perverse and the
findings would not be interfered with.

14.3. In the recent decision of Vijay Mohan Singh [Vijay Mohan Singh v. State of Karnataka, (2019) 5
SCC 436 : (2019) 2 SCC (Cri) 586], this Court again had an occasion to consider the scope of Section
378 CrPC and the interference by the High Court [State of Karnataka v. Vijay Mohan Singh, 2013
SCC OnLine Kar 10732] in an appeal against acquittal. This Court considered a catena of decisions
of this Court right from 1952 onwards. In para 31, it is observed and held as under:

“31. An identical question came to be considered before this Court in Umedbhai
Jadavbhai [Umedbhai Jadavbhai v. State of Gujarat, (1978) 1 SCC 228 : 1978 SCC
(Cri) 108]. In the case before this Court, the High Court interfered with the order of
acquittal passed by the learned trial court on reappreciation of the entire evidence on
record. However, the High Court, while reversing the acquittal, did not consider the
reasons given by the learned trial court while acquitting the accused. Confirming the
judgment of the High Court, this Court observed and held in para 10 as under:

‘10. Once the appeal was rightly entertained against the order of acquittal, the High
Court was entitled to reappreciate the entire evidence independently and come to its
own conclusion. Ordinarily, the High Court would give due importance to the opinion
of the Sessions Judge if the same were arrived at after proper appreciation of the
evidence. This rule will not be applicable in the present case where the Sessions
Judge has made an absolutely wrong assumption of a very material and clinching
aspect in the peculiar circumstances of the case.’ 31.1. In Sambasivan [Sambasivan v.
State of Kerala, (1998) 5 SCC 412 : 1998 SCC (Cri) 1320], the High Court reversed the
order of acquittal passed by the learned trial court and held the accused guilty on

8

Jafarudheen vs State Of Kerala on 22 April, 2022

reappreciation of the entire evidence on record, however, the High Court did not
record its conclusion on the question whether the approach of the trial court in
dealing with the evidence was patently illegal or the conclusions arrived at by it were
wholly untenable.

Confirming the order passed by the High Court convicting the accused on reversal of the acquittal
passed by the learned trial court, after being satisfied that the order of acquittal passed by the
learned trial court was perverse and suffered from infirmities, this Court declined to interfere with
the order of conviction passed by the High Court. While confirming the order of conviction passed
by the High Court, this Court observed in para 8 as under:

‘8. We have perused the judgment under appeal to ascertain whether the High Court
has conformed to the aforementioned principles. We find that the High Court has not
strictly proceeded in the manner laid down by this Court in Doshi case [Ramesh
Babulal Doshi v. State of Gujarat, (1996) 9 SCC 225 : 1996 SCC (Cri) 972] viz. first
recording its conclusion on the question whether the approach of the trial court in
dealing with the evidence was patently illegal or the conclusions arrived at by it were
wholly untenable, which alone will justify interference in an order of acquittal though
the High Court has rendered a well-

considered judgment duly meeting all the contentions raised before it. But then will
this non-

compliance per se justify setting aside the judgment under appeal? We think, not. In
our view, in such a case, the approach of the court which is considering the validity of
the judgment of an appellate court which has reversed the order of acquittal passed
by the trial court, should be to satisfy itself if the approach of the trial court in dealing
with the evidence was patently illegal or conclusions arrived at by it are demonstrably
unsustainable and whether the judgment of the appellate court is free from those
infirmities; if so to hold that the trial court judgment warranted interference. In such
a case, there is obviously no reason why the appellate court's judgment should be
disturbed. But if on the other hand the court comes to the conclusion that the
judgment of the trial court does not suffer from any infirmity, it cannot but be held
that the interference by the appellate court in the order of acquittal was not justified;
then in such a case the judgment of the appellate court has to be set aside as of the
two reasonable views, the one in support of the acquittal alone has to stand. Having
regard to the above discussion, we shall proceed to examine the judgment of the trial
court in this case.’ 31.2. In K. Ramakrishnan Unnithan [K. Ramakrishnan Unnithan
v. State of Kerala, (1999) 3 SCC 309: 1999 SCC (Cri) 410], after observing that though
there is some substance in the grievance of the learned counsel appearing on behalf
of the accused that the High Court has not adverted to all the reasons given by the
trial Judge for according an order of acquittal, this Court refused to set aside the
order of conviction passed by the High Court after having found that the approach of
the Sessions Judge in recording the order of acquittal was not proper and the

9

Jafarudheen vs State Of Kerala on 22 April, 2022

conclusion arrived at by the learned Sessions Judge on several aspects was
unsustainable.

This Court further observed that as the Sessions Judge was not justified in discarding the
relevant/material evidence while acquitting the accused, the High Court, therefore, was fully
entitled to reappreciate the evidence and record its own conclusion. This Court scrutinised the
evidence of the eyewitnesses and opined that reasons adduced by the trial court for discarding the
testimony of the eyewitnesses were not at all sound. This Court also observed that as the evaluation
of the evidence made by the trial court was manifestly erroneous and therefore it was the duty of the
High Court to interfere with an order of acquittal passed by the learned Sessions Judge. 31.3. In
Atley [Atley v. State of U.P., AIR 1955 SC 807 : 1955 Cri LJ 1653], in para 5, this Court observed and
held as under:

‘5. It has been argued by the learned counsel for the appellant that the judgment of
the trial court being one of acquittal, the High Court should not have set it aside on
mere appreciation of the evidence led on behalf of the prosecution unless it came to
the conclusion that the judgment of the trial Judge was perverse. In our opinion, it is
not correct to say that unless the appellate court in an appeal under Section 417 CrPC
came to the conclusion that the judgment of acquittal under appeal was perverse it
could not set aside that order.

It has been laid down by this Court that it is open to the High Court on an appeal
against an order of acquittal to review the entire evidence and to come to its own
conclusion, of course, keeping in view the well-established rule that the presumption
of innocence of the accused is not weakened but strengthened by the judgment of
acquittal passed by the trial court which had the advantage of observing the
demeanour of witnesses whose evidence have been recorded in its presence.

It is also well settled that the court of appeal has as wide powers of appreciation of
evidence in an appeal against an order of acquittal as in the case of an appeal against
an order of conviction, subject to the riders that the presumption of innocence with
which the accused person starts in the trial court continues even up to the appellate
stage and that the appellate court should attach due weight to the opinion of the trial
court which recorded the order of acquittal.

If the appellate court reviews the evidence, keeping those principles in mind, and
comes to a contrary conclusion, the judgment cannot be said to have been vitiated.
(See in this connection the very cases cited at the Bar, namely, Surajpal Singh v. State
[Surajpal Singh v. State, 1951 SCC 1207 : AIR 1952 SC 52]; Wilayat Khan v. State of
U.P. [Wilayat Khan v. State of U.P., 1951 SCC 898 : AIR 1953 SC 122]) In our opinion,
there is no substance in the contention raised on behalf of the appellant that the High
Court was not justified in reviewing the entire evidence and coming to its own
conclusions.’ 31.4. In K. Gopal Reddy [K. Gopal Reddy v. State of A.P., (1979) 1 SCC
355 : 1979 SCC (Cri) 305], this Court has observed that where the trial court allows

10

Jafarudheen vs State Of Kerala on 22 April, 2022

itself to be beset with fanciful doubts, rejects creditworthy evidence for slender
reasons and takes a view of the evidence which is but barely possible, it is the obvious
duty of the High Court to interfere in the interest of justice, lest the administration of
justice be brought to ridicule.” (cid:131) N. Vijayakumar v. State of T.N., [(2021) 3 SCC 687]
as hereunder: – “20. Mainly it is contended by Shri Nagamuthu, learned Senior
Counsel appearing for the appellant that the view taken by the trial court is a
“possible view”, having regard to the evidence on record. It is submitted that the trial
court has recorded cogent and valid reasons in support of its findings for acquittal.
Under Section 378 CrPC, no differentiation is made between an appeal against
acquittal and the appeal against conviction. By considering the long line of earlier
cases this Court in the judgment in Chandrappa v. State of Karnataka, (2007) 4 SCC
415 : (2007) 2 SCC (Cri) 325 has laid down the general principles regarding the
powers of the appellate Court while dealing with an appeal against an order of
acquittal. Para 42 of the judgment which is relevant reads as under: (SCC p. 432) “42.
From the above decisions, in our considered view, the following general principles
regarding powers of the appellate court while dealing with an appeal against an order
of acquittal emerge:

(1) An appellate court has full power to review, reappreciate and reconsider the
evidence upon which the order of acquittal is founded.

(2) The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 puts no limitation, restriction or condition
on exercise of such power and an appellate court on the evidence before it may reach
its own conclusion, both on questions of fact and of law.

(3) Various expressions, such as, “substantial and compelling reasons”, “good and
sufficient grounds”, “very strong circumstances”, “distorted conclusions”, “glaring
mistakes”, etc. are not intended to curtail extensive powers of an appellate court in an
appeal against acquittal. Such phraseologies are more in the nature of “flourishes of
language” to emphasise the reluctance of an appellate court to interfere with acquittal
than to curtail the power of the court to review the evidence and to come to its own
conclusion.

(4) An appellate court, however, must bear in mind that in case of acquittal, there is
double presumption in favour of the accused. Firstly, the presumption of innocence is
available to him under the fundamental principle of criminal jurisprudence that every
person shall be presumed to be innocent unless he is proved guilty by a competent
court of law. Secondly, the accused having secured his acquittal, the presumption of
his innocence is further reinforced, reaffirmed and strengthened by the trial court.

(5) If two reasonable conclusions are possible on the basis of the evidence on record,
the appellate court should not disturb the finding of acquittal recorded by the trial
court.”

11

Jafarudheen vs State Of Kerala on 22 April, 2022

21. Further in the judgment in Murugesan [Murugesan v. State, (2012) 10 SCC 383:
(2013) 1 SCC (Cri) 69] relied on by the learned Senior Counsel for the appellant, this
Court has considered the powers of the High Court in an appeal against acquittal
recorded by the trial court. In the said judgment, it is categorically held by this Court
that only in cases where conclusion recorded by the trial court is not a possible view,
then only the High Court can interfere and reverse the acquittal to that of conviction.
In the said judgment, distinction from that of “possible view” to “erroneous view” or
“wrong view” is explained. In clear terms, this Court has held that if the view taken by
the trial court is a “possible view”, the High Court not to reverse the acquittal to that
of the conviction.

xxx xxx xxx

23. Further, in Hakeem Khan v. State of M.P., (2017) 5 SCC 719 : (2017) 2 SCC (Cri)
653 this court has considered the powers of the appellate court for interference in
cases where acquittal is recorded by the trial court. In the said judgment it is held
that if the “possible view” of the trial court is not agreeable for the High Court, even
then such “possible view” recorded by the trial court cannot be interdicted. It is
further held that so long as the view of the trial court can be reasonably formed,
regardless of whether the High Court agrees with the same or not, verdict of the trial
court cannot be interdicted and the High Court cannot supplant over the view of the
trial court. Para 9 of the judgment reads as under: (SCC pp. 722-23) “9. Having heard
the learned counsel for the parties, we are of the view that the trial court's judgment
is more than just a possible view for arriving at the conclusion of acquittal, and that it
would not be safe to convict seventeen persons accused of the crime of murder i.e.
under Section 302 read with Section 149 of the Penal Code. The most important
reason of the trial court, as has been stated above, was that, given the time of 6.30
p.m. to 7.00 p.m. of a winter evening, it would be dark, and, therefore, identification
of seventeen persons would be extremely difficult. This reason, coupled with the fact
that the only independent witness turned hostile, and two other eyewitnesses who
were independent were not examined, would certainly create a large hole in the
prosecution story. Apart from this, the very fact that there were injuries on three of
the accused party, two of them being deep injuries in the skull, would lead to the
conclusion that nothing was premeditated and there was, in all probability, a scuffle
that led to injuries on both sides. While the learned counsel for the respondent may
be right in stating that the trial court went overboard in stating that the complainant
party was the aggressor, but the trial court's ultimate conclusion leading to an
acquittal is certainly a possible view on the facts of this case. This is coupled with the
fact that the presence of the kingpin Sarpanch is itself doubtful in view of the fact that
he attended the Court at some distance and arrived by bus after the incident took
place.”

24. By applying the abovesaid principles and the evidence on record in the case on
hand, we are of the considered view that having regard to material contradictions

12

Jafarudheen vs State Of Kerala on 22 April, 2022

which we have already noticed above and also as referred to in the trial court
judgment, it can be said that acquittal is a “possible view”. By applying the ratio as
laid down by this Court in the judgments which are stated supra, even assuming
another view is possible, same is no ground to interfere with the judgment of
acquittal and to convict the appellant for the offence alleged. From the evidence, it is
clear that when the Inspecting Officer and other witnesses who are examined on
behalf of the prosecution, went to the office of the appellant-accused, the appellant
was not there in the office and office was open and people were moving out and in
from the office of the appellant. It is also clear from the evidence of PWs 3, 5 and 11
that the currency and cellphone were taken out from the drawer of the table by the
appellant at their instance. There is also no reason, when the tainted notes and the
cellphone were given to the appellant at 5.45 p.m. no recordings were made and the
appellant was not tested by PW 11 till 7.00 p.m.” Delay in sending the (FIR) First
Information Report to the Magistrate:

26. The jurisdictional Magistrate plays a pivotal role during the investigation process.
It is meant to make the investigation just and fair. The Investigating Officer is to keep
the Magistrate in the loop of his ongoing investigation. The object is to avoid a
possible foul play. The Magistrate has a role to play under Section 159 of Cr.PC.

27. The first information report in a criminal case starts the process of investigation
by letting the criminal law into motion. It is certainly a vital and valuable aspect of
evidence to corroborate the oral evidence. Therefore, it is imperative that such an
information is expected to reach the jurisdictional Magistrate at the earliest point of
time to avoid any possible ante-dating or ante-timing leading to the insertion of
materials meant to convict the accused contrary to the truth and on account of such a
delay may also not only gets bereft of the advantage of spontaneity, there is also a
danger creeping in by the introduction of a coloured version, exaggerated account or
concocted story as a result of deliberation and consultation. However, a mere delay
by itself cannot be a sole factor in rejecting the prosecution's case arrived at after due
investigation. Ultimately, it is for the Court concerned to take a call. Such a view is
expected to be taken after considering the relevant materials.

Precedents:

(cid:131) Shivlal v. State of Chhattisgarh, [(2011) 9 SCC 561] as hereunder :-

“18. This Court in Bhajan Singh v. State of Haryana, (2011) 7 SCC 421 : (2011) 3 SCC
(Cri) 241 has elaborately dealt with the issue of sending the copy of the FIR to the
Ilaqa Magistrate with delay and after placing reliance upon a large number of
judgments including Shiv Ram v. State of U.P., (1998) 1 SCC 149 : 1998 SCC (Cri) 278
: AIR 1998 SC 49 and Arun Kumar Sharma v. State of Bihar, (2010) 1 SCC 108 :
(2010) 1 SCC (Cri) 472 came to the conclusion that CrPC provides for internal and
external checks: one of them being the receipt of a copy of the FIR by the Magistrate

13

Jafarudheen vs State Of Kerala on 22 April, 2022

concerned. It serves the purpose that the FIR be not ante-timed or ante-dated. The
Magistrate must be immediately informed of every serious offence so that he may be
in a position to act under Section 159 CrPC, if so required. The object of the statutory
provision is to keep the Magistrate informed of the investigation so as to enable him
to control the investigation and, if necessary, to give appropriate direction. However,
it is not that as if every delay in sending the report to the Magistrate would
necessarily lead to the inference that the FIR has not been lodged at the time stated
or has been ante-timed or ante-dated or the investigation is not fair and forthright. In
a given case, there may be an explanation for delay. An unexplained inordinate delay
in sending the copy of the FIR to the Ilaqa Magistrate may affect the prosecution case
adversely. However, such an adverse inference may be drawn on the basis of
attending circumstances involved in a case.” (cid:131) Rajeevan v. State of Kerala, [(2003) 3
SCC 355] as hereunder: – “12. Another doubtful factor is the delayed lodging of FIR.
The learned counsel for the appellants highlights this factor. Here it is worthwhile to
refer Thulia Kali v. State of T.N. [(1972) 3 SCC 393 : 1972 SCC (Cri) 543] wherein the
delayed filing of FIR and its consequences are discussed. At para 12 this Court says:
(SCC p. 397) “First information report in a criminal case is an extremely vital and
valuable piece of evidence for the purpose of corroborating the oral evidence adduced
at the trial.

The importance of the above report can hardly be overestimated from the standpoint of the accused.
The object of insisting upon prompt lodging of the report to the police in respect of commission of
an offence is to obtain early information regarding the circumstances in which the crime was
committed, the names of the actual culprits and the part played by them as well as the names of
eyewitnesses present at the scene of occurrence. Delay in lodging the first information report quite
often results in embellishment which is a creature of afterthought. On account of delay, the report
not only gets bereft of the advantage of spontaneity, danger creeps in of the introduction of coloured
version, exaggerated account or concocted story as a result of deliberation and consultation. It is,
therefore, essential that the delay in lodging of the first information report should be satisfactorily
explained.” (emphasis supplied) xxx xxx xxx

14. As feared by the learned counsel for the appellants, the possibility of subsequent implication of
the appellants as a result of afterthought, maybe due to political bitterness, cannot be ruled out. This
fact is further buttressed by the delayed placing of FIR before the Magistrate, non-satisfactory
explanation given by the police officer regarding the blank sheets in Ext. P-30, counterfoil of the FIR
and also by the closely written bottom part of Ext. P-1, statement by PW 1. All these factual
circumstances read with the aforementioned decisions of this Court lead to the conclusion that it is
not safe to rely upon the FIR in the instant case. The delay of 12 hours in filing FIR in the instant
case irrespective of the fact that the police station is situated only at a distance of 100 metres from
the spot of incident is another factor sufficient to doubt the genuineness of the FIR. Moreover, the
prosecution did not satisfactorily explain the delayed lodging of the FIR with the Magistrate.

15. This Court in Marudanal Augusti v. State of Kerala, (1980) 4 SCC 425 : 1980 SCC (Cri) 985 while
deciding a case which involves a question of delayed dispatch of the FIR to the Magistrate, cautioned

14

Jafarudheen vs State Of Kerala on 22 April, 2022

that such delay would throw serious doubt on the prosecution case, whereas in Arjun Marik v. State
of Bihar, 1994 Supp (2) SCC 372 : 1994 SCC (Cri) 1551 it was reminded by this Court that: (SCC p.
382, para 24) “[T]he forwarding of the occurrence report is indispensable and absolute and it has to
be forwarded with earliest dispatch which intention is implicit with the use of the word ‘forthwith’
occurring in Section 157 CrPC, which means promptly and without any undue delay. The purpose
and object is very obvious which is spelt out from the combined reading of Sections 157 and 159
CrPC. It has the dual purpose, firstly to avoid the possibility of improvement in the prosecution
story and introduction of any distorted version by deliberations and consultation and secondly to
enable the Magistrate concerned to have a watch on the progress of the investigation.” (cid:131) State of
Rajasthan v. Om Prakash, [(2002) 5 SCC 745] as hereunder: – “9. There was delay of nearly 26
hours in lodging the FIR. The offence is alleged to have taken place at about 9 a.m. The FIR was
registered at about 11.30 a.m. on the next day. It was contended by Mr Bachawat, learned counsel
for the respondent, that this delay had assumed importance and was fatal particularly when the
brother of the prosecutrix, namely, Mam Raj (PW 6) was admittedly at the house. The delay,
according to the counsel, has resulted in embellishments. Reliance has been placed on the decision
in the case of Thulia Kali v. State of T.N. [(1972) 3 SCC 393 : 1972 SCC (Cri) 543 : AIR 1973 SC 501]
holding that the first information report in a criminal case is an extremely vital and valuable piece of
evidence for the purpose of corroborating the oral evidence adduced at the trial. The object of
insisting upon prompt lodging of the report to the police in respect of commission of an offence is to
obtain early information regarding the circumstances in which the crime was committed, the names
of the actual culprits and the part played by them as well as the names of eye-witnesses present at
the scene of occurrence. Delay in lodging the first information report quite often results in
embellishment which is a creature of an afterthought. On account of delay, the report not only gets
bereft of the advantage of spontaneity, danger creeps in of the introduction of coloured version,
exaggerated account or concocted story as a result of deliberation and consultation. There can be no
dispute about these principles relied upon by Mr Bachawat but the real question in the present case
is about the explanation for the delay. It is not at all unnatural for the family members to await the
arrival of the elders in the family when an offence of this nature is committed before taking a
decision to lodge a report with the police. The reputation and prestige of the family and the career
and life of a young child is involved in such cases. Therefore, the presence of the brother of the
prosecutrix at home is not of much consequence. It has been established that the father of the girl
along with his brother came back to their house at 7 o'clock in the evening. The girl was unconscious
during the day. PW 2 told her husband as to what had happened to their daughter. The police
station was at a distance of 15 km. According to the testimony of PW 1 no mode of conveyance was
available. The police was reported to the next day morning and FIR was recorded at 11.30 a.m. The
delay in reporting the matter to the police has thus been fully explained.” Delay in Recording the
Statement under Section 161 Cr.PC:

28. The Investigating Officer is expected to kick start his investigation immediately
after registration of a cognizable offense. An inordinate and unexplained delay may
be fatal to the prosecution's case but only to be considered by the Court, on the facts
of each case. There may be adequate circumstances for not examining a witness at an
appropriate time. However, non-examination of the witness despite being available
may call for an explanation from the Investigating Officer. It only causes doubt in the

15

mind of the Court, which is required to be cleared.

Jafarudheen vs State Of Kerala on 22 April, 2022

29. Similarly, a statement recorded, as in the present case, the investigation report is
expected to be sent to the jurisdictional Magistrate at the earliest. A long,
unexplained delay, would give room for suspicion.

Precedents:

(cid:131) Shahid Khan v. State of Rajasthan, [(2016) 4 SCC 96] as hereunder: – “20. The
statements of PW 25 Mirza Majid Beg and PW 24 Mohamed Shakir were recorded
after 3 days of the occurrence. No explanation is forthcoming as to why they were not
examined for 3 days. It is also not known as to how the police came to know that
these witnesses saw the occurrence. The delay in recording the statements casts a
serious doubt about their being eyewitnesses to the occurrence. It may suggest that
the investigating officer was deliberately marking time with a view to decide about
the shape to be given to the case and the eyewitnesses to be introduced. The
circumstances in this case lend such significance to this delay. PW 25 Mirza Majid
Beg and PW 24 Mohamed Shakir, in view of their unexplained silence and delayed
statement to the police, do not appear to us to be wholly reliable witnesses. There is
no corroboration of their evidence from any other independent source either. We find
it rather unsafe to rely upon their evidence only to uphold the conviction and
sentence of the appellants. The High Court has failed to advert to the contentions
raised by the appellants and reappreciate the evidence thereby resulting in
miscarriage of justice. In our opinion, the case against the appellants has not been
proved beyond reasonable doubt.” (cid:131) Ganesh Bhavan Patel v. State of Maharashtra,
[(1978) 4 SCC 371] as hereunder: – “15. As noted by the trial Court, one unusual
feature which projects its shadow on the evidence of PWs Welji, Pramila and
Kuvarbai and casts a serious doubt about their being eyewitnesses of the occurrence,
is the undue delay on the part of the investigating officer in recording their
statements. Although these witnesses were or could be available for examination
when the investigating officer visited the scene of occurrence or soon thereafter, their
statements under Section 161, Cr.P.C. were recorded on the following day. Welji (PW
3) was examined at 8 a.m., Pramila at 9.15 or 9.30 a.m., and Kuvarbai at 1 p.m. Delay
of a few hours, simpliciter, in recording the statements of eyewitnesses may not, be
itself, amount to a serious infirmity in the prosecution case. But it may assume such a
character if there are concomitant circumstances to suggest that the investigator was
deliberately marking time with a view to decide about the shape to be given to the
case and the eyewitnesses to be introduced. A catena of circumstances which lend
such significance to this delay, exists in the instant case.

xxx xxx xxx

29. Thus considered in the light of the surrounding circumstances, this inordinate
delay in registration of the ‘F.I.R.’ and further delay in recording the statements of

16

Jafarudheen vs State Of Kerala on 22 April, 2022

the material witnesses, casts a cloud of suspicion on the credibility of the entire warp
and woof of the prosecution story.

xxx xxx xxx

47. All the infirmities and flaws pointed out by the trial Court assumed importance,
when considered in the light of the all-pervading circumstance that there was
inordinate delay in recording Ravji's statement (on the basis of which the “F.I.R.” was
registered) and further delay in recording the statements of Welji, Pramila and
Kuvarbai. This circumstance, looming large in the back-ground, inevitably leads to
the conclusion, that the prosecution story was conceived and constructed after a good
deal of deliberation and delay in a shady setting, highly redolent of doubt and
suspicion.” Recovery under Section 27 of the Evidence Act:

30. Section 27 of the Evidence Act is an exception to Sections 24 to 26.

Admissibility under Section 27 is relatable to the information pertaining to a fact discovered. This
provision merely facilitates proof of a fact discovered in consequence of information received from a
person in custody, accused of an offense. Thus, it incorporates the theory of “confirmation by
subsequent facts” facilitating a link to the chain of events. It is for the prosecution to prove that the
information received from the accused is relatable to the fact discovered. The object is to utilize it for
the purpose of recovery as it ultimately touches upon the issue pertaining to the discovery of a new
fact through the information furnished by the accused. Therefore, Section 27 is an exception to
Sections 24 to 26 meant for a specific purpose and thus be construed as a proviso.

31. The onus is on the prosecution to prove the fact discovered from the information obtained from
the accused. This is also for the reason that the information has been obtained while the accused is
still in the custody of the police. Having understood the aforesaid object behind the provision, any
recovery under Section 27 will have to satisfy the Court’s conscience. One cannot lose sight of the
fact that the prosecution may at times take advantage of the custody of the accused, by other means.
The Court will have to be conscious of the witness's credibility and the other evidence produced
when dealing with a recovery under Section 27 of the Evidence Act.

Precedents:

(cid:131) Kusal Toppo v. State of Jharkhand, [(2019) 13 SCC 676] as hereunder: – “25. The
law under Section 27 of the Evidence Act is well settled now, wherein this Court in
Geejaganda Somaiah v. State of Karnataka, (2007) 9 SCC 315 : (2007) 3 SCC (Cri) 135
has observed as under : (SCC p. 324, para 22) “22. As the section is alleged to be
frequently misused by the police, the courts are required to be vigilant about its
application. The court must ensure the credibility of evidence by police because this
provision is vulnerable to abuse. It does not, however, mean that any statement made
in terms of the aforesaid section should be seen with suspicion and it cannot be
discarded only on the ground that it was made to a police officer during investigation.

17

Jafarudheen vs State Of Kerala on 22 April, 2022

The court has to be cautious that no effort is made by the prosecution to make out a
statement of the accused with a simple case of recovery as a case of discovery of fact
in order to attract the provisions of Section 27 of the Evidence Act.”

26. The basic premise of Section 27 is to only partially lift the ban against
admissibility of inculpatory statements made before the police, if a fact is actually
discovered in consequence of the information received from the accused. Such
condition would afford some guarantee. We may additionally note that, the courts
need to be vigilant while considering such evidence.

27. This Court in multiple cases has reiterated the aforesaid principles under Section
27 of the Evidence Act and only utilised Section 27 for limited aspect concerning
recovery (refer Pulukuri Kotayya v. King Emperor, 1946 SCC OnLine PC 47 :
(1946-47) 74 IA 65; Jaffar Hussain Dastagir v. State of Maharashtra, (1969) 2 SCC
872 : AIR 1970 SC 1934). As an additional safeguard we may note that reliance on
certain observations made in certain precedents of this Court without understanding
the background of the case may not be sustainable. There is no gainsaying that it is
only the ratio which has the precedential value and the same may not be extended to
an obiter. As this Court being the final forum for appeal, we need to be cognizant of
the fact that this Court generally considers only legal aspects relevant to the facts and
c i r c u m s t a n c e s   o f   t h a t   c a s e ,   w i t h o u t   e l a b o r a t e l y   d i s c u s s i n g   t h e   m i n u t e
h y p e r - t e c h n i c a l i t i e s   a n d   f a c t u a l   i n t r i c a c i e s   i n v o l v e d   i n   t h e   t r i a l . ”   (cid:131)
Navaneethakrishnan v. State, [(2018) 16 SCC 161] as hereunder: – “23. The learned
counsel for the appellant-accused contended that the statements given by the
appellant-accused are previous statements made before the police and cannot be
therefore relied upon by both the appellant-accused as well as the prosecution. In this
view of the matter, it is pertinent to mention here the following decision of this Court
in Selvi v. State of Karnataka, (2010) 7 SCC 263 : (2010) 3 SCC (Cri) 1 wherein it was
held as under : (SCC pp. 334-35, paras 133 & 134) “133. We have already referred to
the language of Section 161 CrPC which protects the accused as well as suspects and
witnesses who are examined during the course of investigation in a criminal case. It
would also be useful to refer to Sections 162, 163 and 164 CrPC which lay down
procedural safeguards in respect of statements made by persons during the course of
investigation. However, Section 27 of the Evidence Act incorporates the “theory of
confirmation by subsequent facts” i.e. statements made in custody are admissible to
the extent that they can be proved by the subsequent discovery of facts. It is quite
possible that the content of the custodial statements could directly lead to the
subsequent discovery of relevant facts rather than their discovery through
independent means. Hence such statements could also be described as those which
“furnish a link in the chain of evidence” needed for a successful prosecution…..” (cid:131)
H.P. Admn. v. Om Prakash, [(1972) 1 SCC 249] as hereunder: – “8…We are not
unaware that Section 27 of the Evidence Act which makes the information given by
the accused while in custody leading to the discovery of a fact and the fact admissible,
is liable to be abused and for that reason great caution has to be exercised in resisting

18

Jafarudheen vs State Of Kerala on 22 April, 2022

any attempt to circumvent, by manipulation or ingenuity of the Investigating Officer,
the protection afforded by Section 25 and Section 26 of the Evidence Act. While
considering the evidence relating to the recovery we shall have to exercise that
caution and care which is necessary to lend assurance that the information furnished
and the fact discovered is credible.” (cid:131) Aghnoo Nagesia v. State of Bihar, [(1966) 1 SCR
134] as hereunder: – “9. Section 25 of the Evidence Act is one of the provisions of law
dealing with confessions made by an accused. The law relating to confessions is to be
found generally in Sections 24 to 30 of the Evidence Act and Sections 162 and 164 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898. Sections 17 to 31 of the Evidence Act are to be
found under the heading “Admissions”. Confession is a species of admission, and is
dealt with in Sections 24 to 30. A confession or an admission is evidence against the
maker of it, unless its admissibility is excluded by some provision of law. Section 24
excludes confessions caused by certain inducements, threats and promises.

Section 25 provides: “No confession made to a police officer, shall be proved as against a person
accused of an offence”. The terms of Section 25 are imperative. A confession made to a police officer
under any circumstances is not admissible in evidence against the accused. It covers a confession
made when he was free and not in police custody, as also a confession made before any investigation
has begun. The expression “accused of any offence” covers a person accused of an offence at the trial
whether or not he was accused of the offence when he made the confession. Section 26 prohibits
proof against any person of a confession made by him in the custody of a police officer, unless it is
made in the immediate presence of a Magistrate. The partial ban imposed by Section 26 relates to a
confession made to a person other than a police officer. Section 26 does not qualify the absolute ban
imposed by Section 25 on a confession made to a police officer. Section 27 is in the form of a
proviso, and partially lifts the ban imposed by Sections 24, 25 and 26. It provides that when any fact
is deposed to as discovered in consequence of information received from a person accused of any
offence, in the custody of a police officer, so much of such information, whether it amounts to a
confession or not, as relates distinctly to the fact thereby discovered, may be proved. Section 162 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure forbids the use of any statement made by any person to a police
officer in the course of an investigation for any purpose at any enquiry or trial in respect of the
offence under investigation, save as mentioned in the proviso and in cases falling under sub-section
(2), and it specifically provides that nothing in it shall be deemed to affect the provisions of Section
27 of the Evidence Act. The words of Section 162 are wide enough to include a confession made to a
police officer in the course of an investigation. A statement or confession made in the course of an
investigation may be recorded by a Magistrate under Section 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
subject to the safeguards imposed by the section. Thus, except as provided by Section 27 of the
Evidence Act, a confession by an accused to a police officer is absolutely protected under Section 25
of the Evidence Act, and if it is made in the course of an investigation, it is also protected by Section
162 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, and a confession to any other person made by him while in
the custody of a police officer is protected by Section 26, unless it is made in the immediate presence
of a Magistrate. These provisions seem to proceed upon the view that confessions made by an
accused to a police officer or made by him while he is in the custody of a police officer are not to be
trusted, and should not be used in evidence against him. They are based upon grounds of public
policy, and the fullest effect should be given to them.” (cid:131) K. Chinnaswamy Reddy v. State of A.P.,

19

[(1963) 3 SCR 412] as hereunder:

Jafarudheen vs State Of Kerala on 22 April, 2022

– “9. Let us then turn to the question whether the statement of the appellant to the
effect that “he had hidden them (the ornaments)” and “would point out the place”
where they were, is wholly admissible in evidence under Section 27 or only that part
of it is admissible where he stated that he would point out the place but not that part
where he stated that he had hidden the ornaments. The Sessions Judge in this
connection relied on Pulukuri Kotayya v. King-Emperor [(1946) 74 IA 65] where a
part of the statement leading to the recovery of a knife in a murder case was held
inadmissible by the Judicial Committee. In that case the Judicial Committee
considered Section 27 of the Indian Evidence Act, which is in these terms:

“Provided that, when any fact is deposed to as discovered in consequence of
information received from a person accused of any offence, in the custody of a police
officer, so much of such information, whether it amounts to a confession or not, as
relates distinctly to the fact thereby discovered, may be proved.” This section is an
exception to Sections 25 and 26, which prohibit the proof of a confession made to a
police officer or a confession made while a person is in police custody, unless it is
made in immediate presence of a Magistrate. Section 27 allows that part of the
statement made by the accused to the police “whether it amounts to a confession or
not” which relates distinctly to the fact thereby discovered to be proved. Thus even a
confessional statement before the police which distinctly relates to the discovery of a
fact may be proved under Section 27. The Judicial Committee had in that case to
consider how much of the information given by the accused to the police would be
admissible under Section 27 and laid stress on the words “so much of such
information … as relates distinctly to the fact thereby discovered” in that connection.
It held that the extent of the information admissible must depend on the exact nature
of the fact discovered to which such information is required to relate. It was further
pointed out that “the fact discovered embraces the place from which the object is
produced and the knowledge of the accused as to this, and the information given
must relate distinctly to this fact”…..” On Merit:

We shall first take the case of the accused who suffered conviction at the hands of the
Trial Court and the High Court. On perusal, we find that the courts have dealt with all
the contentions thoroughly. The Trial Court considered the issue qua the delay, and
the reasoning rendered thereunder does not warrant interference. We do not find any
material to hold that the delay is willful and deliberate to the extent of creating any
suspicion. The occurrence happened at night and Ext. P1 reached on the next day
evening. There is no clarity on the mode. Perhaps it reached late during the day as it
would have been felt not to place it before the jurisdictional Magistrate during the
night-time, at the time of occurrence. The Trial Court has considered this aspect, and
as we find no infirmity in its reasoning, which is rendered by taking into
consideration the other evidence available on record, including the deposition of the
eye-witnesses, we are inclined to reject the said contention.

20

Jafarudheen vs State Of Kerala on 22 April, 2022

32. It is also contended that it would not be probable to make a reference in Ext. P1
about the registration number of vehicles which was known to P.W.1 only the next
day. Though not raised before the Trial Court, the said contention also deserves to be
rejected for the reasoning aforesaid. The evidence available on record would suggest
the place of occurrence and the manner in which it happened. The Trial Court found
acceptance of the testimonies of the witnesses who saw the occurrence. The
deposition was rendered by P.W.1 after the registration of Exhibit P1. This would not
materially alter the case of the prosecution.

33. Though A-8 and A-9 were injured, they have taken a plea that they were not
present at the place of occurrence. The Trial Court was right in holding that the
doctor’s evidence and the evidence of the eye-witnesses would clearly explain the
reasons behind the injury suffered. The accused (A-8 and A-9) suffered the injury at
the place of occurrence, which they denied. Thus, the said contention raised also
deserves to be rejected.

34. We find that nothing has been elicited from the eye-witnesses insofar as the
aforesaid accused are concerned to impeach through their evidence. Merely because
the witnesses are family members apart from being chance witnesses, their
testimonies cannot be rejected. P.W.’s 4 and 21 are likely to be seen near the place of
occurrence. P.W. 21 was working in the theatre nearby, and P.W.4 was a neighbour.
Though they would not have seen the occurrence from inside the house, their
presence cannot be doubted to the extent of being present there.

Therefore, their evidence as applicable to A-2, A-4, A-5, A-8 and A-9 must be approved. Both the
courts have considered the entire evidence available in drawing their conclusion, which we do not
find to be perverse. In such a view of the matter, Criminal Appeal Nos. 450-451 of 2015 and
Criminal Appeal No. 959 of 2015 stand dismissed.

35. This takes us to the remaining criminal appeals being Criminal Appeal Nos.430- 431 of 2015. We
find considerable force in the submission made by Mr. R. Basant, learned senior counsel. The Trial
Court has given cogent reasoning for acquitting these accused. It found the witnesses struggling and
going back and forth to identify these accused persons. Incidentally, it found that two material
objects in which A-8 and A-11 were involved either by travelling to the place of occurrence or by
owning are not proved by duly connecting them. Very exhaustive reasons have been given for
coming to the said conclusion.

36. The High Court found fault with the Trial Court by relying on Section 149 IPC. To attract Section
149, the prosecution has to prove its foundational facts. The Trial Court has taken a possible view
that the evidence rendered by the eye- witnesses does not satisfy the Court qua the presence of A-10
to A-13. As recorded by us, adequate reasons have been given for coming to this conclusion. In that
context, the Trial Court held that P.W.1 and P.W.2 did not state that A-11 inflicted injuries. The Trial
Court had the advantage of seeing the witnesses as they deposed. The appellate forum cannot
change the conclusion arrived at thereafter by substituting its views. It seems to us that the High

21

Court has adopted the principle of preponderance of probability as could be applicable to the civil
cases to the case on hand when more scrutiny is warranted for reversing an order of acquittal.

Jafarudheen vs State Of Kerala on 22 April, 2022

37. The reasoning of the Trial Court for not going with the evidence of P.W. 21 and P.W. 46 as
against A-11 and A-13 appears to be an acceptable one as it was extremely doubtful on the evidence
rendered by the eye-witnesses who actually saw the occurrence from outside the house.
Furthermore, these witnesses, P.W.21 and P.W.46, have given their statements under Section 161
Cr.PC only after nine days and two days delay subsequently. Therefore, we can draw our analogical
reasoning since the evidentiary arguments raised on behalf of the statements provided by these
witnesses raise suspicion and are likely to mislead or, at any rate, not firm enough to support a
seriously contested conclusion. Thus, to the Trial Court's decision, we give our approval.

38. The High Court placed its reliance also on the recovery coupled with the scientific evidence. We
believe that such recoveries are expected to be proved if relied upon by the Court. As against P.W.
35, who signed the recovery mahazar, he was not even acquainted with the place and lived in a far
distant area. Similarly, P.W. 33 is not a resident of the locality. Except for P.W.4, the other witnesses
have not identified the material object recovered.

39. P.W.40, who signed the recovery mahazar qua A-11, turned hostile. Furthermore, the arrest of
A-11 was made on 05.08.2002, while the recovery was made on 13.08.2002, creating a serious
doubt.

40. For the recovery made from A-12 also, there is no confirmation from P.W.1 to P.W.3. P.W.34,
who signed a mahazar is also a CPI(M) party member. We may also hasten to add that P.W.64,
Investigating Officer, feigns ignorance of the witnesses who signed the recovery mahazar pertaining
to A-10 and A-11 as to whether they belong to the said party or not as he did not even know as to
where they hail from. On the recovery made from A-12, mahazar was signed by P.W.50, who was
also incidentally a CPI(M) member and the other attesting member was not examined. It is also
improbable that A-12 could wear the same dress for more than 10 days with the bloodstains. The
same logic would also apply to A-10 as well.

41. The blood-stained dress was stated to have been recovered from A-13 from the hospital. It is not
known as to how the said dress reached the hospital, and there is no evidence forthcoming on that
count, apart from correlating the said dress to that of the accused.

42. From the above, we can find a structured pattern in the recovery of A-10 to A-

13. There appears to be some anxiety on the part of the prosecution to make compulsory recoveries.
The recoveries are said to have been made from the house of P.W.21, having no connection with
A-10. The fallacious notion that the recovery of such an incriminating article was made from a place
that might also be accessible to the P.W.21, is also one of the doubts we sense in the following factual
analogy of this case. P.W. 21 is also the same witness who has given his 161 Cr.PC statement nine
days after the incident pertaining to the accused. This further raises the question on the credibility
of the prosecution case.

22

Jafarudheen vs State Of Kerala on 22 April, 2022

43. Upon the discussion made as aforesaid, we are inclined to dismiss the appeals filed being
Criminal Appeal No.450-451 of 2015 and Criminal Appeal No.959 of 2015 confirming the conviction
rendered by the High Court. The conviction rendered by the High Court against the appellants in
Criminal Appeal No. 430- 431 of 2015 arrayed as A-10 to A-13 stands set aside. Consequently, the
appeals filed by accused nos. A-10 to A-13 being Criminal Appeal No.430-431 of 2015 are allowed by
setting aside the judgment rendered by the High Court and restoring the acquittal rendered by the
Trial Court. Bail bonds, if any, pertaining to A-10 to A-13 stand discharged. Pending application(s),
if any, stand(s) disposed of.

…….………………………J. (SANJAY KISHAN KAUL) ……………………………J. (M.M. SUNDRESH) New
Delhi April 22, 2022

23