Jasdeep Singh @ Jassu vs The State Of Punjab on 7 January, 2022

Jasdeep Singh @ Jassu vs The State Of Punjab on 7 January,
2022

Author: M.M. Sundresh

Bench: M.M. Sundresh, Sanjay Kishan Kaul

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1584 of 2021
(@SLP (CRL.) NO. 11816 OF 2019)

JASDEEP SINGH @ JASSU                          …APPELLANT(S)

VERSUS

STATE OF PUNJAB                               …RESPONDENT(S)

WITH

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1585 OF 2021
(@SLP(CRL.) NO.11486/2019)

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1586 OF 2021
(@SLP(CRL.) NO.3301/2020)

JUDGMENT

M.M. SUNDRESH, J.

1. Heard learned counsel appearing for the parties.

2. Crl. A. No.1584 of 2021 and Crl. A. No.1585 of 2021 are filed by convicted Appellants/Accused 3
and 4 respectively against conviction under Section 304 Part I of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) with
life sentence, while Crl. A. No.1586 of 2021 is filed by the de facto complainant seeking modification
of 17:25:06 IST Reason:

the conviction to the sentence punishable under Section 302 IPC. Thus, we shall deal
with all the appeals by our common order, particularly, when they emanate and
emerge from a common impugned order.

1

Jasdeep Singh @ Jassu vs The State Of Punjab on 7 January, 2022

BRIEF FACTS

3. Four accused persons were charged, convicted, and sentenced in the following
manner:

Name of convict         Offence       under            Sentence
Section
Ramsimran       Singh   U/s 304 Part I IPC     To                undergo
Makkar                                         imprisonment for life
and to pay fine of
Rs.10,000/-      and   in
default of payment of
fine to undergo further
RI for one year.
U/s 25 Arms Act        To undergo rigorous
imprisonment for two
years and to pay fine of
Rs.2000/- and in default
of payment of fine to
undergo further RI for
three months.
U/s 27 Arms Act        To undergo rigorous
imprisonment for five
years and to pay fine of
Rs.5000/- and in default
of payment of fine to
undergo further RI for
six months.
Amardeep        Singh   U/s 304 Part I, read   To                undergo
Sachdeva                with Section 34 IPC    imprisonment for life
and to pay fine of
Rs.10,000/-      and   in
default of payment of

(cid:12)                                                    fine to undergo further
RI for one year.
U/s 25 Arms Act         To undergo rigorous
imprisonment for two
years and to pay fine of
Rs.2000/- and in default
of payment of fine to
undergo further RI for
three months.
Jasdeep Singh            U/s 304 Part I, read    To                undergo
with Section 34 IPC     imprisonment for life
and to pay fine of
Rs.10,000/-      and   in
default of payment of
fine to undergo further
RI for one year.
Amarpreet       Singh    U/s 304 Part I, read    To                undergo

2

Jasdeep Singh @ Jassu vs The State Of Punjab on 7 January, 2022

Narula                   with Section 34 IPC     imprisonment for life
and to pay fine of
Rs.10,000/-      and   in
default of payment of
fine to undergo further
RI for one year.

4. The occurrence took place at about 12:45 a.m. on 21.04.2011 in the area of Baba
Rasoi Dhaba, Jalandhar. The motive for the occurrence was that the deceased felt
that a raid conducted in the hotel belonging to him and his father (PW6), the
Appellant in Crl. A. No.1586 of 2021, was done at the instance of the accused. All the
accused are friends of each other.

5. PW6 went in search of the deceased on finding that he had not returned home,
though he was in a habit of coming late. On a particular street, he saw the accused
grappling with the deceased. It was seen by him in the street light.

The occurrence was also witnessed by PW10 who incidentally was a friend of the deceased. PW13
spoke about the common intention on the part of the accused on the previous night to do away with
the deceased.

6. In pursuance to the statement made by A3 and A4, saying “what are you seeing now”, A1 took out
a gun from his pocket and shot the deceased. A2 took his gun and brandished it against the
deceased, prior to the aforesaid statement made by A3 and A4, followed by the shooting by A1. A3
and A4 made the statement pointing to A1, though A2 was already having the gun out. It is only
thereafter that A1 took out his gun and shot the deceased.

7. The deceased was taken to the hospital situated about 3 kms from the place of occurrence,
notwithstanding the other hospitals nearby. PW23 helped PW6 and PW10 to carry the deceased into
the car of PW6. Thereafter PW6 gave the complaint under Exhibit PL. In the complaint, he did not
make any statement that A3 and A4 exhorted A1 to shoot, except the statement as referred earlier.
However, in his additional statement given under Section 161 CrPC, he improved his version by
stating that A3 and A4 instigated A1 to fire. We may note, A6 is a legally qualified person.

8. PW24 took up the investigation and completed the formalities. Recoveries have been made,
including of the weapons.

9. Before the trial court, the prosecution examined 27 witnesses and marked documents in support
of its case. On behalf of the defense, 16 witnesses have been examined along with the documents.

10.Before the trial court, PW10 and PW23 turned hostile. Upon hearing the counsel appearing for
the parties a conviction has been rendered against all the accused for the offences punishable under
Section 304 Part I IPC along with life sentence. The trial court reasoned that it is not as if the

3

Jasdeep Singh @ Jassu vs The State Of Punjab on 7 January, 2022

accused were waiting for the deceased. The deceased went nearer to the accused, as could be seen
from the evidence of PW10 under Exhibit PF/1 and PQ. There was only one single shot. Though the
deceased fell down the accused did not shoot him thereafter. There was indeed a quarrel preceding
the occurrence. The evidence of PW13 was disbelieved with respect to prior concert. It was noted
that he was a resident of a place 50 kms away from Jalandhar. The evidence adduced by his cousin
(DW1) showed that he was not present at his house at Jalandhar and there was no reason for going
to Jalandhar on 20.04.2011. The prosecution did not prove that that day was his birthday and there
were other places available nearer to his residence. There was absolutely no material to hold that he
knew the accused at any prior point of time. It would be improbable that the accused would make a
plan to commit a murder in public, by addressing themselves by names while flaunting their
weapons. Further, he did not make any complaint. The statement that he visited days thereafter to
seek tires for his jeep was not believed as such tires could be obtained otherwise in a nearer place.

11.Accordingly, holding that there was no premeditation, and the occurrence took place in
pursuance to a sudden fight, in a heat of passion, the case was brought under Exception 4 to Section
300 IPC.

12.Appeals were filed by all the parties. The High Court concurred with the views of the trial court.
However, it did not specifically deal with the scope of Section 34 IPC as against A3 and A4 which
was accordingly done by the trial court. We may also note that the trial court did an in-depth,
exhaustive assessment, by considering almost all the material placed before it, including the
statements made by the witnesses.

13.A3 and A4 are before us by filing their respective appeals seeking to overturn the judgment
rendered by the High Court confirming the one by the trial court. Thus, A1 and A2 have not filed
their appeals. We have been informed at the Bar, by the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the de
facto complainant/Appellant in Crl. A. No.1586 of 2021 that A1 has since been let out on pre-mature
release by the State. We do not wish to state anything on the role of A1 and A2 except to the extent of
testing the decision of the High Court and the trial court as to whether the case would fall under
Section 304 Part I or Section 302 IPC.

Arguments on behalf of the Appellants

14.Since appeals have been filed both by the convicted Appellants and the de facto complainant, we
would like to note the arguments of A3 and A4 first and thus the other appeal filed by de facto
complainant would be taken along with the arguments of the State.

15.It is submitted by the learned counsel that the evidence of PW13 having been disbelieved, the
courts have committed an error in applying Section 34 IPC. There is an improvement with respect to
the statement made by PW6. A mere statement per se would not be sufficient to attract Section 34
IPC. It is strange that both of them made the same statement. The presence of PW6 is very doubtful.
He had deposed that the deceased used to come late and there was no complaint whatsoever. If A2
brandished the gun before the deceased was shot by A1, it is only logical that A3 and A4 would have
asked A2 to shoot first. Even the other eyewitness in PW10 has turned hostile and so also another

4

Jasdeep Singh @ Jassu vs The State Of Punjab on 7 January, 2022

material witness in PW23. Under those circumstances it is a fit case where the conviction rendered
against A3 and A4 are to be set aside. Submission of the Respondents

16.The learned Senior Counsel appearing for the de facto complainant submitted that the accused
are influential persons. The case would come under offense punishable under Section 302 IPC. The
trial court has committed an error as confirmed by the High Court in bringing it under Section 299
IPC and therefore wrongly applied Section 304 Part I IPC. It is not necessary that an accused will
have to do a physical act in order to attract Section 34 IPC. Thus, a mere presence of the accused
would suffice. Hence, the appeal filed by the de facto complainant be allowed while dismissing the
appeal filed by the Accused-Appellants.

17.The counsel appearing for the State submitted that cogent reasoning was given by the High Court.
The trial court considered the entire material available on record. Recoveries made have been
proved. Under those circumstances there is no need to interfere with the conviction and sentence.
Section 34 IPC

18.We shall first go back into the history to understand Section 34 IPC as it stood at the inception
and as it exists now.

Old Section 34 of IPC                New Section 34 of IPC
“When a criminal act is done by      “When a Criminal act is done by
several persons, each of such        several persons, in furtherance of the

(cid:12) persons is liable for that act in       common intention of all, each of such
the same manner as if the act           persons is liable for that act in the
was done by him alone”                  same manner as if it were by him
alone”

19.On a comparison, one could decipher that the phrase “in furtherance of the common intention”
was added into the statute book subsequently. It was first coined by Chief Justice Barnes Peacock
presiding over a Bench of the Calcutta High Court, while delivering its decision in Queen v.
Gorachand Gope, (1866 SCC OnLine Cal 16) which would have probably inspired and hastened the
amendment to Section 34 IPC, made in 1870. The following passage may lend credence to the
aforesaid possible view:

“It does not follow that, because they were present with the intention of taking him
away, that they assisted by their presence in the beating of him to such an extent as to
cause death. If the object and design of those who seized Amordi was merely to take
him to the thannah on a charge of theft, and it was no part of the common design to
beat him, they would not all be liable for the consequence of the beating merely
because they were present. It is laid down that, when several persons are in company
together engaged in one common purpose, lawful or unlawful, and one of them,

5

Jasdeep Singh @ Jassu vs The State Of Punjab on 7 January, 2022

without the knowledge or consent of the others, commits an offence, the others will
not be involved in the guilt, unless the act done was in some manner in furtherance of
the common intention. It is also said, although a man is present when a felony is
committed, if he take no part in it, and do not act in concert with those who commit
it, he will not be a principal merely because he did not endeavour to prevent it or to
apprehend the felon. But if several persons go out together for the purpose of
apprehending a man and taking him to the thannah on a charge of theft, and some of
the party in the presence of the others beat and ill-treat the man in a cruel and violent
manner, and the others stand by and look on without endeavouring to dissuade them
from their cruel and violent conduct, it appears to me that those who have to deal
with the facts might very properly infer that they were all assenting parties and acting
in concert, and that the beating was in furtherance of a common design. I do not
know what the evidence was, all that I wish to point out is, that all who are present do
not necessarily assist by their presence every act that is done in their presence, nor
are consequently liable to be punished as principals.”

20. Before we deal further with Section 34 IPC, a peep at Section 33 IPC may give a better
understanding. Section 33 IPC brings into its fold a series of acts as that of a single one. Therefore,
in order to attract Section 34 to 39 IPC, a series of acts done by several persons would be related to a
single act which constitutes a criminal offense. A similar meaning is also given to the word
‘omission’, meaning thereby, a series of omissions would also mean a single omission. This
provision would thus make it clear that an act would mean and include other acts along with it.

21.Section 34 IPC creates a deeming fiction by infusing and importing a criminal act constituting an
offence committed by one, into others, in pursuance to a common intention. Onus is on the
prosecution to prove the common intention to the satisfaction of the court. The quality of evidence
will have to be substantial, concrete, definite and clear. When a part of evidence produced by the
prosecution to bring the accused within the fold of Section 34 IPC is disbelieved, the remaining part
will have to be examined with adequate care and caution, as we are dealing with a case of vicarious
liability fastened on the accused by treating him at par with the one who actually committed the
offence.

22.What is required is the proof of common intention. Thus, there may be an offence without
common intention, in which case Section 34 IPC does not get attracted.

23.It is a team effort akin to a game of football involving several positions manned by many, such as
defender, mid-fielder, striker, and a keeper. A striker may hit the target, while a keeper may stop an
attack. The consequence of the match, either a win or a loss, is borne by all the players, though they
may have their distinct roles. A goal scored or saved may be the final act, but the result is what
matters. As against the specific individuals who had impacted more, the result is shared between the
players. The same logic is the foundation of Section 34 IPC which creates shared liability on those
who shared the common intention to commit the crime.

6

Jasdeep Singh @ Jassu vs The State Of Punjab on 7 January, 2022

24.The intendment of Section 34 IPC is to remove the difficulties in distinguishing the acts of
individual members of a party, acting in furtherance of a common intention. There has to be a
simultaneous conscious mind of the persons participating in the criminal action of bringing about a
particular result. A common intention qua its existence is a question of fact and also requires an act
“in furtherance of the said intention”. One need not search for a concrete evidence, as it is for the
court to come to a conclusion on a cumulative assessment. It is only a rule of evidence and thus does
not create any substantive offense.

25.Normally, in an offense committed physically, the presence of an accused charged under Section
34 IPC is required, especially in a case where the act attributed to the accused is one of
instigation/exhortation. However, there are exceptions, in particular, when an offense consists of
diverse acts done at different times and places. Therefore, it has to be seen on a case to case basis.

26.The word “furtherance” indicates the existence of aid or assistance in producing an effect in
future. Thus, it has to be construed as an advancement or promotion.

27.There may be cases where all acts, in general, would not come under the purview of Section 34
IPC, but only those done in furtherance of the common intention having adequate connectivity.
When we speak of intention it has to be one of criminality with adequacy of knowledge of any
existing fact necessary for the proposed offense. Such an intention is meant to assist, encourage,
promote and facilitate the commission of a crime with the requisite knowledge as aforesaid.

28.The existence of common intention is obviously the duty of the prosecution to prove. However, a
court has to analyse and assess the evidence before implicating a person under Section 34 IPC. A
mere common intention per se may not attract Section 34 IPC, sans an action in furtherance. There
may also be cases where a person despite being an active participant in forming a common intention
to commit a crime, may actually withdraw from it later. Of course, this is also one of the facts for the
consideration of the court. Further, the fact that all accused charged with an offence read with
Section 34 IPC are present at the commission of the crime, without dissuading themselves or others
might well be a relevant circumstance, provided a prior common intention is duly proved. Once
again, this is an aspect which is required to be looked into by the court on the evidence placed before
it. It may not be required on the part of the defence to specifically raise such a plea in a case where
adequate evidence is available before the court.

29.The essence and scope of Section 34 IPC can be borne out of excerpts from the following
judgements:

Suresh v State of U.P. ((2001) 3 SCC 673):

“24. Looking at the first postulate pointed out above, the accused who is to be
fastened with liability on the strength of Section 34 IPC should have done some act
which has nexus with the offence. Such an act need not be very substantial, it is
enough that the act is only for guarding the scene for facilitating the crime. The act
need not necessarily be overt, even if it is only a covert act it is enough, provided such

7

Jasdeep Singh @ Jassu vs The State Of Punjab on 7 January, 2022

a covert act is proved to have been done by the co-accused in furtherance of the
common intention. Even an omission can, in certain circumstances, amount to an
act. This is the purport of Section 32 IPC. So, the act mentioned in Section 34 IPC
need not be an overt act, even an illegal omission to do a certain act in a certain
situation can amount to an act, e.g. a co-accused, standing near the victim face to face
saw an armed assailant nearing the victim from behind with a weapon to inflict a
blow. The co-accused, who could have alerted the victim to move away to escape from
the onslaught deliberately refrained from doing so with the idea that the blow should
fall on the victim. Such omission can also be termed as an act in a given situation.
Hence an act, whether overt or covert, is indispensable to be done by a co-accused to
be fastened with the liability under the section. But if no such act is done by a person,
even if he has common intention with the others for the accomplishment of the
crime, Section 34 IPC cannot be invoked for convicting that person. In other words,
the accused who only keeps the common intention in his mind, but does not do any
act at the scene, cannot be convicted with the aid of Section 34 IPC.

xxx xxx xxx

40. Participation in the crime in furtherance of the common intention cannot
conceive of some independent criminal act by all accused persons, besides the
ultimate criminal act because for that individual act law takes care of making such
accused responsible under the other provisions of the Code. The word “act” used in
Section 34 denotes a series of acts as a single act. What is required under law is that
the accused persons sharing the common intention must be physically present at the
scene of occurrence and be shown not to have dissuaded themselves from the
intended criminal act for which they shared the common intention.

Culpability under Section 34 cannot be excluded by mere distance from the scene of occurrence. The
presumption of constructive intention, however, has to be arrived at only when the court can, with
judicial servitude, hold that the accused must have preconceived the result that ensued in
furtherance of the common intention. A Division Bench of the Patna High Court in Satrughan Patar
v. Emperor, AIR 1919 Pat 111 held that it is only when a court with some certainty holds that a
particular accused must have preconceived or premeditated the result which ensued or acted in
concert with others in order to bring about that result, that Section 34 may be applied.” Lallan Rai v.
State of Bihar, [(2003) 1 SCC 268]:

“22. The above discussion in fine thus culminates to the effect that the requirement of
statute is sharing the common intention upon being present at the place of
occurrence. Mere distancing himself from the scene cannot absolve the accused —
though the same however depends upon the fact situation of the matter under
consideration and no rule steadfast can be laid down therefor.” Chhota Ahirwar v.
State of M.P., [(2020) 4 SCC 126]:

8

Jasdeep Singh @ Jassu vs The State Of Punjab on 7 January, 2022

“24. Section 34 is only attracted when a specific criminal act is done by several
persons in furtherance of the common intention of all, in which case all the offenders
are liable for that criminal act in the same manner as the principal offender as if the
act were done by all the offenders. This section does not whittle down the liability of
the principal offender committing the principal act but additionally makes all other
offenders liable. The essence of liability under Section 34 is simultaneous consensus
of the minds of persons participating in the criminal act to bring about a particular
result, which consensus can even be developed at the spot as held in Lallan Rai v.
State of Bihar, (2003) 1 SCC 268. There must be a common intention to commit the
particular offence. To constitute common intention, it is absolutely necessary that the
intention of each one of the accused should be known to the rest of the accused.”
Barendra Kumar Ghosh v. King Emperor (AIR 1925 PC 1):

"...... the words of S. 34 are not to be eviscerated by reading them in this exceedingly
limited sense. By S. 33 a criminal act in S. 34 includes a series of acts and, further,
“act” includes omissions to act, for example, an omission to interfere in order to
prevent a murder being done before one's very eyes. By S. 37, when any offence is
committed by means of several acts whoever intentionally co-operates in the
commission of that offence by doing any one of those acts, either singly or jointly
with any other person, commits that offence. Even if the appellant did nothing as he
stood outside the door, it is to be remembered that in crimes as in other things “they
also serve who only stand and wait”. By S. 38, when several persons are engaged or
concerned in the commission of a criminal act, they may be guilty of different
offences by means of that act. Read together, these sections are reasonably plain. S.
34 deals with the doing of separate acts, similar or diverse, by several persons; if all
are done in furtherance of a common intention, each person is liable for the result of
them all, as if he had done them himself, for “that act” and “the act” in the latter part
of the section must include the whole action covered by 'a criminal act' in the first
part, because they refer to it. S. 37 provides that, when several acts are done so as to
result together in the commission of an offence, the doing of any one of them, with an
intention to co-operate in the offence (which may not be the same as an intention
common to all), makes the actor liable to be punished for the commission of the
offence. S. 38 provides for different punishments for different offences as an
alternative to one punishment for one offence, whether the persons engaged or
concerned in the commission of a criminal act are set in motion by the one intention
or by the other."

Mehbub Shah v. Emperor (AIR 1945 PC 148):

"....Section 34 lays down a principle of joint liability in the doing of a criminal act.
The section does not say "the common intentions of all" nor does it say "an intention
common to all.” Under the section, the essence of that liability is to be found in the
existence of a common intention animating the accused leading to the doing of a
criminal act in furtherance of such intention. To invoke the aid of S. 34 successfully,

9

Jasdeep Singh @ Jassu vs The State Of Punjab on 7 January, 2022

it must be shown that the criminal act complained against was done by one of the
accused persons in the furtherance of the common intention of all;

if this is shown, then liability for the crime may be imposed on any one of the persons
in the same manner as if the act were done by him alone. This being the principle, it
is clear to their Lordships that common intention within the meaning of the section
implies a pre-arranged plan, and to convict the accused of an offence applying the
section it should be proved that the criminal act was done in concert pursuant to the
pre- arranged plan…"

Rambilas Singh & Ors. v. State of Bihar [(1989) 3 SCC 605]:

"7…It is true that in order to convict persons vicariously under section 34 or section
149 IPC, it is not necessary to prove that each and every one of them had indulged in
overt acts. Even so, there must be material to show that the overt act or acts of one or
more of the accused was or were done in furtherance of the common intention of all
the accused or in prosecution of the common object of the members of the unlawful
assembly…"

Krishnan & Another v. State of Kerala [(1996) 10 SCC 508]:

"15. Question is whether it is obligatory on the part of the prosecution to establish
commission of overt act to press into service section 34 of the Penal Code. It is no
doubt true that court likes to know about overt act to decide whether the concerned
person had shared the common intention in question. Question is whether overt act
has always to be established? I am of the view that establishment of an overt act is
not a requirement of law to allow section 34 to operate inasmuch this section gets
attracted when "a criminal act is done by several persons in furtherance of common
intention of all". What has to be, therefore, established by the prosecution is that all
the concerned persons had shared the common intention. Court's mind regarding the
sharing of common intention gets satisfied when overt act is established qua each of
the accused. But then, there may be a case where the proved facts would themselves
speak of sharing of common intention: res ipsa loquitur."

Surendra Chauhan v. State of M.P. [(2000) 4 SCC 110]:

"11. Under Section 34 a person must be physically present at the actual commission
of the crime for the purpose of facilitating or promoting the offence, the commission
of which is the aim of the joint criminal venture….” Gopi Nath @ Jhallar v. State of
U.P. [(2001) 6 SCC 620]:

“8. …As for the challenge made to the conviction under Section 302 read with Section
23 IPC, it is necessary to advert to the salient principles to be kept into consideration
and often reiterated by this Court, in the matter of invoking the aid of Section 34 IPC,

10

Jasdeep Singh @ Jassu vs The State Of Punjab on 7 January, 2022

before dealing with the factual aspect of the claim made on behalf of the appellant.
Section 34 IPC has been held to lay down the rule of joint responsibility for criminal
acts performed by plurality or persons who joined together in doing the criminal act,
provided that such commission is in furtherance of the common intention of all of
them. Even the doing of separate, similar or diverse acts by several persons, so long
as they are done in furtherance of a common intention, render each of such persons
liable for the result of them all, as if he had done them himself, for the whole of the
criminal action – be it that it was not overt or was only covert act or merely an
omission constituting an illegal omission. The section, therefore, has been held to be
attracted even where the acts committed by the different confederates are different
when it is established in one way or the other that all of them participated and
engaged themselves in furtherance of the common intention which might be of a
pre-concerted or pre-arranged plan or one manifested or developed at the spur of the
moment in the course of the commission of the offence. The common intention or the
intention of the individual concerned in furtherance of the common intention could
be proved either from direct evidence or by inference from the acts or attending
circumstances of the case and conduct of the parties. The ultimate decision, at any
rate, would invariably depend upon the inferences deducible from the circumstances
of each case.” Ramesh Singh @ Photti v. State of A.P. [(2004) 11 SCC 305]:

"12. …As a general principle in a case of criminal liability it is the primary
responsibility of the person who actually commits the offence and only that person
who has committed the crime can be held guilty. By introducing Section 34 in the
Penal Code the legislature laid down the principle of joint liability in doing a criminal
act. The essence of that liability is to be found in the existence of a common intention
connecting the accused leading to the doing of a criminal act in furtherance of such
intention. Thus, if the act is the result of a common intention, then every person who
did the criminal act with that common intention would be responsible for the offence
committed irrespective of the share which he had in its perpetration.......... "

Nand Kishore V. State Of Madhya Pradesh [(2011) 12 SCC 120)]:

“20. A bare reading of this section shows that the section could be dissected as
follows:

(a) Criminal act is done by several persons;

(b) Such act is done in furtherance of the common intention of all; and

(c) Each of such persons is liable for that act in the same manner as if it were done by
him alone.

In other words, these three ingredients would guide the court in determining whether an accused is
liable to be convicted with the aid of Section 34. While first two are the acts which are attributable

11

Jasdeep Singh @ Jassu vs The State Of Punjab on 7 January, 2022

and have to be proved as actions of the accused, the third is the consequence. Once the criminal act
and common intention are proved, then by fiction of law, criminal liability of having done that act by
each person individually would arise. The criminal act, according to Section 34 IPC must be done by
several persons. The emphasis in this part of the section is on the word “done”. It only flows from
this that before a person can be convicted by following the provisions of Section 34, that person
must have done something along with other persons. Some individual participation in the
commission of the criminal act would be the requirement. Every individual member of the entire
group charged with the aid of Section 34 must, therefore, be a participant in the joint act which is
the result of their combined activity.

21. Under Section 34, every individual offender is associated with the criminal act which constitutes
the offence both physically as well as mentally i.e. he is a participant not only in what has been
described as a common act but also what is termed as the common intention and, therefore, in both
these respects his individual role is put into serious jeopardy although this individual role might be a
part of a common scheme in which others have also joined him and played a role that is similar or
different. But referring to the common intention, it needs to be clarified that the courts must keep in
mind the fine distinction between “common intention” on the one hand and “mens rea” as
understood in criminal jurisprudence on the other. Common intention is not alike or identical to
mens rea. The latter may be coincidental with or collateral to the former but they are distinct and
different.

22. Section 34 also deals with constructive criminal liability. It provides that where a criminal act is
done by several persons in furtherance of the common intention of all, each of such persons is liable
for that act in the same manner as if it was done by him alone. If the common intention leads to the
commission of the criminal offence charged, each one of the persons sharing the common intention
is constructively liable for the criminal act done by one of them. (Refer to Brathi v. State of Punjab
1991 (1) SCC 519).

23. Another aspect which the court has to keep in mind while dealing with such cases is that the
common intention or state of mind and the physical act, both may be arrived at the spot and
essentially may not be the result of any predetermined plan to commit such an offence. This will
always depend on the facts and circumstances of the case…” Shyamal Ghosh V. State of West Bengal
[(2012) 7 SCC 646)]:

“87. Upon analysis of the above judgments and in particular the judgment of this
Court in the case of Dharnidhar v. State of Uttar Pradesh, [(2010) 7 SCC 759], it is
clear that Section 34 IPC applies where two or more accused are present and two
factors must be established i.e. common intention and participation of the accused in
the crime. Section 34 IPC, moreover, involves vicarious liability and therefore, if the
intention is proved but no overt act was committed, the section can still be invoked.
This provision carves out an exception from general law that a person is responsible
for his own act, as it provides that a person can also be held vicariously responsible
for the act of others, if he had the common intention to commit the act. The phrase
“common intention” means a pre-oriented plan and acting in pursuance to the plan,

12

Jasdeep Singh @ Jassu vs The State Of Punjab on 7 January, 2022

thus, common intention must exist prior to the commission of the act in a point of
time. The common intention to give effect to a particular act may even develop on the
spur of moment between a number of persons with reference to the facts of a given
case."

30. The aforesaid principle has also been dealt with in extenso by the Apex Court in
Virendra Singh V. State of Madhya Pradesh ((2010) 8 SCC 407) through the following
paragraphs:

"15. Ordinarily, a person is responsible for his own act. A person can also be
vicariously responsible for the acts of others if he had the common intention to
commit the offence. The words "common intention" implies a prearranged plan and
acting in concert pursuant to the plan. It must be proved that the criminal act was
done in concert pursuant to the prearranged plan. Common intention comes into
force prior to the commission of the act in point of time, which need not be a long
gap. Under this section a pre-concert in the sense of a distinct previous plan is not
necessary to be proved. The common intention to bring about a particular result may
well develop on the spot as between a number of persons, with reference to the facts
of the case and circumstances of the situation. Though common intention may
develop on the spot, it must, however, be anterior in point of time to the commission
of the crime showing a prearranged plan and prior concert. The common intention
may develop in course of the fight but there must be clear and unimpeachable
evidence to justify that inference. This has been clearly laid down by this Court in the
case of Amrik Singh & Ors. v. State of Punjab, 1972 (4) SCC (N) 42:1972 CriLJ 465.

16. The essence of the liability is to be found in the existence of a common intention
animating the accused leading to the doing of a criminal act in furtherance of such
intention. Undoubtedly, it is difficult to prove even the intention of an individual and,
therefore, it is all the more difficult to show the common intention of a group of
persons. Therefore, in order to find whether a person is guilty of common intention,
it is absolutely necessary to carefully and critically examine the entire evidence on
record. The common intention can be spelt out only from the evidence on record.

17. Section 34 is not a substantive offence. It is imperative that before a man can be
held liable for acts done by another under the provisions of this section, it must be
established that there was common intention in the sense of a prearranged plan
between the two and the person sought to be so held liable had participated in some
manner in the act constituting the offence. Unless common intention and
participation are both present, this section cannot apply.

xxx xxx xxx

36. Referring to the facts of this case, the short question which arises for adjudication
in this appeal is whether the appellant Virendra Singh can be convicted under section

13

Jasdeep Singh @ Jassu vs The State Of Punjab on 7 January, 2022

302 with the aid of section 34 IPC. Under the Penal Code, the persons who are
connected with the preparation of a crime are divided into two categories: (1) those
who actually commit the crime i.e. principals in the first degree; and (2) those who
aid in the actual commission i.e. principals in the second degree. The law does not
make any distinction with regard to the punishment of such persons, all being liable
to be punished alike.

37. Under the Penal Code, a person is responsible for his own act. A person can also
be vicariously responsible for the acts of others if he had a common intention to
commit the acts or if the offence is committed by any member of the unlawful
assembly in prosecution of the common object of that assembly, then also he can be
vicariously responsible. Under the Penal Code, two sections, namely, Sections 34 and
149, deal with them circumstances when a person is vicariously responsible for the
acts of others.

38. The vicarious or constructive liability under Section 34 IPC can arise only when
two conditions stand fulfilled i.e. the mental element or the intention to commit the
criminal act conjointly with another or others; and the other is the actual
participation in one form or the other in the commission of the crime.

39. The common intention postulates the existence of a prearranged plan implying a
prior meeting of the minds. It is the intention to commit the crime and the accused
can be convicted only if such an intention has been shared by all the accused. Such a
common intention should be anterior in point of time to the commission of the crime,
but may also develop on the spot when such a crime is committed. In most of the
cases it is difficult to procure direct evidence of such intention. In most of the cases, it
can be inferred from the acts or conduct of the accused and other relevant
circumstances. Therefore, in inferring the common intention under section 34 IPC,
the evidence and documents on record acquire a great significance and they have to
be very carefully scrutinized by the court. This is particularly important in cases
where evidence regarding development of the common intention to commit the
offence graver than the one originally designed, during execution of the original plan,
should be clear and cogent.

40. The dominant feature of Section 34 is the element of intention and participation
in action. This participation need not in all cases be by physical presence. Common
intention implies acting in concert.

41. The essence of Section 34 IPC is a simultaneous consensus of the minds of the
persons participating in criminal action to bring about a particular result. Russell in
his celebrated book Russell on Crime, 12th Edn., Vol. 1 indicates some kind of aid or
assistance producing an effect in future and adds that any act may be regarded as
done in furtherance of the ultimate felony if it is a step intentionally taken for the
purpose of effecting that felony. It was observed by Russell that any act of

14

Jasdeep Singh @ Jassu vs The State Of Punjab on 7 January, 2022

preparation for the commission of felony is done in furtherance of the act.

42. Section 34 IPC does not create any distinct offence, but it lays down the principle
of constructive liability. Section 34 IPC stipulates that the act must have been done in
furtherance of the common intention. In order to incur joint liability for an offence
there must be a prearranged and premeditated concert between the accused persons
for doing the act actually done, though there might not be long interval between the
act and the premeditation and though the plan may be formed suddenly. In order
that Section 34 IPC may apply, it is not necessary that the prosecution must prove
that the act was done by a particular or a specified person. In fact, the section is
intended to cover a case where a number of persons act together and on the facts of
the case it is not possible for the prosecution to prove as to which of the persons who
acted together actually committed the crime. Little or no distinction exists between a
charge for an offence under a particular section and a charge under that section read
with section 34."

On merit

31.Having understood Section 34 IPC, we shall now deal with the case on hand.

32.The evidence of PW13 did not find favour with the courts. The trial court which had the
advantage of noting the deposition of the witnesses, chose to disbelieve the evidence adduced, by
giving cogent reasons. This evidence was rightly eschewed by the trial court and also by the High
Court. There are too many improbabilities in the testimony of PW13. A person who was living 50
kms away remembered the accused and their names and overheard their plot to commit the murder.
His evidence was belied by the evidence of DW1 who was none other than his own cousin with
whom he was said to be residing at the relevant point of time.

33.The other material witnesses are PW6 and PW10. PW10 had given prior statements. Though he
turned hostile despite being a friend of the deceased, the trial court did take into consideration his
earlier statement, while coming to the conclusion that there was no premeditation and thus the case
would fall under culpable homicide not murder. Though the evidence of PW6 was not rejected, both
the courts did find a clear exaggeration on his part. On many occasions PW6 made a concerted effort
to improve the case of prosecution. The testimony given by him on the dying declaration, a case
inserted by him in his supplementary statement, made subsequently, was also rightly rejected by the
courts. This was also supported by the medical evidence. The other part of the evidence with respect
to the fight was also dealt with by the courts as evidence available would suggest that it is the
deceased who went nearer, and the accused were not stationing themselves waiting for his arrival.
Therefore, the aforesaid findings of both the courts in coming to the conclusion that it is not a case
which would attract punishment under Section 301 Part I IPC does not suffer from any perversity.
In view of the above Crl. A. No.1586 of 2021 stands dismissed. At this stage we also hasten to add
that the overt act of A2 being different and in the absence of any appeal filed by him, we do not wish
to make any remark for the purpose of acquitting him.

15

Jasdeep Singh @ Jassu vs The State Of Punjab on 7 January, 2022

34. The only other issue for consideration is the application of Section 34 IPC to the case of the
Appellants. The occurrence was admittedly during the nighttime. It happened on the street. If A3
and A4 had made such a statement in the same voice, they should have addressed A2 instead of A1.
A2 was already having a gun and A1 was stated to have taken his gun out only on the statement
made by A3 and A4. The reasoning of the trial court in disbelieving the evidence of PW6 as he
improved on his case subsequently, ought to be applied for the statement made that A3 and A4 had
asked A1 to fire. Admittedly, this was an improvement to the earlier statement made as could be
seen from the evidence of PW6 on more than one occasion. Thus, in our considered view both the
courts ought to have disbelieved the evidence of PW6 insofar as Section 34 IPC is concerned. There
is no evidence at all on record to hold that A3 and A4 were aware of the fact that A1 was having a
gun with him. The prosecution wanted to implicate A3 and A4 mainly on the evidence of PW13.
Once the said evidence was not accepted, more care ought to have been taken before convicting A3
and A4 under Section 34 IPC. We have no difficulty in holding that a common intention can be
formed at the time of the occurrence. However, the evidence available is not sufficient enough to
hold that Section 34 IPC is attracted as against A3 and A4, especially when the testimony of PW13
did not find favour with the courts. We further note that except the statement said to have been
made by A3 and A4, there was no other material to implicate them.

35. Now, we shall come to the statements. The statement made by A3 and A4 is as follows: “what are
you seeing now”. The question is as to whether the said statement would constitute an offense
punishable under Section 304 Part I IPC. We have already noted the fact that had A2 fired at the
deceased in pursuance to the statement made by A3 and A4 the situation would have been different.
It is possible that the said statement has been made only to attack otherwise the deceased. Suffice it
is to hold that the prosecution has not proved its case beyond reasonable doubt as against A3 and A4
by reflecting the offence committed by A1, taking umbrage under Section 34 IPC.

36. The High Court did not even consider the import of Section 34 IPC as against A3 and A4. We
find that the approach of the trial court cannot be sustained to that extent in the light of our
discussion. Thus, we are inclined to set aside the judgment of the High Court confirming that of the
trial court as against the Accused-Appellants namely A3 and A4 alone are concerned.

37. In the result Crl. A. No.1584 of 2021 and Crl. A. No.1585 of 2021 are allowed. The Crl. A. No.1586
of 2021 stands dismissed.

……………………………J. (SANJAY KISHAN KAUL) ……………………………J. (M.M. SUNDRESH) New
Delhi, January 07, 2022

16