Jeetubha Khansangji Jadeja vs Kutchh District Panchayat on 23 September, 2022

Jeetubha Khansangji Jadeja vs Kutchh District Panchayat on 23
September, 2022

Author: S. Ravindra Bhat

Bench: Chief Justice, Indira Banerjee, S. Ravindra Bhat

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NO.6890 OF 2022
[@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 8393 OF 2022]

JEETUBHA KHANSANGJI JADEJA                                                      ...APPELLANT(S)

VERSUS

KUTCHH DISTRICT PANCHAYAT                                                      ...RESPONDENT(S)

JUDGMENT

S. RAVINDRA BHAT, J.

1. Leave granted. With consent, learned counsels for the parties were heard finally. This appeal is
directed against an order of the Gujarat High Court1.

2. Aggrieved by the termination from employment, the appellant raised an industrial dispute which
was referred to the Labour Court, Bhuj, Kutchh District of Gujarat. The appellant was appointed as a
Watchman on 05.10.1992 by the respondent society (hereafter referred to as “the management”),
and lastly, he 1 Dated 05.07.2021 in LPA No.896/2011 in Special Civil Application No. 5620/2011.
was working as a watchman at the Shirai Dam at the Beraja Village of Mundra Taluk, Gujarat, with
the respondent. After rendering continuous employment, he was terminated from the services on
30.12.2002 for no cause, without notice and without following the procedure prescribed by the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. His request for reinstatement was negated; consequently, the
industrial dispute.

1

Jeetubha Khansangji Jadeja vs Kutchh District Panchayat on 23 September, 2022

3. The management disputed the claim on the basis that the appellant worked in a purely temporary
basis and could not claim the benefit of Section 25B of the Industrial Disputes Act,1947 as he had
not worked for a continuous period of 240 days in any given year. However, his employment as a
workman since 1992 was not denied.

4. Before the Labour Court, the parties led evidence - oral and documentary. A copy of the muster
roll maintained by the management was called for. In the evidence, the appellant deposed that the
management did not maintain any seniority list nor was it published and that employees junior to
him were retained while he was unfairly terminated from service. The respondent management
contended that the entire muster roll records was not available as it was destroyed during a natural
calamity; they could produce the documents for the years 1994-98. After considering the pleadings
and the materials on record, the Labour Court, by Award dated 31.08.2010, held that the appellant’s
termination was illegal and directed his reinstatement with continuity but without backwages.

5. The management challenged the award, mainly contending that the appellant workman was not
entitled to the benefits of the Industrial Disputes Act. The learned Single judge of the Gujarat High
Court endorsed the findings of the Labour Court, affirming the Award, and directed the appellant’s
reinstatement. The management, however, appealed to the Division Bench. Initially, the Division
Bench rejected the appeal; the management approached this court by special leave petition. This
court remitted the matter for fresh consideration.

6. By the impugned order, the Division Bench noticed the findings of the single judge that workmen
junior to the appellant had been retained in service despite which his services were terminated and
that the management had not maintained proper records. In spite of these facts, the Division Bench
set aside the direction to reinstate the appellant workman and instead awarded lumpsum
compensation of (cid:131) 1 lakh.

7. The appellant contends that the Labour Court and the learned single Judge concurrently ruled
that sufficient material had been brought on record to show that 63 labourers were working with the
respondent management, many of whom were junior to the appellant. It was pointed out that the
workman appellant had moved the Labour Court to direct the management to produce all relevant
service particulars of its employees’ muster roll, pay register, and bonus register. An appropriate
direction was issued in this regard. Since the management did not produce the entire records, the
Labour Court drew an adverse inference and based on available material concluded that the
termination was illegal. In these circumstances, all the findings were endorsed by the High Court;
the substitution of the order of reinstatement amounted to a miscarriage of justice. It was submitted
that the appellant had been unfairly kept out of employment, despite the fact that the award was
made in 2010, and the single judge endorsed it in 2011. The management unjustifiably dragged the
matter for one more decade, which resulted in denial of backwages to him in a very harsh manner. It
was further submitted that the denial of reinstatement to the appellant, by the impugned order,
which did not disturb the findings of the labour court and the single judge, is not based on any
reasoning or norm but has resulted in unfairness.

2

Jeetubha Khansangji Jadeja vs Kutchh District Panchayat on 23 September, 2022

8. Learned counsel for the respondent/management argued that this Court should not interfere with
the impugned judgment since the Division Bench acted correctly in law in not upholding the
reinstatement. It was submitted that the petitioner had been out of employment for over 20 years
and in the circumstances, directing reinstatement was not in the interest of justice.

9. The record indicates that both the Labour Court and the learned Single Judge elaborately
considered the depositions of the parties as well as the evidence on the record. In fact, the appellant
workman had applied under the RTI Act, eliciting relevant documents to substantiate his claim that
employees junior to him, were retained in the service. The management was unable to refute the
material on record. On the other hand, it claimed the inability to produce the relevant documents,
i.e., the muster roll for the later period of the appellant’s service. Concededly, the appellant had
worked for over 10 years. In the absence of precise details as to the so-called periods when the
appellant had not been employed – as alleged by the management, both the Labour Court and the
learned Single Judge concluded that his claim for having continuously worked within the meaning
of Section 25B of the Industrial Disputes Act stood proved. Furthermore, the workman had deposed
that employees junior to him were retained in the service, contrary to Section 25G of the Industrial
Disputes Act.

10. This Court discerns no material to establish the proposition put forth by the appellant. In the
circumstances, given the fact that the direction of the Labour Court was only to reinstate but not pay
backwages, the Division Bench’s substitution of that relief is not based on any known principle. In
the present case, the Labour Court had rendered its award on 31.08.2010; the learned Single Judge
rejected the management’s writ petition on 04.05.2011. The management’s appeal was, in the first
instance, rejected on 16.01.2014; however, it approached this Court by filing special leave petition,
which was allowed on 29.04.2016. It was thereafter – 5 years later, that the impugned judgment was
delivered. Having regard to these factors, the Court is of the opinion that the appellant workman
could not have been made to suffer on account of the management’s obdurate attempt to have the
relief set aside. Furthermore, the Division Bench’s impugned judgment has not interfered with the
factual findings. Therefore, the direction to substitute the relief of reinstatement with one for
lumpsum payment was not warranted in the circumstances of this case.

11. This court, in a three-judge Bench decision, in Hindustan Tin Works (P) Ltd.v. Employees of M/s
Hindustan Tin Works Pvt. Ltd. And Others when retrenchment of services of 56 employees due to
non-availability of the raw material necessary for utilisation of full installed capacity by the
employer, was held to be illegal, held that:

“‘9. It is no more open to debate that in the field of industrial jurisprudence a
declaration can be given that the termination of service is bad and the workman
continues to be in service. The spectre of common law doctrine that contract of
personal service cannot be specifically enforced or the doctrine of mitigation of
damages does not haunt in this branch of law. The relief of reinstatement with
continuity of service can be granted where termination of service is found to be
invalid. It would mean that the employer has taken away illegally the right to work of
the workman contrary to the relevant law or in breach of contract and simultaneously

3

Jeetubha Khansangji Jadeja vs Kutchh District Panchayat on 23 September, 2022

deprived the workman of his earnings. If thus the employer is found to be in the
wrong as a result of which the workman is directed to be reinstated, the employer
could not shirk his responsibility of paying the wages which the workman has been
deprived of by the illegal or invalid action of the employer. Speaking realistically,
where termination of service is questioned as invalid or illegal and the workman has
to go through the gamut of litigation, his capacity to sustain himself throughout the
protracted litigation is itself such an awesome factor that he may not survive to see
the day when relief is granted. More so in our system where the law's proverbial delay
has become stupefying. If after such a 2 (1979) 2 SCC 80 protracted time and energy
consuming litigation during which period the workman just sustains himself,
ultimately he is to be told that though he will be reinstated, he will be denied the back
wages which would be due to him, the workman would be subjected to a sort of
penalty for no fault of his and it is wholly undeserved. Ordinarily, therefore, a
workman whose service has been illegally terminated would be entitled to full back
wages except to the extent he was gainfully employed during the enforced idleness.
That is the normal rule. Any other view would be a premium on the unwarranted
litigative activity of the employer. If the employer terminates the service illegally and
the termination is motivated as in this case viz. to resist the workmen's demand for
revision of wages, the termination may well amount to unfair labour practice. In such
circumstances reinstatement being the normal rule, it should be followed with full
back wages.”

12. In a more recent decision, Deepali Gundu Surwase v. Kranti Junior Adhyapak Mahavidyalaya
and Others,3 this court highlighted the need to adopt a restitutionary approach, when a court has to
consider whether to reinstate an employee and if so, the extent to which backwages is to be ordered.
The court observed:

“22. The very idea of restoring an employee to the position which he held before
dismissal or removal or termination of service implies that the employee will be put
in the same position in which he would have been but for the illegal action taken by
the employer. The injury suffered by a person, who is dismissed or removed or is
otherwise terminated from service cannot easily be measured in terms of money.
With the passing of an order which has the effect of severing the employer- employee
relationship, the latter's source of income gets dried up. Not only the employee
concerned, but his entire family suffers grave adversities. They are deprived of the
source of sustenance. The children are deprived of nutritious food and all
opportunities of education and advancement in life. At times, the family has to
borrow from the relatives and other acquaintance to avoid starvation. These
sufferings continue till the competent adjudicatory forum decides on the legality of
the action taken by the employer. The reinstatement of such an employee, which is
preceded by a finding of the competent 3 (2013) 10 SCC 324 judicial/quasi-judicial
body or court that the action taken by the employer is ultra vires the relevant
statutory provisions or the principles of natural justice, entitles the employee to claim
full back wages. If the employer wants to deny back wages to the employee or contest

4

Jeetubha Khansangji Jadeja vs Kutchh District Panchayat on 23 September, 2022

his entitlement to get consequential benefits, then it is for him/her to specifically
plead and prove that during the intervening period the employee was gainfully
employed and was getting the same emoluments. The denial of back wages to an
employee, who has suffered due to an illegal act of the employer would amount to
indirectly punishing the employee concerned and rewarding the employer by
relieving him of the obligation to pay back wages including the emoluments.”

13. In Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited v. Bhurumal,4 on the other hand, the discretion of the court in
directing reinstatement with backwages in the event of a retrenchment being declared illegal, was
described in the following terms:

“33. It is clear from the reading of the aforesaid judgments that the ordinary principle
of grant of reinstatement with full back wages, when the termination is found to be
illegal is not applied mechanically in all cases. While that may be a position where
services of a regular/permanent workman are terminated illegally and/or mala fide
and/or by way of victimisation, unfair labour practice, etc. However, when it comes
to the case of termination of a daily-wage worker and where the termination is found
illegal because of a procedural defect, namely, in violation of Section 25-F of the
Industrial Disputes Act, this Court is consistent in taking the view that in such cases
reinstatement with back wages is not automatic and instead the workman should be
given monetary compensation which will meet the ends of justice. Rationale for
shifting in this direction is obvious.

34. The reasons for denying the relief of reinstatement in such cases are obvious. It is
trite law that when the termination is found to be illegal because of non-payment of
retrenchment compensation and notice pay as mandatorily required under Section
25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, even after reinstatement, it is always open to the
management to terminate the services of that employee by paying him the
retrenchment compensation. Since such a workman was 4 2014 (7) SCC 177 working
on daily-wage basis and even after he is reinstated, he has no right to seek
regularisation [see State of Karnataka v. Umadevi (3) [(2006) 4 SCC 1]. Thus when he
cannot claim regularisation and he has no right to continue even as a daily-wage
worker, no useful purpose is going to be served in reinstating such a workman and he
can be given monetary compensation by the Court itself inasmuch as if he is
terminated again after reinstatement, he would receive monetary compensation only
in the form of retrenchment compensation and notice pay. In such a situation, giving
the relief of reinstatement, that too after a long gap, would not serve any purpose.

35. We would, however, like to add a caveat here. There may be cases where
termination of a daily-wage worker is found to be illegal on the ground that it was
resorted to as unfair labour practice or in violation of the principle of last come first
go viz.

5

Jeetubha Khansangji Jadeja vs Kutchh District Panchayat on 23 September, 2022

while retrenching such a worker daily wage juniors to him were retained. There may also be a
situation that persons junior to him were regularised under some policy but the workman concerned
terminated. In such circumstances, the terminated worker should not be denied reinstatement
unless there are some other weighty reasons for adopting the course of grant of compensation
instead of reinstatement. In such cases, reinstatement should be the rule and only in exceptional
cases for the reasons stated to be in writing, such a relief can be denied.”

14. In the present case, this court finds no perversity or unreasonableness on the part of the Labour
Court and the single judge in directing the appellant’s reinstatement. Had the respondent
management chosen to accept the verdict, the appellant would have been spared the agony of
waiting for more than 10 years. In such circumstances, the denial of backwages, has resulted in
punishing him, although the delay is attributable to the judicial process. However, the respondent
management cannot be absolved of the primary responsibility in its litigative proclivity. In these
circumstances, the appellant shall be entitled to backwages for a period of two years immediately
preceding, i.e., from 01.01.2020 to 01.01.2022.

15. In light of the above discussion, the impugned judgment is hereby set aside. The appellant
workman shall be reinstated in the services of the respondent within six weeks from today. He shall
also be entitled to backwages for a period of two years immediately preceding, i.e., from 01.01.2020
to 01.01.2022. The direction of the Labour Court and the learned Single Judge for continuity of
service is also restored. The respondent management is directed to pay the backwages as directed by
this court, at current rates, within 6 weeks from today. Hence, the appeal is allowed in above terms,
with no order as to costs.

....................................................CJI. [UDAY UMESH LALIT] ......................................................J. [S.
RAVINDRA BHAT] New Delhi, September 23, 2022.

6