K. Kumara Gupta vs Sri Markendaya And Sri Omkareswara ... on 18 February, 2022

K. Kumara Gupta vs Sri Markendaya And Sri Omkareswara ... on
18 February, 2022

Author: M.R. Shah

Bench: B.V. Nagarathna, M.R. Shah

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 791-792 OF 2022

K. Kumara Gupta                                             ...Appellant(s)

Versus

Sri Markendaya and
Sri Omkareswara Swamy Temple & Ors.                       ...Respondent(s)

JUDGMENT

M.R. SHAH, J.

1. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment and order dated 18.09.2019
passed by the High Court of Andhra Pradesh at Amaravati in Writ Appeal Nos.790 and 1069 of 2018
by which the High Court has allowed the said writ appeals and has directed the authorities
concerned to conduct a re-auction of the entire properties by fixing the upset price higher than what
has been fixed earlier, the auction purchaser, who purchased the property in question in the year
1998, has preferred the present appeals.

2. The facts leading to the present appeals and the chronological dates and events are as under:-

2.1 That a proposal was published by the office of Commissioner, Endowments
Department to auction the land in question belonging to Sri Markendaya and
Omkareswara Swamy Devasthanam, Eluru, which was published in the newspaper on
10.03.1997. Notification to sell the subject land was published in the Andhra Pradesh
Gazette on 22.05.1997. Nobody raised any objection against the said proposal.

That the probable expected price of the land was fixed at Rs. 4,00,000/- per acre and the total
extent of land was about 1.81 acre. That thereafter the Commissioner of Endowments Department
granted permission to sell the land in question on 13.11.1997. The Executive Officer of the Temple

1

K. Kumara Gupta vs Sri Markendaya And Sri Omkareswara ... on 18 February, 2022

Trust issued tender/public notice to sell the land in question by way of an open auction in the
presence of the Deputy Commissioner, Endowments on 22.05.1998. As per the notice, the date and
time of the open auction was 24.06.1998 at 11.00 AM and the interested participants had to deposit
Rs.20,000/- as EMD. Forty-five persons participated including the appellant herein – K. Kumara
Gupta. At this stage, it is required to be noted that Shri L. Kantha Rao, original writ petitioner did
not participate in the auction and nor did he deposit the EMD of Rs.20,000/-.

2.2 Thereafter the auction took place on 24.06.1998 in which 45 people participated. The appellant
herein was declared as the highest bidder quoting price of Rs.5,55,000/- per acre against the
expected price of Rs.4,00,000/-. However, thereafter, the highest offer of the appellant was
Rs.13,01,000/- per acre as per the bid submitted by the appellant herein. Thus, the appellant
became the highest bidder fixing the price at Rs.13,01,000/- per acre. The appellant deposited
Rs.7,85,000/- being 1/3rd of the bid amount immediately as per the tender conditions. It appears
that thereafter the first round of litigation started at the instance of one Shri Jagat Kumar, who as
such did not participate in the auction which was held on 24.06.1998. He made a representation on
20.07.1998 that the subject land has a potential of getting more money. Though, initially he had
shown his readiness and willingness to pay the higher price but did not deposit the money. On the
contrary, he expressed his willingness to buy only 1200 square yards but not the entire land put to
auction. On the representation of the said Shri Jagat Kumar, the auction came to be cancelled vide
order dated 24.07.1998. The appellant filed the revision under Section 93 of the Endowments Act,
1987 (hereinafter referred to as the “Act of 1987”) against the order dated 24.07.1998 cancelling the
auction. However, thereafter by order dated 22.12.1998, the order confirming the sale was issued by
the Office of the Commissioner, Endowments Department in favour of the appellant. The Executive
Officer of the Temple was directed to get the sale deed registered in the name of the highest bidder.
2.3 That thereafter the appellant deposited balance amount of Rs.15,69,810/- vide four banker
cheques dated 30.12.1998. The sale deed was executed in favour of the appellant by Executive
Officer on behalf of the Temple vide Sale Deed dated 31.12.1998. As mentioned in the sale deed, the
physical possession of the land in question was also delivered to the appellant.

2.4 That at the relevant time, the sale deed could not be registered because of the non-availability of
the Clearance Certificate from the Income Tax department. The sale deed was presented for
registration before the Sub-Registrar, Eluru on 01.01.1999. On 01.01.1999, the Executive Officer of
the Temple/Devasthanam filed an affidavit before the Income Tax Office for Clearance Certificate so
that the sale deed could be registered. The Clearance Certificate was granted to the Executive Officer
on 12.01.1999. Thus, the first round of litigation ended there. 2.5 However, the second round of
litigation begun at the instance of one Shri L. Kantha Rao, the original writ petitioner before the
High Court, and one of the respondents in these appeals, who as such and as observed hereinabove
did not even participate in the public auction proceedings. The said Shri L. Kantha Rao filed a Writ
Petition No. 41 of 1999 before the High Court to direct the Executive Officer/ the Temple Committee
not to execute the sale deed in respect of the auctioned land. Vide interim order dated 05.01.1999,
the High Court granted interim stay of all further proceedings subject to the condition that he
furnishes a bank guarantee of a sum of Rs.30 lakhs within two weeks from the date of the said
interim order. That during the pendency of the aforesaid writ petition and in light of the interim
order passed by the High Court in the aforesaid writ petition, being Writ Petition No. 41 of 1999, the

2

K. Kumara Gupta vs Sri Markendaya And Sri Omkareswara ... on 18 February, 2022

office of the Commissioner, Endowments Department unilaterally passed an order dated 10.02.1999
cancelling the auction held on 24.06.1998. The Executive Officer of the Temple was instructed to
conduct a re-auction for the land in question keeping the upset price of Rs.30 lakhs. As the order
dated 10.02.1999 was passed without hearing the appellant, the appellant preferred revision before
the Government under Section 93 of Act of 1987. The Government stayed the order dated
10.02.1999 of the Commissioner vide its order dated 08.03.1999. Questioning the order of the
Government dated 08.03.1999 staying the order of the Commissioner dated 10.02.1999, the said
Shri L. Kantha Rao filed another Writ Petition No. 11552 of 1999 before the High Court. That by
order dated 11.03.1999, the Commissioner himself revoked his order dated 10.02.1999. That by
order dated 09.07.1999, the High Court disposed of both the writ petitions, i.e., Writ Petition No. 41
of 1999 and Writ Petition No. 11552 of 1999. It appears that the High Court while disposing of the
aforesaid writ petitions observed that as the Commissioner had revoked the order dated 10.02.1999,
the revision filed against the same had become infructuous and Government was not required to
decide the issue on merits unless suo moto revision was taken up by the Government. However,
liberty was granted to the said Shri L. Kantha Rao to file a revision against the original order passed
by the Commissioner dated 22.12.1998 confirming the sale in favour of the appellant. The second
round of litigation ended there. 2.6 Then the third round of litigation began. On the basis of the
liberty granted by the High Court, the said Shri L. Kantha Rao filed a revision before the
Government challenging the order dated 22.12.1998 although he was not a participant in the auction
in which appellant herein was declared the highest bidder. By order dated 26.11.1999, the said
revision came to be allowed quashing and setting aside the order dated 22.12.1998 and directing the
Commissioner to refund the amount paid by the appellant and to conduct a re-auction. Even the
said order dated 26.11.1999 was passed without hearing the appellant. The appellant filed Writ
Petition No. 25407 of 1999 before the High Court challenging the order dated 26.11.1999. By a
detailed judgment and order dated 02.02.2018, the learned Single Judge allowed the Writ Petition
No.25407 of 1999 (which shall be dealt with hereinbelow). The said Shri L. Kantha Rao died on
01.03.2018. That the respondent No.1 herein – the Temple through its Executive Officer filed Writ
Appeal No.790 of 2018 before the Division Bench challenging the judgment and order dated
02.02.2018 passed in Writ Petition No.25407 of 1999 on 16.03.2018. The wife of Shri L. Kantha Rao
also filed Writ Appeal No. 1069 of 2018 challenging the judgment and order passed by the Learned
Single Judge in Writ Petition No.25407 of 1999.

2.7 By the impugned common judgment and order, the Division Bench of the High Court has
allowed the said appeals and has set aside the judgment and order passed by the learned Single
Judge passed in Writ Petition No.25407 of 1999 and has directed the authorities concerned to
conduct the re-auction of the entire land by fixing the upset price higher than what had been fixed
earlier by observing that since more than twenty years had elapsed from the date of issuance of GO
Rt. No. 1808 dated 26.11.1999 and price of the land in question had risen. The Division Bench of the
High Court has further observed that as the appellant has agreed and even the learned Single Judge
had directed the appellant to pay Rs.30 lakhs as the said Shri L. Kantha Rao furnished a bank
guarantee of Rs. 30 lakhs and therefore, the Temple would get more than Rs.30 lakhs. While
passing the impugned judgment and order, the Division Bench of the High Court has also observed
that the writ petitioner as well as the appellant shall also be allowed to participate in the re-auction,
if they are otherwise eligible. 2.8 Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned common

3

K. Kumara Gupta vs Sri Markendaya And Sri Omkareswara ... on 18 February, 2022

judgment and order passed by the Division Bench of the High Court, the original respondent No.4
before the High Court, the auction purchaser has preferred the present appeals.

3. Shri Harin P. Raval, learned Senior Advocate has appeared on behalf of the appellant, Shri S.
Niranjan Reddy, learned Senior Advocate has appeared on behalf of the respondent – Temple Trust
and Shri Siddhartha Dave, learned Senior Advocate has appeared on behalf of the wife of Shri L.
Kantha Rao – the original writ petitioner.

4. Shri Harin P. Raval, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the appellant has vehemently
submitted that in the facts and circumstances of the case the Division Bench of the High Court has
committed a grave error in setting aside the auction/sale in favour of the appellant, which was held
in the year 1998.

4.1 It is submitted that as such the auction sale was conducted after wide publicity in the well-known
newspapers and in fact, 45 people participated in the auction. It is submitted that the appellant was
found to be the highest bidder and therefore the sale in favour of the appellant was confirmed and
the appellant paid the full sale consideration and even the sale deed was also executed in favour of
the appellant on 31.12.1998. It is submitted that as there was no illegality in conducting the auction,
therefore, the Division Bench of the High Court ought not to have set aside such a sale after a period
of approximately twenty years from the date of conducting the public auction and the sale that too at
the instance of a person, who never participated in the auction. 4.2 It is submitted that Division
Bench of the High Court ought to have appreciated that as the said Shri L. Kantha Rao did not even
participate in the public auction and did not submit any offer, thereafter, he had no locus to
challenge the public auction and/or the sale in favour of the appellant, who was found to be the
highest bidder.

4.3 It is submitted that the Division Bench of the High Court ought to have appreciated that merely
because somebody, subsequently to the completion of the public auction and the sale deed has been
executed in the favour of the highest bidder states that he is ready and willing to pay a higher
amount than the highest bid amount, would frustrate the object and purpose of holding the public
auction, if at such a person’s instance, the auction/sale is interfered with in any manner. It is
submitted that the Division Bench of the High Court ought to have appreciated that at the relevant
time, nobody restrained the said Shri L. Kantha Rao from participating in the public auction and
submit his offer. 4.4 It is further submitted by Shri Raval, learned Senior Advocate appearing on
behalf of the appellant that as such the Division Bench of the High Court has not at all observed
and/or held that the auction was illegal and/or there was any illegality in holding the public auction.
It is submitted that the Division Bench of the High Court has passed the impugned judgment and
order and has directed for re-auction solely on the ground that subsequently the said Shri L. Kantha
Rao offered Rs. 30 lakhs, which was higher than the amount paid by the appellant even when the
learned Single Judge had also directed the appellant to pay a total sum of Rs.30 lakhs, which the
appellant had agreed; therefore, the Division Bench of the High Court has presumed that the value
of the land would have been much more than Rs.30 lakhs at the time when it was put up for
auction/sale. It is submitted that the High Court has not at all appreciated the fact that as such the
said L. Kantha Rao had no locus to challenge the sale in favour of the appellant, who was the highest

4

K. Kumara Gupta vs Sri Markendaya And Sri Omkareswara ... on 18 February, 2022

bidder firstly, on the ground that he did not participate in the public auction.

4.5 It is submitted that the Division Bench of the High Court has not properly appreciated the fact
that the proceedings initiated by Shri L. Kantha Rao were by way of “Public Interest Litigation
(PIL)” and therefore after his death, his wife could not have continued the PIL proceedings by way
of writ petition before the High Court as a private litigation. It is submitted by learned Senior
Advocate for the appellant that the entire litigation was at the instance of the second highest bidder
namely, Shri M.M. Gupta, brother-in-law of Shri L. Kantha Rao, who had purchased the nearby
lands to the auctioned land in the name of his family members at Rs.7,50,000/- per acre on
28.07.1998 and 22.09.1998 and who had an eye on the land in question. 4.6 It is submitted by Shri
Raval, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the appellant that filing of objections and
entertaining the same after the conclusion of the auction and after execution of the sale deed cannot
be permitted at the instance of a stranger to the auction proceeding. It is submitted that in the
present case, the sale deed was executed in favour of the appellant herein being the highest bidder in
the public auction in which 45 persons had participated and therefore to maintain the sanctity of the
public auction, the objections ought not to have been entertained that too by a person, who never
participated in the public auction, more particularly, when no allegation of fraud was even pleaded,
much less established or proved by the respondents. Reliance is placed on the decision of this Court
in the case of Valji Khimji and Company Vs. Official Liquidator of Hindustan Nitro Product
(Gujarat) Limited and Others, (2008) 9 SCC 299 (paras 11, 12, 25 and 28).

4.7 It is further submitted by Shri Raval that as such the wife of the deceased Shri L. Kantha Rao
could not have preferred an appeal as an heir of Shri L. Kantha Rao, a petitioner, who had filed the
petition as a Public Interest Litigation. It is submitted that as such the litigation initiated on behalf
of Shri M.M. Gupta the second highest bidder by Shri L. Kantha Rao, was in fact a private interest
litigation only in the guise of a Public Interest Litigation to thwart the auction sale. It is submitted
that the learned Single Judge had rightly reached to the conclusion that the respondents – writ
petitioners had no locus standi to raise the objection as well as to file the writ petitions before the
High Court as admittedly they did not participate in the auction.

4.8 It is further submitted that the Temple Trust never objected at any stage of auction or after the
auction until the order/judgment dated 02.02.2018 was rendered by the learned Single Judge. It is
submitted that the Executive officer of the Temple, who was aware of the entire proceedings
including conducting of the public auction and after receiving the full and total consideration could
not have challenged the judgment and order passed by the learned Single Judge rendered on
02.02.2018 at a belated stage, i.e., almost after twenty years from the date of the execution of the
sale deed. It is submitted that filing of an appeal by the Temple Trust against the judgment and
order dated 02.02.2018 before the Division Bench without any allegation of fraud or collusion
against it reeks of mala fides and collusion, which ought not to have been allowed. In fact, the
Division Bench of the High Court ought not to have entertained the same, is the submission. 4.9
Making the above submissions, it is urged that the Division Bench of the High Court has committed
a grave error in quashing and setting aside the sale in favour of the appellant after a period of 23
years and when the appellant had paid the entire sale consideration on 30.12.1998 and was put in
the possession on execution of the sale deed. It is contended that the Division Bench of the High

5

K. Kumara Gupta vs Sri Markendaya And Sri Omkareswara ... on 18 February, 2022

Court has not properly appreciated the fact that as such the sale was confirmed in favour of the
appellant after the approval by the competent authority of the Endowments Department.

5. Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent No.3 has submitted that the respondent
No.1 – Temple is a public religious institution and registered under Section 6(b)(ii) of Act of 1987. It
is submitted that the Government under the Act of 1987 is necessarily bound to act for the benefit of
the temples and ensure revenue maximization for the temples. That as held by this Court in a catena
of decisions Government acts as a trustee of the said properties. It is submitted that as observed and
held by this Court in a catena of decisions, the duty of the State is parens partriae in respect of the
charitable endowments and to ensure its due protection. Reliance is placed on the decisions in
Paramananda Mahapatra Vs. Commissioner of Hindu Religious Endowments, Orissa and Others,
AIR 1966 SC 1544 and Mahant Ram Saroop Dasji Vs. S.P. Sahi, 1959 Supp (2) SCR 583.

5.1 It is submitted that therefore the Government cannot act against the interest of the temple. That
in the present case the auction was conducted on behalf of the Deity, which is in law a perpetual
minor. Therefore, it is important to ensure that the trustees act strictly in accordance with the
interest of the Deity. It is submitted that in the present case, the consideration paid was inadequate
as on the date of auction. That initially the appellant offered Rs.13,01,000/- per acre, which was
treated as the highest bid and the same was confirmed. That one Shri Jagat Kumar through
representation dated 24.07.1998 stated that he was willing to offer Rs. 22,00,000/- per acre, i.e., Rs.
7 lakhs more than the price on which the bid was confirmed in favour of the appellant. Also one Shri
L. Kantha Rao submitted a bank guarantee for an amount of Rs. 30 lakhs on 05.01.1999 pursuant to
the directions passed by the High Court in Writ Petition No. 41 of 1999 on his submission that he
was ready and willing to purchase the property in question at Rs. 30 lakhs. It is submitted that
thereafter the State Government vide its order dated 26.11.1999 fixed the reserved at Rs.32 lakhs
and allowed the parties to participate in the auction. It is submitted that the aforesaid facts evidently
reveal that within a period of one year, the price of the property significantly increased by more than
125%. That the value of the property, as on date, is about 15 crores. It is submitted that therefore in
the interest of the Deity, the impugned judgment and order passed by the Division Bench of the
High Court may not be interfered with.

5.2 Relying upon the decision of the Division Bench of the High Court in the case of Princess Fatima
Fauzia and Anr. Vs. Syeed UI-Mulk alias Nawab Saheb Chathari & Ors., AIR 1979 AP 229, it is
submitted that as held the Division Bench of the High Court, the authorities ought to have permitted
re-auction where, in case of a trust, the consideration is inadequate.

5.3 It is further submitted by the learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the respondent
No.3 that it is the duty of the Court to ensure that the price fetched is adequate – especially in the
case of a Public Trust even though there is no suggestion of irregularity or fraud. Reliance is placed
on the decision of this Court in the case of Divya Manufacturing Company (P) Ltd. Vs. Union Bank
of India and Ors., (2000) 6 SCC 69.

5.4 It is further submitted by the learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of respondent No.3
that by the impugned judgment and order passed by the Division Bench of the High Court, no

6

K. Kumara Gupta vs Sri Markendaya And Sri Omkareswara ... on 18 February, 2022

prejudice shall be caused to the appellant as the Division Bench of the High Court has directed that
the money deposited including the amount incurred on account of purchase of stamp papers be
refunded to the appellant and the appellant will also be getting the benefit of the prevailing bank
interest on the deposited amount. Further, the appellant is also permitted to participate in the
re-auction. It is therefore prayed not to interfere with the impugned judgment and order passed by
the Division Bench of the High Court considering the interest of the charitable institution.

6. Learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of respondent No.1 – Temple Trust / Devasthanam
in addition to the submissions made by the learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of
respondent No.3 has submitted that in the matter of sale of public property/auction, the dominant
consideration is to secure the best price for the property. It is submitted that the court should always
keep the larger interest of the public in mind while interfering with the decision of the authority.
Further, the concept of locus standi has been widened by this Court while dealing with matters of
public interest. It is submitted that it is the duty of the Court to see that the price fetched is
adequate.

6.1 Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent No.1 has relied upon the decisions of this
Court in the case of Chairman and Managing director, SIPCOT, Madras and Ors. Vs. Contromix Pvt.
Ltd., (1995) 4 SCC 595; Union Bank of India Vs. Official Liquidator H.C of Calcutta and Ors., (2000)
5 SCC 274 and Navalkha and Sons Vs. Sri Ramanya Das and Ors., (1969) 3 SCC 537 in support of his
submission that in the matter of sale of public property/auction the dominant consideration is to
secure the best price for the property. 6.2 Making the above submissions and relying upon above
decisions, it is prayed to dismiss the present appeals.

7. Heard the learned counsel appearing for the respective parties at length.

8. At the outset, it is required to be noted that by the impugned judgment and order, the Division
Bench of the High Court has ordered re-auction of the land in question by fixing the upset price
more than what has been fixed earlier by observing that since more than 20 years have elapsed from
the date of the issuance of G.O. dated 26.11.1999, it is in the interest of the Temple that the property
in auction is put to re- auction. However, it is required to be noted that the appellant purchased the
property in question in a public auction, which took place on 24.06.1998. He was found to be the
highest bidder, who offered Rs.13,01,000/- per acre. It is also required to be noted that in the said
auction, which took place on 24.06.1998, in all 45 people participated. The auction was conducted
after following due procedure under the provisions of the Act of 1987 and the auction was conducted
by none other than the Executive Officer of the Temple Trust. It is also to be noted that after
receiving a detailed report of Assistant Commissioner of Endowments, office of the Commissioner,
Endowments Department vide order dated 22.12.1998 confirmed the sale in favour of the appellant.
Consequently, the appellant deposited the balance amount. The sale deed came to be executed in his
favour vide Sale Deed dated 31.12.1998. Even thereafter on the application made by the Executive
Officer of the Devasthanam/Temple, the Income Tax Department granted Clearance Certificate to
the Executive Officer on 12.01.1999. Therefore, as such the sale, which was held and confirmed in
the year 1998 and for which the sale deed was executed on 31.12.1998, the Division Bench of the
High Court has ordered re-auction of the property in question after a period of more than 23 years

7

K. Kumara Gupta vs Sri Markendaya And Sri Omkareswara ... on 18 February, 2022

solely on the basis of the offer made by one Shri Jagat Kumar in the year 1998 (after the public
auction was concluded) and the offer made by one Shri L. Kantha Rao that they are ready to offer /
pay a higher price than fetched in the public auction already concluded and therefore, the Division
Bench of the High Court has presumed that the value of the property must have been much more
than the sale consideration realized in the public auction. However, the Division Bench of the High
Court has not at all appreciated and considered the lack of bona fides on the part of the said Shri
Jagat Kumar and even Shri L. Kantha Rao. It is to be noted that though in the month of July, 1998,
i.e., after the public auction was held, the said Shri Jagat Kumar, who even did not participate in the
auction proceedings initially came out with a case that he was ready and willing to pay a higher price
for the auctioned land. But subsequently, he backed out and did not deposit any money. Neither did
the said Shri Jagat Kumar nor Shri L. Kantha Rao had participated in the auction proceedings and
made any offer. Therefore, as such both of them ought not have been permitted to raise any
objection subsequently on the valuation when they had not participated in the public auction and
made any offer. The Division Bench of the High Court ought to have considered whether these
subsequent objectors had acted in a bona fide manner. At this stage, it is required to be noted that
even Shri Jagat Kumar subsequently did not prosecute the matter further and subsequently it was
only Shri L. Kantha Rao, who filed the revision before the Government by way of a “Public Interest
Litigation”. It is also to be noted that neither the Government nor even the Division Bench of the
High Court have given any finding that the auction, which was conducted/held on 24.06.1998 was
in any way irregular and/or illegal. Even the Division Bench of the High Court has as such not set
aside the auction/sale in favour of the appellant, however, it has ordered re-auction by observing
that as Shri L. Kantha Rao deposited a sum of Rs. 30 lakhs pursuant to the interim order passed by
the High Court in Writ Petition No. 41 of 1999 and as even the learned Single Judge had also
directed the appellant to pay a total sum of Rs. 30 lakhs, which the appellant had agreed, the
Division Bench of the High Court has observed that the value of the property can be said to be much
more than what was realized in the public auction.

8.1 Once the appellant was found to be the highest bidder in a public auction in which 45 persons
had participated and thereafter when the sale was confirmed in his favour and even the sale deed
was executed, unless and until it was found that there was any material irregularity and/or illegality
in holding the public auction and/or auction/sale was vitiated by any fraud or collusion, it is not
open to set aside the auction or sale in favour of a highest bidder on the basis of some
representations made by third parties, who did not even participate in the auction proceedings and
did not make any offer. In this context, we rely on the following observations of this Court in the
case of Jasbhai Motibhai Desai Vs. Roshan Kumar, Haji Bashir Ahmed and Ors., (1976) 1 SCC 671
made in paragraphs 34, 37 and 49, which are as under:-

“34. This Court has laid down in a number of decisions that in order to have the locus
siandi to invoke the extraordinary jurisdiction under Article 226, an applicant should
ordinarily be one who has a personal or individual right in the subject-matter of the
application, though in the case of some of the writs like habeas corpus or quo
warranto this rule is relaxed or modified. In other words, as a general rule,
infringement of some legal right or prejudice to some legal interest inhering in the
petitioner is necessary to give him a locus standi in the matter, (see State of Orissa v.

8

K. Kumara Gupta vs Sri Markendaya And Sri Omkareswara ... on 18 February, 2022

Madan Gopal Rungta [AIR 1952 SC 12 ]; Calcutta Gas Co. v. State of W.B. [AIR 1962
SC 1044]; Ram Umeshwari Suthoo v. Member, Board of Revenue, Orissa [(1967) 1
SCA 413]; Gadde Venkateswara Rao v. Government of A.P. [AIR 1966 SC 828]; State
of Orissa v. Rajasaheb Chandanmall [(1973) 3 SCC 739]; Satyanarayana Sinha Dr v.
S. Lal & Co. [(1973) 2 SCC 696] ).

37. It will be seen that in the context of locus standi to apply for a writ of certiorari,
an applicant may ordinarily fall in any of these categories: (i) “person aggrieved”; (ii)
“stranger”; (iii) busybody or meddlesome interloper.

Persons in the last category are easily distinguishable from those coming under the first two
categories. Such persons interfere in things which do not concern them. They masquerade as
crusaders for justice. They pretend to act in the name of pro bono publico, though they have no
interest of the public or even of their own to protect. They indulge in the pastime of meddling with
the judicial process either by force of habit or from improper motives. Often, they are actuated by a
desire to win notoriety or cheap popularity; while the ulterior intent of some applicants in this
category, may be no more than spoking the wheels of administration. The High Court should do well
to reject the applications of such busybodies at the threshold.

49. It is true that in the ultimate analysis, the jurisdiction under Article 226 in general, and
certiorari in particular is discretionary. But in a country like India where writ petitions are instituted
in the High Courts by the thousand, many of them frivolous, a strict ascertainment, at the outset, of
the standing of the petitioner to invoke this extraordinary jurisdiction, must be insisted upon. The
broad guidelines indicated by us, coupled with other well- established self-devised rules of practice,
such as the availability of an alternative remedy, the conduct of the petitioner etc. can go a long way
to help the courts in weeding out a large number of writ petitions at the initial stage with consequent
saving of public time and money.” In the aforesaid decision, it was also observed that despite
adequate opportunity, if a person has not lodged any objection at an appropriate stage and time, he
could not be said to have been in fact, grieved.

8.2 It is also required to be noted that the sale was confirmed in favour of the appellant by the
Commissioner, Endowments Department after obtaining the report of the Assistant Commissioner.
Therefore, we are of the opinion that in the aforesaid facts and circumstances of the case, the High
Court ought not to have ordered re-auction of the land in question after a period of 23 years of
confirmation of the sale and execution of the sale deed in favour of the auction purchaser by
observing that the value of the property might have been much more, otherwise, the object and
purpose of holding the public auction and the sanctity of the public auction will be frustrated. Unless
there is concrete material and it is established that there was any fraud and/or collusion or the land
in question was sold at a throw away price, the sale pursuant to the public auction cannot be set
aside at the instance of strangers to the auction proceeding. The sale pursuant to the public auction
can be set aside in an eventuality where it is found on the basis of material on record that the
property had been sold away at a throw away price and/or on a wholly inadequate consideration
because of the fraud and/or collusion and/or after any material irregularity and/or illegality is found
in conducing/holding the public auction. After the public auction is held and the highest bid is

9

K. Kumara Gupta vs Sri Markendaya And Sri Omkareswara ... on 18 February, 2022

received and the property is sold in a public auction in favour of a highest bidder, such a sale cannot
be set aside on the basis of some offer made by third parties subsequently and that too when they
did not participate in the auction proceedings and made any offer and/or the offer is made only for
the sake of making it and without any serious intent. In the present case, as observed hereinabove,
though Shri Jagat Kumar immediately after finalising the auction stated that he is ready and willing
to pay a higher price, however, subsequently, he backed out. If the auction/sale pursuant to the
public auction is set aside on the basis of the such frivolous and irresponsible representations made
by such persons then the sanctity of a public auction would be frustrated and the rights of a genuine
bidder would be adversely affected. 8.3 Further, the Division Bench of the High Court ought to have
appreciated that the objector – Shri L. Kantha Rao, who did not participate in the auction
proceedings and submit any bid can be said to be a fence sitter having no stakes on his shoulder and
had simply come forward just to nullify the registered sale deed executed in favour of the appellant
by adopting an indirect method of making a public offer by way of filing a “Public Interest
Litigation” before the High Court. The so-called lucrative offer initially made by Shri Jagat Kumar
and the subsequent offer made by Shri L. Kantha Rao appears to be made only to frustrate the
auction proceedings with a mala fide intent. As observed hereinabove, if there was any error in the
decision-making process adopted by the authority, the remedy available was to question the sale
deed in an appropriate proceeding available under the law and not by filing a petition under Article
226 of the Constitution of India. 8.4 The Division Bench of the High Court has observed that as the
said Shri L. Kantha Rao submitted a bank guarantee of Rs. 30 lakhs as he offered to pay Rs. 30 lakhs
and even the learned Single Judge had also directed the appellant to pay a total sum of Rs.30 lakhs
against his original offer and the appellant had agreed to pay the same, the High Court has
presumed that the value of the property at the time of auction would have been much more. There
was no concrete material before the Division Bench of the High Court to come to such a conclusion
that what was received in the public auction in the year 1998 was a lesser amount and/or at the
relevant time, the valuation of the property was much more than the highest bid received. Merely
because the appellant might have agreed to pay a total sum of Rs.30 lakhs (after deducting whatever
he paid earlier), by that itself, it cannot be presumed and/or held against the appellant that in the
year 1998 what was offered by him was a lesser amount than the actual valuation. The appellant
agreed to pay a higher price for the land in question in order to save his rights. 8.5 At the cost of
repetition, it is observed that as such there was no material available with the Division Bench to the
effect that the valuation of the property in the year 1998 was much more and that the highest bid of
the appellant was for a lesser consideration than the actual value of the land.

8.6 In fact, the learned Single Judge had passed a detailed judgment and order quashing and setting
aside the order passed by the Government dated 26.11.1999. Learned Single Judge specifically
observed in paragraphs 8, 9, 12 and 14 as under:-

“8. The repeated orders of the second respondent passed time and again in this
matter are found to be without assigning any cogent reasons. Under the Indian
Contract Act, which is a Central Act, having an over riding effect upon the
Endowments Act, more particularly when the matter pertains to contractual
obligations between both the parties i.e., between the vendor and the vendee and also
when the matter pertains to tender-cum-auction, where both parties have fulfilled

10

K. Kumara Gupta vs Sri Markendaya And Sri Omkareswara ... on 18 February, 2022

their part of obligations and where no fraud played by the parties has been
established, the action of the second respondent in canceling the sale deed is
unwarranted. The conduct of the 4th respondent cannot be appreciated, where he has
not participated in the tender-cum-auction and more so, he is not an effected party.
Only after knowing the tender and auction amount, the 4th respondent appears to
have either got tempted by the sale of the property or he has been planted by the
persons having vested interest. This kind of conduct cannot be encouraged. It is an
undisputed fact that petitioner, 45 persons filed tenders and participated in the
auction, nothing prevented the 4 th respondent from filing tender and participating
in the auction.

9. As stated supra, the respondents have not made out a case of fraud in conducting the sale and also
they have not raised any objection at the time of conducting sale proceedings. The respondents
conveniently causing interference, at a later stage cannot be accepted and they are estopped from
raising objections after conducting the sale proceedings……………

12. Respondent No.4 has not approached this Court with clean hands. He has no locus standi. He
did not participate in the tender-cum-auction and when 45 persons participated in
tender-cum-auction, nothing prevented the 4th respondent to participate in tender-cum- auction
proceedings. Mere depositing the money saying that the amount would fetch more is of no argument
that can be looked into without establishing malafides or fraud played by the vendor or vendee. No
relief can be granted to respondent No.4 in the writ petition filed by the petitioner.

14. Once the contractual obligation has been completed by both parties and sale deed is executed,
the second respondent has no jurisdiction in the matter to cancel the same and it is the competent
Court of law which has jurisdiction to decide the validity.” 8.7 None of the aforesaid aspects have
been dealt with and/or considered by the Division Bench of the High Court while passing the
impugned judgment and order. Even it was the specific case of the appellant before the learned
Single Judge that the order dated 26.11.1999 passed by the Government cancelling the sale and
ordering for re-auction was passed without hearing him. The same is also not dealt with by the
Division Bench of the High Court.

8.8 Now, in so far as the submission on behalf of the respondents that the value of the property as
on today is Rs. 15 crores approximately and therefore in the interest of the Deity/Temple, the
impugned judgment and order passed by the Division Bench of the High Court may not be
interfered with by this Court is concerned, it is to be noted that by the passage of time the value of
the property is bound to increase. In the present case, subsequent to the auction and the sale, more
than 23 years have passed, therefore, whatever was the value in the year 1998 would not be same at
a future date and that too, after 20-23 years. What is required to be considered is, at the relevant
time, when the sale was conducted, what was the value of the land/property. Learned Senior
Advocate appearing on behalf of the respondents are not in a position to point out any material on
which it can be said that what was offered by the appellant in the year 1998 was not a fair value. The
base price was Rs.4,00,000/- per acre in the public auction, in which 45 persons participated and
what was offered by the appellant, i.e., Rs. 13,01,000/- per acre was much higher than the base

11

K. Kumara Gupta vs Sri Markendaya And Sri Omkareswara ... on 18 February, 2022

price. Under normal circumstances, unless there are allegations of fraud and/or collusion and/or
cartel and/or any other material irregularity or illegality, the highest offer received in the public
auction may be accepted as a fair value. Otherwise, there shall not be any sanctity of a public
auction. 8.9 By the impugned judgment and order by ordering re-auction, the Division Bench of the
High Court has permitted both, the appellant as well as the original writ petitioner to participate in
the re-auction. It is to be noted that as such the original writ petitioner never participated in the
public auction, which was conducted/held on 24.06.1998. Therefore, by such a liberty being
granted, the High Court has given one another opportunity to the original writ petitioner, who has
died, and/or to his heirs to participate in the re-auction, which liberty could not have been reserved.
As a result, the writ petition filed by the deceased petitioner Shri L. Kantha Rao has ceased to be a
“Public Interest Litigation” but it is a litigation with a private mala fide interest as the original writ
petitioner had no locus to file such a case, not being a participant in the auction and being unable to
point out any irregularity or illegality in the auction. 8.10 Even the Division Bench of the High Court
ought not to have passed the impugned judgment and order in an appeal preferred by the Temple
Trust for the simple reason that it was the Executive Officer of the Temple Trust, who had conducted
the auction; it was the Executive Officer, who had obtained the Clearance Certificate from the
Income Tax department and who executed the sale deed in favour of the highest bidder – appellant
herein. At no point of time till the judgment and order was passed by the learned Single Judge, the
Temple Trust had challenged the auction/sale on the ground that the amount realized was
inadequate. Therefore, the Temple Trust could not have challenged their own decision, which they
had never challenged earlier. 8.11 Similarly, the appeal preferred by the heirs of Shri L. Kantha Rao
also ought not to have been entertained. Shri L. Kantha Rao never participated in the auction. He
never submitted any offer. The proceedings initiated by Shri L. Kantha Rao was in the nature of a
Public Interest Litigation and therefore being heir of Shri L. Kantha Rao, his wife could not have
been permitted to prosecute further with the Public Interest Litigation.

8.12 Now, in so far as the decisions relied upon by the learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf
of the respondents referred to hereinabove are concerned, there cannot be any dispute to the
proposition of law laid down by this Court in the aforesaid decisions. However, in the facts and
circumstances of the case narrated hereinabove, none of the decisions are of any assistance to the
respondents. There was/is no material to show that the market value at the time of auction/sale in
favour of the appellant was more than what was offered by the appellant as a highest bidder. The
base price fixed was Rs. 4,00,000/- per acre against which the appellant being highest bidder
offered Rs.13,01,000/- per acre. In all 45 persons participated in the auction, in which the appellant
was found to be the highest bidder. There are no allegations of fraud and/or collusion. According to
the appellant, the entire litigation started at the instance of Shri L. Kantha Rao when one Shri M.M.
Gupta, brother-in-law of Shri L. Kantha Rao, who was the second highest bidder and who had
purchased lands in the name of his family members near the auction land at Rs.7,50,000/- per acre
on 28.07.1998 and 22.09.1998. Therefore, it is observed that the proceedings initiated by Shri L.
Kantha Rao as such cannot be said to be a Public Interest Litigation but is squarely a private interest
litigation in the garb of espousing a public cause, which also did not exist in the instant case.
Therefore, in the facts and circumstances of the case, the Division Bench of the High Court ought
not to have passed an order for re-auction of the property after a period of 23 years from the date of
auction/sale to the detriment of the rights of the appellant who was the successful bidder in the

12

K. Kumara Gupta vs Sri Markendaya And Sri Omkareswara ... on 18 February, 2022

auction sale. In this regard, we wish to rely on some of the observations made by this Court in the
case of State of Uttaranchal Vs. Balwant Singh Chaufal and Ors., (2010) 3 SCC 402, cautioning the
High Courts to be more discerning / vigilant and/or cautious while entertaining writ petitions
apparently filed in public interest. In the said decision, it is observed and held that: (1) The Courts
must encourage genuine and bona fide PIL and effectively discourage and curb the PIL filed for
extraneous considerations; (2) The Courts should prima facie verify the credentials of the petitioner
before entertaining a PIL; (3) The Courts should be prima facie satisfied regarding the correctness of
the contents of the petition before entertaining a PIL; (4) The Courts should be fully satisfied that
substantial public interest is involved before entertaining the petition; (5) The Courts before
entertaining the PIL should ensure that the PIL is aimed at redressal of genuine public harm or
public injury. The Court should also ensure that there is no personal gain, private motive or oblique
motive behind filing the public interest litigation; and (6) The Courts should also ensure that the
petitions filed by busybodies for extraneous and ulterior motives must be discouraged by imposing
exemplary costs or by adopting similar novel methods to curb frivolous petitions and the petitions
filed for extraneous considerations. 8.13 The submission on behalf of the respondents that as on
today the value of the property is Rs.15 crores and therefore, this Court may not interfere with the
impugned judgment and order passed by the Division Bench of the High Court is concerned, the
aforesaid cannot be accepted. After a period of 20-23 years, the prices of lands are bound to
increase. The auction was conducted and held in the year 1998 and was sold in favour of the
appellant then on payment of the full sale consideration as per the highest bid offered by him.
Therefore, the valuation as on the date of auction is the relevant consideration and not the value
after so many years and over two decades after conducting the auction and confirming the sale.

9. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the impugned judgment and order passed
by the Division Bench of the High Court is unsustainable and deserves to be quashed and set aside
and is accordingly quashed and set aside. The judgment and order passed by the learned Single
Judge in Writ Petition No.25407 of 1999 is hereby ordered to be restored. However, as the appellant
had agreed to deposit the balance amount of Rs.6,45,190/- being the balance of Rs. 30 lakhs and
considering the fact that the respondent is a Temple Trust / Devasthanam, we direct the appellant to
pay to the respondent – Temple Trust / Devasthanam a further sum of Rs. 15 lakhs (Rs.6,45,190/-
plus interest from 1998), to be paid by the appellant to the respondent – Temple Trust
/Devasthanam by demand draft /banker cheque within a period of two weeks from today and take
all consequential steps pursuant to the auction/sale being confirmed in his favour including getting
registration of the sale deed in his name and taking possession of the land in question in case the
same have not yet taken place till date.

Present appeals are accordingly allowed to the aforesaid extent. However, in the facts and
circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.

Pending application(s), if any, also stands disposed of.

………………………………….J.

13

K. Kumara Gupta vs Sri Markendaya And Sri Omkareswara ... on 18 February, 2022

[M.R. SHAH]

NEW DELHI;                                 ………………………………….J.
FEBRUARY 18, 2022.                           [B.V. NAGARATHNA]

14