K. Srinivasappa vs M. Mallamma on 18 May, 2022

K. Srinivasappa vs M. Mallamma on 18 May, 2022

Author: B.V. Nagarathna

Bench: B.V. Nagarathna, M.R. Shah

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3486-3488 OF 2022

K. SRINIVASAPPA & ORS.                                ……..APPELLANT(S)

VS.

M. MALLAMMA & ORS.                                    …….RESPONDENT(S)

JUDGMENT

NAGARATHNA J.

These appeals assail the judgment and order dated 17 th April, 2015, passed by the High Court of
Karnataka at Bengaluru in Writ Petition nos.20607, 20608 and 20609 of 2013, whereby the High
Court disposed of the Writ Petitions filed by plaintiff nos. 4 to 6 and has recalled order dated 7th
July, 2012 by which the compromise had been recorded by the Lok Adalat, between the parties to
Original Suit No. 876 of 2004, being a suit for partition and separate possession instituted by
plaintiff nos. 1 to 6 on the file of the Court of the Civil Judge (Junior Division), Rural District,
Bangalore.

2. For the sake of convenience, the parties shall be referred to in terms of their rank and status in
O.S. No. 876 of 2004.

3. Briefly stated, the facts giving rise to the present appeal are that plaintiff nos. 1, 4, 5, 6 and
defendant nos. 2 to 5 are children of M. Krishnappa and M. Mallamma, defendant no. 1. Plaintiff
nos. 2 and 3 are the sons of plaintiff no. 1, namely, K. Devraj. The Plaintiffs filed a suit for partition
and separate possession, being O.S. 876 of 2004 on the file of the Court of the Civil Judge, Junior
Division, Rural District Bangalore stating that the suit schedule properties were acquired by M.
Krishnappa and were in joint possession and enjoyment of the plaintiffs and defendants, until the
demise of M. Krishnappa. That following the death of M. Krishnappa, defendant no. 1 was in
possession of the suit schedule properties and was acting in a manner detrimental to the interests of

1

K. Srinivasappa vs M. Mallamma on 18 May, 2022

the plaintiffs and had attempted to alienate the properties without effecting a partition so as to
crystallise the rights of each of the parties to the suit. That requests of the plaintiffs to effect a
partition of the property, were met with threats by the defendants to alienate the same.

With the aforesaid averments the plaintiffs had sought partition and separate possession of their
shares in the suit schedule properties.

4. During the pendency of the suit, on 30 th June, 2012, a compromise petition was filed jointly by
the plaintiffs and the defendants under Order XXIII Rule 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
(hereinafter “CPC”, for short), before the Trial Court stating therein that the parties to the suit had,
on intervention of relatives and well-wishers there was a mediation of their disputes as to partition
and settled their disputes inter-se, in the following manner:

i. That the plaintiffs would relinquish their right, title, interest and claim in respect of
the suit schedule properties, and in consideration for the same, the defendants had
paid to the plaintiffs the following amounts:

a) Rs. 1,10,00,000/- (rupees one crore, ten lakhs) paid in favour of K. Devaraj,
plaintiff no. 1.

b) Rs. 30,00,000/- (rupees thirty lakhs) paid in favour of K. Sugunamma, plaintiff
no. 4, by way of two cheques for amounts of Rs. 2,50,000/- (rupees two lakhs and
fifty thousands) and Rs. 27,50,000/- (rupees twenty seven lakhs and fifty thousands),
respectively.

c) Rs. 30,00,000/- (rupees thirty lakhs) paid in favour of K. Shanthamma, plaintiff
no. 5 by way of two cheques for amounts of Rs. 2,50,000/- (rupees two lakhs and fifty
thousands) and Rs. 27,50,000/- (rupees twenty seven lakhs and fifty thousands),
respectively.

d) Rs. 30,00,000/- (rupees thirty lakhs) paid in favour of K. Geetha, plaintiff no. 6,
by way of two cheques for amounts of Rs. 2,50,000/- (rupees two lakhs and fifty
thousands) and Rs. 27,50,000/- (rupees twenty seven lakhs and fifty thousands),
respectively.

e) Rs. 4,00,000/- (rupees four lakhs) paid in favour of Mallamma, defendant no. 1.

ii. That the defendants would be entitled, jointly and severally, to enjoy absolute right, title and
interest over the suit schedule properties.

iii. That defendant nos. 2 to 5 would be entitled to get the khata, mutation and record of rights
transferred in their names, in respect of the suit schedule properties.

2

K. Srinivasappa vs M. Mallamma on 18 May, 2022

iv. That the suit schedule properties would be retained by defendant nos. 2 to 5, who shall hold the
same as joint owners thereof, until a division is effected inter-se between the said defendants. That
the said property would not be available for partition, so far as the plaintiffs were concerned as their
right over the suit property was conveyed in favour of defendant nos. 2 to 5, for consideration.

v. That the plaintiffs undertake not to initiate any action or proceedings by themselves or through
their successors-in- interest or heirs, as regards their right, title and interest over the suit schedule
properties.

vi. That the compromise was entered into by plaintiff no. 1, on behalf of, and for the benefit of his
two minor children, in order to protect their shares.

5. On 26th June, 2012, plaintiff no. 4 encashed two cheques received by her as a part of the
compromise entered into between the plaintiffs and the defendants, as detailed above.

6. In view of the inter-se compromise between the parties, the matter was referred by the Trial Court
to the Lok Adalat. After hearing the parties, the Lok Adalat passed an order dated 07 th July, 2012,
decreeing the suit for partition and separate possession, in terms of the memo of compromise
presented before it. The Lok Adalat recorded the following findings:

i. That all the parties to the dispute had agreed to amicably settle the dispute as
regards the partition of the suit schedule property, in terms of the memo of
compromise;

ii. That the terms of compromise had been read over and explained to the parties in a
language known and understood by them, in the presence of their Advocates and the
parties had admitted the same to be true and correct;

iii. That since the compromise was in favour of the minor children of plaintiff no. 1,
he was permitted to enter into the compromise on their behalf.

In view of the aforestated findings, the application filed by the parties under Order
XXXII Rule 3 of the CPC, was allowed and accepted.

7. Two days later, on 09th July, 2012, only plaintiff nos.4-6 filed an affidavit before the Lok Adalat
stating that the defendants had played fraud on them and misled them in order to obtain their
consent to the terms of compromise.

8. The Lok Adalat considered the affidavit submitted by plaintiff nos.4-6 and by an order dated 13 th
July, 2012, rejected the prayer made therein, to set aside the order recording compromise of the
parties. The Lok Adalat noted that the order recording compromise was passed after duly recording
the consent of all parties to the compromise and therefore, the prayer to set aside the compromise
could not be entertained.

3

K. Srinivasappa vs M. Mallamma on 18 May, 2022

9. Aggrieved by the order of the Lok Adalat dated 13 th July, 2012, plaintiff no. 4 filed a Writ
Petition, being W.P. No. 25989 of 2012, before the High Court of Karnataka, praying, inter-alia, that
the order of the Lok Adalat dated 07 th July, 2012 whereby compromise of the parties was recorded,
be set aside. Plaintiff no. 4 submitted before the learned Single Judge of the High Court that
although she had signed the compromise petition presented before the Trial Court and thereafter
referred to referred to the Lok Adalat, the order sheet dated 07th July, 2012, which was drawn up in
terms of the compromise petition was not signed by her. That the compromise petition was signed
by plaintiff no. 4 as a result of fraud practiced by the defendants.

10. In light of the allegation of fraud on the part of the defendants, the High Court, by an order dated
24 th January, 2013 disposed of W.P. No. 25989 of 2012, by remanding the matter to the Civil Judge
(Junior Division), Bangalore, to refer the matter to the Lok Adalat to hold an enquiry and record a
finding on the allegation of fraud levelled against the defendants. The High Court directed that such
an exercise ought to be completed by the Lok Adalat within a period of three months.

11. In accordance with the directions issued by the High Court vide order dated 24th January, 2013,
the matter was referred by the Trial Court to the Lok Adalat, Rural District, Bangalore. Plaintiff nos.
4-6 filed their objections to the compromise stating that their signatures on the compromise petition
were obtained by fraud on the part of the defendants. It was stated that during the pendency of O.S.
No. 876 of 2004, one property included in the schedule of properties to be partitioned, was sold in
favour of M/s. Trishul Buildtech and Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd., by way of a registered sale deed dated
23 rd June, 2012 for a consideration of Rs. 2,70,00,000/- (rupees two crores and seventy lakhs.
That the amount of Rs. 30,00,000/- (rupees thirty lakhs), paid to plaintiff nos. 4-6, was their share
of consideration for the said sale. That on the date of sale of the said property, several papers were
signed by plaintiff nos. 4-6, at the behest of the defendants, under the guise that the same were
required to be submitted to the tax authorities. That plaintiff no. 1 and the defendants had conspired
together and engaged the services of advocates to represent plaintiff nos. 4-6, without their
knowledge. It was further alleged that the defendants had caused plaintiff nos.4-6 to believe that
they were appearing before the tax authorities, in relation to the sale carried out on 23 rd June,
2012, when in fact, they were appearing before the Lok Adalat in connection with the compromise
petition. Plaintiff no. 4 stated that on realising before the Lok Adalat that the proceedings related to
a compromise petition, she refused to sign the order sheet dated 07 th July, 2012, wherein the terms
of compromise had been recorded by the Lok Adalat. Plaintiff nos.5 and 6 stated that they were
misled into signing both, the compromise petition, as well as the order sheet dated 07th July, 2012.

12. On hearing the parties, the Lok Adalat, by an order date 27 th April, 2013, rejected the objections
filed by plaintiff nos.4-6 and the order of the Lok Adalat dated 07th July, 2012, wherein the terms of
compromise had been recorded, was confirmed.

13. Aggrieved by the order of the Lok Adalat dated 27 th April, 2013, plaintiff nos. 4-6 filed Writ
Petitions, being W.P. Nos. 20607-20609 of 2013, before the High Court of Karnataka, praying,
inter-alia, that the entire records pertaining to O.S. No. 876 of 2004 be called for and the orders of
the Lok Adalat dated 07 th July, 2012 and 27th April, 2013, be quashed.

4

K. Srinivasappa vs M. Mallamma on 18 May, 2022

14. By the impugned judgment dated 17 th April, 2015, the learned Single Judge of the High Court of
Karnataka, Bengaluru disposed of the Writ Petition filed by plaintiff nos.4-6 by recalling the order of
compromise passed by the Lok Adalat on 07 th July, 2012. The High Court remanded the matter to
the Civil Judge (Junior Division), Bengaluru, to dispose of the matter in accordance with law, as if
no compromise was entered into between the parties. Aggrieved by the judgment of the High Court
whereby the order of the Lok Adalat recording compromise, was set aside, defendant nos. 2-5 have
preferred the present appeals.

15. We have heard Mr. Anirudh Gotety, learned counsel for the appellants and Ms. Manju Jetly,
learned counsel for the respondents, and perused the material on record.

16. Learned counsel for the appellants at the outset contended that the High Court was not right in
setting aside the order of the Lok Adalat dated 07th July, 2012, whereby the compromise of the
parties was recorded. Elaborating the said contention, it was submitted that the Lok Adalat had, in
its order dated 07th July, 2012 noted that every party to the compromise had consented to the terms
thereof, and had admitted that the contents of the compromise petition were true and correct, when
the same had been read over and explained to them in Kannada language. That the Lok Adalat in its
order dated 27 th April, 2013 had upheld the validity of the compromise between the parties, after
considering, in detail the objections raised by plaintiff nos. 4-6 and rejecting the same. It was urged
that the Lok Adalat’s order dated 27 th April, 2013 had been passed after detailed examination of the
contentions of the parties and the Lok Adalat had rightly rejected the objections raised by plaintiff
nos. 4-6. However, the learned Single Judge of the High Court, in the absence of any reasoning, and
in a casual and cryptic manner, had reversed the order of the Lok Adalat wherein the compromise of
the parties was recorded.

17. It was next contended that every award of a Lok Adalat is deemed to be a decree of a Civil Court
as provided under Section 21 of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 and cannot therefore be set
aside by a cryptic order of the High Court sans reasons. Learned counsel for the appellants relied on
Smt. Sawarni vs. Smt. Inder Kaur and Ors. – [1996 (6) SCC 223] to contend that when a Civil Court
had come to a conclusion after elaborate discussion of the evidence on record, an Appellate Court
could not set aside the decree of the Civil Court without a reasoned decision to reverse the findings
of the Civil Court. In that context, it was further submitted that the award of the Lok Adalat, dated
07th July, 2012, being in the nature of a decree of the Civil Court, could not have been set aside by
the High Court, without a reasoned decision to reverse the findings of the Lok Adalat.

18. Learned counsel for the appellants submitted that plaintiff nos.4-6 having taken advantage of
the terms of the compromise by accepting a sum of Rs. 30,00,000/- (rupees thirty lakhs) each, as
consideration for relinquishing all their rights of title and interest in the suit schedule properties in
favour of the defendants, could not, at a later juncture rescind from the terms of the compromise,
after encashing the cheques issued to them. That these objectors could not approbate and reprobate
at the same time. That the High Court had erred in setting aside the compromise, without issuing
any direction requiring plaintiff nos.4-6 to return the amounts paid to them in terms of the
compromise.

5

K. Srinivasappa vs M. Mallamma on 18 May, 2022

19. It was averred that the Lok Adalat, had, in its orders dated 07 th July, 2012 and 27th April, 2013
recorded several findings of fact which ought not to have been interfered with by the High Court in
exercise of its writ jurisdiction under Article 227 of the Constitution of India.

20. That plaintiff nos. 4-6 had not made any effort to explain why they did not state before the Lok
Adalat on 07 th July, 2012 that their signatures were obtained by fraud. That this aspect of the
matter was rightly recognised by the Lok Adalat in rejecting the allegations of fraud raised against
the defendants. However, the High Court, made no reference to any of the findings of the Lok
Adalat, in passing the impugned judgment.

With the aforesaid contentions, it was prayed that the impugned judgment of the High Court may be
set aside and the order of the Lok Adalat, dated 07th July, 2012, whereby the compromise between
the parties was recorded, be restored.

21. Per contra, Ms. Manju Jetly, learned counsel for the respondents submitted that the impugned
judgment of the High Court does not suffer from any infirmity warranting interference by this
Court. That the High Court rightly set aside the Order dated 07 th July, 2012, passed by the Lok
Adalat, after appreciating that the consent of plaintiff nos.4-6 to the terms of compromise had been
obtained by practicing fraud.

22. It was submitted that the High Court passed the impugned judgment after taking note of the fact
that plaintiff no. 4 had not signed the order sheet dated 07 th July, 2012, wherein the Lok Adalat
had recorded the compromise of the parties, although she had signed the compromise petition
presented before the Lok Adalat.

23. It was next contended by learned counsel for the respondents that the amount of
Rs.30,00,000/- (rupees thirty lakhs), paid to plaintiff nos. 4-6, was their share of consideration for
the sale of one property which was included in the schedule of the properties to be divided between
the parties. That such amount was not received in relation to the compromise between the parties
and therefore, could not form the basis for rejecting their objections to the order recording
comprise.

24. Ms. Manju Jetly further submitted that the fact that plaintiff no.4 had refused to sign the order
sheet dated 07 th July, 2012, having signed the compromise petition, would establish that she
realised at that juncture that the defendants had fraudulently obtained her signature on the
compromise petition, under the guise that such signatures were being taken on documents to be
submitted to the tax authorities.

As regards plaintiff nos.5 and 6, it was submitted that they were misled into signing both, the
compromise petition, as well as the order sheet dated 07th July, 2012.

25. It was averred that plaintiff nos.4-6, on 09 th July, 2012 had submitted an affidavit before the
Lok Adalat, stating therein that the defendants had played fraud on them and misled them in order
to obtain their consent to the terms of compromise. The fact that such an affidavit was submitted

6

K. Srinivasappa vs M. Mallamma on 18 May, 2022

within a short span of two days after the order of the Lok Adalat dated 07th July, 2012 would
establish that plaintiff nos. 4-6 took immediate steps to bring to the notice of the Lok Adalat, the
fraud on the part of the defendants. Therefore, the fact that plaintiff nos. 4-6 did not state before the
Lok Adalat on 07 th July, 2012 that their signatures were obtained by fraud, could not form the basis
for rejecting their allegations of fraud on the part of the defendants.

With the aforesaid contentions, it was submitted that the impugned order of the High Court,
whereby the order of the Lok Adalat dated 07th July, 2012 was set aside, did not call for interference
by this Court.

26. Having regard to the contention of the learned counsel for appellant that the impugned
judgment of the High Court set aside the order of the Lok Adalat dated 07 th July, 2012, in a very
cursory and cryptic manner, without assigning any reasons for doing so, the impugned judgment
dated 17th April, 2015 in its entirety has been extracted hereinunder:

“O R D E R In these writ petitions, petitioners have challenged the order sheet of the
Lok Adalath, dated 7.7.2012. Being aggrieved by the rejection of the objections to the
compromise petition raised by the petitioners and orders passed by the Learned
Judicial and non Judicial Members of the Lok Adalath, Bangalore Rural, Bangalore
on 27.04.2013 passed in O.S. No. 876/2004, petitioners are before this Court. The
learned counsel requests the court, under the facts and circumstances of the case,
order of compromise passed is to be set aside.

2. As against this, learned counsel appearing for the respondents support the order
passed by the Lok Adalat and prays to dismiss these writ petitions.

Petitioners are the defendants no. 6 to 9 and it is submitted by the learned counsel for the
petitioners that by playing fraud compromise petition was filed. Petitioner No. 1 submits that she
has not at all signed the compromise petition entered into between the parties.

3. Under the facts and circumstances of the case, I deem it proper to recall the order of the
compromise. Order dated 7.7.2012 passed by the Lok Adalat is set aside. The matter is referred to
the learned Civil Judge (Jr.Dn.) Bengaluru and is hereby directed to dispose of the matter in
accordance with law, as if no compromise is entered into between the parties.

Accordingly, these petitions are disposed of.”

27. At the outset, we observe that we do not find any reason forthcoming from the judgment of the
High court while setting aside the order of the Lok Adalat dated 07 th July, 2012 whereby the terms
of the compromise were recorded. To recall a compromise that has been recorded would call for
strong reasons. This is because a compromise would result ultimately into a decree of a Court which
can be enforced just as a decree passed on an adjudication of a case. This is also true in the case of a
compromise recorded before a Lok Adalat. In this regard, it may be apposite to refer to Section 21 of
the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987, which is extracted as under:

7

K. Srinivasappa vs M. Mallamma on 18 May, 2022

“21. Award of Lok Adalat.— (1) Every award of the Lok Adalat shall be deemed to be a
decree of a civil court or, as the case may be, an order of any other court and where a
compromise or settlement has been arrived at, by a Lok Adalat in a case referred to it
under sub-section ( 1) of section 20, the court-fee paid in such case shall be refunded
in the manner provided under the Court-fees Act, 1870 (7 of 1870). (2) Every award
made by a Lok Adalat shall be final and binding on all the parties to the dispute, and
no appeal shall lie to any court against the award.”

28. Section 21 of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 equates an award of the Lok Adalat, to a
decree of a Civil Court and imputes an element of finality to an award of compromise passed by the
Lok Adalat. When the Lok Adalat disposes cases in terms of a compromise arrived at between the
parties to a suit, after following principles of equity and natural justice, every such award of the Lok
Adalat shall be deemed to be a decree of a Civil Court and such decree shall be final and binding
upon the parties. Given the element of finality attached to an award of the Lok Adalat, it also follows
that no appeal would lie, under Section 96 of the CPC against such award, vide P.T. Thomas vs.
Thomas Job - [(2005) 6 SCC 478].

29. While we recognise that a Writ Petition would be maintainable against an award of the Lok
Adalat, especially when such writ petition has been filed alleging fraud in the manner of obtaining
the award of compromise, a writ court cannot, in a casual manner, de hors any reasoning, set aside
the order of the Lok Adalat. The award of a Lok Adalat cannot be reversed or set aside without
setting aside the facts recorded in such award as being fraudulent arrived at.

30. The Latin maxim “cessante ratione legis cessat ipsa lex ” meaning “reason is the soul of the law,
and when the reason of any particular law ceases, so does the law itself” vide H H Sri Swamiji of Sri
Admar Mutt vs. the Commissioner, Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Dept.– [(1979) 4
SCC 642], is also apposite.

31. On the aspect of the duty to accord reasons for a decision arrived at by a court, or for that matter,
even a quasi-judicial authority, it would be useful to refer to a judgment of this Court in Kranti
Associates Private Limited & Anr. Vs. Masood Ahmed Khan & Ors. – (2010) 9 SCC 496, wherein
after referring to a number of judgments, this Court summarised at paragraph 47 of the judgment
the law on the point. The relevant principles for the purpose of this case are extracted as under:

(a) Insistence on recording of reasons is meant to serve the wider principle of justice
that justice must not only be done it must also appear to be done as well.

(b) Recording of reasons also operates as a valid restraint on any possible arbitrary
exercise of judicial and quasi-

judicial or even administrative power.

(c) Reasons reassure that discretion has been exercised by the decision-maker on relevant grounds
and by disregarding extraneous considerations.

8

K. Srinivasappa vs M. Mallamma on 18 May, 2022

(d) Reasons have virtually become as indispensable a component of a decision-making process as
observing principles of natural justice by judicial, quasi-judicial and even by administrative bodies.

(e) Reasons facilitate the process of judicial review by superior courts.

(f) The ongoing judicial trend in all countries committed to rule of law and constitutional
governance is in favour of reasoned decisions based on relevant facts. This is virtually the lifeblood
of judicial decision-making justifying the principle that reason is the soul of justice.

(g) Judicial or even quasi-judicial opinions these days can be as different as the judges and
authorities who deliver them. All these decisions serve one common purpose which is to
demonstrate by reason that the relevant factors have been objectively considered. This is important
for sustaining the litigants' faith in the justice delivery system.

(h) Insistence on reason is a requirement for both judicial accountability and transparency.

(i) If a judge or a quasi-judicial authority is not candid enough about his/her decision-making
process then it is impossible to know whether the person deciding is faithful to the doctrine of
precedent or to principles of incrementalism.

(j) Reasons in support of decisions must be cogent, clear and succinct. A pretence of reasons or
“rubber-stamp reasons” is not to be equated with a valid decision-

making process.

(k) It cannot be doubted that transparency is the sine qua non of restraint on abuse of judicial
powers.

Transparency in decision-making not only makes the judges and decision-makers less prone to
errors but also makes them subject to broader scrutiny. (See David Shapiro in Defence of Judicial
Candor [(1987) 100 Harvard Law Review 731-37)

(l) In all common law jurisdictions judgments play a vital role in setting up precedents for the
future. Therefore, for development of law, requirement of giving reasons for the decision is of the
essence and is virtually a part of “due process”.

(m) The requirement to record reasons emanates from the broad doctrine of fairness in
decision-making i.e. adequate and intelligible reasons must be given for judicial decisions Though
the aforesaid judgment was rendered in the context of a dismissal of a revision petition by a cryptic
order by the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, reliance could be placed on the
said judgment on the need to give reasons while deciding a matter particularly as it arises in the
instant case.

9

K. Srinivasappa vs M. Mallamma on 18 May, 2022

32. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we shall now consider the facts of the present case. The
details as to the terms of the compromise as well as the contentions raised at the Bar have been
narrated above. On a consideration of the same, the following aspects would emerge:

(a) The Lok Adalat, in its award dated 07th July, 2012 recorded that the parties had
admitted that the contents of the compromise petition were true and correct, after
the terms thereof had been read over and explained to them in Kannada language.
Further, it was also noted that the compromise was entered into by plaintiff no. 1, on
behalf of, and for the benefit of his two minor children, in order to protect their
shares. The same was allowed by the Lok Adalat on recognising the terms of the
compromise, would protect the interests plaintiff no. 1’s minor children. There is no
objection raised on behalf of plaintiff no. 1 in the instant case.

(b) The Lok Adalat, in its order dated 27th April, 2013, rejected the allegations of
fraud raised by plaintiff nos. 4-6, against the defendants and recorded that plaintiff
nos. 4-6 had offered no explanation as to why no objection was raised by any of them
on 07 th July, 2012 before the Lok Adalat. It was further observed that plaintiff nos.
4-6, could not, after having accepted huge sums of money in terms of the
compromise, rescind from the terms thereof.

(c) It is not the case of plaintiff nos. 4-6 that they had not received an amount of Rs.
30,00,000/- (rupees thirty lakhs) each, in terms of the compromise. Further, it is not
their case that such sum has been returned, in whole or in part, to the defendants.

(d) That although plaintiff no. 4, stated that on learning that the proceedings
conducted on 07th July, 2012 before the Lok Adalat were in relation to a
compromise, she had not signed the order sheet, she failed to provide any
explanation as to why she did not inform the Lok Adalat on the said date that her
signature on the compromise petition was obtained by fraud.

(e) That plaintiff nos. 4-6 had admitted before the Lok Adalat on 07th July, 2012 that
the contents of the compromise petition were true and correct, when the same had
been read over and explained to them in Kannada.

(f) That plaintiff nos. 4-6 specifically admitted that they had received a sum of Rs.
30,00,000/- (rupees thirty lakhs) each, as mentioned in the compromise petition in
lieu of relinquishing their rights, title and interest in the other suit schedule
properties.

(g) That if, in fact, the signatures of plaintiff nos. 4-6 had been obtained by fraud,
they ought to have returned the amount of Rs.

30,00,000/- (rupees thirty lakhs) each, paid to them in accordance with the terms of the
compromise. Having not done so, plaintiff nos. 4-6 had failed to establish that any fraud was

10

K. Srinivasappa vs M. Mallamma on 18 May, 2022

practiced upon them, by the defendants, with a view to obtain their signatures on the compromise
petition.

(h) On a perusal of the plaint, it is noted that there were 13 items of the suit schedule property
having different valuation and therefore, the plaintiffs would have had their respective shares in the
suit schedule properties taken together. However, plaintiff nos.4-6 accepted a sum of Rs.30 lakhs
each by relinquishing their right, title and interest in all the suit schedule properties. Having
received a monetary share in respect of the suit items, the plaintiffs had decided to relinquish their
right, title and interest in respect of all the suit items.

The learned Single Judge of the High Court in the impugned judgment has not considered the
aforesaid facts of the case in the context of setting aside the award of the Lok Adalat dated 07 th
July, 2012. Learned Single Judge has also not considered the reasoning given in the order dated 27
th April, 2013 by which the objections raised by plaintiff nos.4-6 to the decree of the Lok Adalat had
been rejected.

33. This Court in Ruby Sales and Services Pvt. Ltd. vs. State of Maharashtra- [(1994) 1 SCC 531]
observed that a consent decree is a creature of an agreement and is liable to be set aside on any of
the grounds which will invalidate an agreement. Therefore, it would follow that the level of
circumspection, which a Court of law ought to exercise while setting aside a consent decree or a
decree based on a memo of compromise, would be atleast of the same degree, which is to be
observed while declaring an agreement as invalid.

34. In Pushpa Devi Bhagat (dead) through LR. Sadhna Rai vs. Rajinder Singh and Ors. – [(2006) 5
SCC 566], this Court held that since no appeal would lie against a compromise decree, the only
option available to a party seeking to avoid such a decree would be to challenge the consent decree
before the Court that passed the same and to prove that the agreement forming the basis for the
decree was invalid. It is therefore imperative that a party seeking to avoid the terms of a consent
decree has to establish, before the Court that passed the same, that the agreement on which the
consent decree is based, is invalid or illegal.

35. It is a settled position of law that where an allegation of fraud is made against a party to an
agreement, the said allegation would have to be proved strictly, in order to avoid the agreement on
the ground that fraud was practiced on a party in order to induce such party to enter into the
agreement. Similarly, the terms of a compromise decree, cannot be avoided, unless the allegation of
fraud has been proved. In the absence of any conclusive proof as to fraud on the part of the
objectors, the High Court could not have set aside the compromise decree in the instant case.

36. Having considered the aforesaid facts of the present case, we are of the view that no ground was
made out warranting the decision of the High Court to set aside the order of the Lok Adalat dated
07th July, 2012, wherein compromise was recorded between the parties. The High Court’s decision
to set aside the order of the Lok Adalat, without entering into a discussion as to the findings in such
order, cannot be sustained. Such decision of the High Court runs contrary to established principles
of law which seek to protect the sanctity and finality of orders based on a compromise or consent

11

between parties.

K. Srinivasappa vs M. Mallamma on 18 May, 2022

37. Hence the impugned judgment of the High Court of Karnataka, dated 17th April, 2015 is set
aside and the order of the Lok Adalat, dated 07th July, 2012 whereby the compromise between the
parties to O.S. No. 876 of 2004 was recorded, is restored. The appeals are allowed.

38. Having regard to the relationship between the parties, the parties are directed to bear their
respective costs.

………………………………J. (M.R. SHAH) ….…………………….…..J. (B.V. NAGARATHNA) NEW DELHI;

18th MAY, 2022.

12