Karan Singh vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 2 March, 2022

Karan Singh vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 2 March, 2022

Author: Indira Banerjee

Bench: V. Ramasubramanian, Indira Banerjee

1

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL APPEAL No. ………….. OF 2022
(Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No.717 of 2020)

KARAN SINGH                                     …Appellant(s)

Versus

THE STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH & ORS.             ...Respondent(s)

JUDGMENT

Indira Banerjee, J.

Leave granted.

2. This Appeal is against a judgment and order dated 30 th July 2018 passed by a Division Bench of
the Allahabad High Court, dismissing Criminal Appeal No. 1813 of 1983 filed by the Appellant along
with other accused persons, against a judgment and order of conviction dated 1 st August 1983
passed by the VI Additional District and Sessions Judge, Shahjahanpur in Sessions Trial No. 268 of
1981, inter alia, convicting the Appellant of the offences under Section 302 read with Section 149,
Section 307 read with Section 149 and Section 148 of the Indian Penal Code (hereinafter referred to
as “the IPC”) and sentencing him, inter alia, to life imprisonment for offence punishable under
Section 302 read with Section 149 of the IPC.

3. It appears that the Appellant had been granted bail by the Trial Court by an order dated 13th June
1980. The High Court also granted bail to the Appellant during the entire period of the appeal. The
Appellant was taken into custody on 9 th September 2019 after dismissal of his appeal by the High

1

Court.

Karan Singh vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 2 March, 2022

4. It is the case of the Prosecution that on 8th April 1980, at about 12:15 P.M., one Rati Pal arrived at
Kaanth Police Station and filed a complaint alleging that eight days before Holi, one Rajkumar
Singh had purchased a buffalo from his elder brother Brahmapal Singh at the price of Rs. 1,900/-.

5. The said Rajkumar had promised to pay the price of the buffalo to the complainant’s elder
brother, Brahmapal Singh, eight days after Holi.

6. Rajkumar Singh, however, did not pay the price of the buffalo to the complainant’s elder brother,
Brahmapal Singh as promised. Brahmapal Singh did not permit Rajkumar Singh to harvest his
crops.

7. On 7th April 1980, Rajkumar Singh asked Brahmapal Singh to come to Simra Khera the next day,
that is, 8 th April 1980, to collect his money.

8. On 8th April 1980, the complainant’s cousin brother, Mahendra Singh came to the complainant’s
house and asked Brahmapal Singh to go to Simra Khera with him to collect his money from
Rajkumar Singh after settling accounts with him. Thereafter, the complainant’s brother-in-law
(Shreepal Singh), Brahmapal Singh, the complainant, a villager Badshah Singh and Mahendra Singh
went to Simra Khera. They went to the house of Sher Singh Thakur and sat on a cot in the sitting
area.

9. Mahendra Singh called Rajkumar Singh, who came with a rifle in his hand along with the
Appellant, Karan Singh, who was also armed with a rifle, Sukhlal armed with a single barrel gun,
Jagdish Singh armed with a single barrel gun, Harpal Singh armed with a single barrel gun and
Nankoo Singh armed with a double barrel gun.

10. At about 9:00 A.M., Brahmapal Singh asked for his money. Harpal Singh asked Rajkumar Singh
to discharge his debt to Brahmapal Singh as soon as possible. At this, Rajkumar Singh opened fire
with his rifle and shot Brahmapal Singh. The bullet hit his head. Brahmapal Singh fell down
unconscious.

11. Thereafter, the associates of Rajkumar Singh, that is, Harpal Singh, Karan Singh, Jagdish Singh,
Sukhpal Singh and Nankoo Singh opened fire from their respective weapons. After the associates of
Rajkumar Singh opened fire, the complainant, Badshah Singh, Shreepal Singh and Mahendra Singh
ran away from the spot. Out of the shots fired from the side of the accused, one shot hit Mahendra
Singh. The complainant and other eyewitnesses ran into Sher Singh Thakur’s house. When they
returned to the place of occurrence, they found Brahmapal Singh dead.

12. After the FIR was lodged, the Investigating Officer investigated the case and after completion of
investigation submitted chargesheet against the accused persons Rajkumar Singh, Harpal Singh,
Jagdish Singh, Karan Singh, Sukhlal Singh and Nankoo Singh under Sections 148, 302/149 and
307/149 of the IPC.

2

Karan Singh vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 2 March, 2022

13. The Fifth Prosecution Witness (PW5) Dr. P. K. Gupta who had conducted the post mortem
examination of the dead body of the deceased found several gunshot injuries on the body.

14. The Appellant and other accused persons were tried by the Sessions Court. The prosecution
examined six witnesses, namely, the first Prosecution Witness, Dr. R.N. Rastogi (PW1), Rati Pal
Singh (PW2), Shreepal Singh (PW3), Mahendra Singh (PW4), Dr. P.K. Gupta (PW5) and the
Investigating Officer (IO) Jagdish Singh (PW6).

15. By a judgment and order dated 1 st August 1983, the Trial Court convicted the accused persons,
inter alia, for murder and sentenced them, inter alia, to undergo life imprisonment.

16. The Trial Court found the testimonies of the eye-witnesses were reliable. The Trial Court further
found there was motive to kill the deceased and this was proved by the witnesses produced by the
Prosecution. All accused persons had come to the spot with deadly weapons with intention to kill the
deceased. All the accused had fired on the deceased with their firearms, as a result of which the
deceased had sustained 16 bullet injuries.

17. As observed above, the Appellant along with other convicted persons filed Criminal Appeal No.
1813 of 1983 which has been dismissed by the High Court by the judgment and order under appeal.
While the appeal was pending before the High Court, five out of six accused persons died. Only the
Appellant is alive.

18. The High Court did not find any major contradiction either in the evidence of the witnesses or
any conflict in medical or ocular evidence, which could tilt the balance in favour of the Appellant.
The High Court observed that minor discrepancies and/or improvements and/or embellishments
were insignificant and ought to be ignored in view of the overwhelming corroborative evidence of
the other witnesses.

19. Mr. Ajit Kumar Sinha, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the Appellant submitted
that the police recovered two articles which were produced in evidence. They produced
blood-stained clothes of the injured witness Mahender Singh marked as Exhibit Ka-13 and the
blood-stained mud and normal mud recovered from the alleged site of the incident which is marked
as Exhibit Ka-12. Mr. Sinha argued that there was no recovery of the weapon of crime.

20. The 11 exhibits tendered in evidence were (i) Medical Report of injuries sustained by the injured
witness Mahender Singh, (ii) The complaint made by the complainant to the Investigating Officer,
(iii) Post Mortem Report of the deceased,

(iv) Pallets recovered from the body of the deceased, (v) Incident Report entered by the constable on
the basis of the FIR,

(vi) Case diary submitted by the I.O., (vii) Panchnama etc., (viii) Site plan of the place of occurrence,
(ix) Sample of blood-stained mud and normal mud collected from the site by the I.O., (x)
Blood-stained clothes of the injured witness Mahender Singh and

3

Karan Singh vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 2 March, 2022

(xi) Chargesheet drawn by the police upon conclusion of investigation, as is evident from the
records.

21. The Prosecution, as observed, had examined six Prosecution Witnesses namely, Dr. R.N. Rastogi
(PW1), Ratipal Singh (PW2), Shreepal Singh (PW3), Mahendra Singh (PW4), Dr. P.K. Gupta (PW5)
and Jagdish Singh (Investigating Officer).

22. Mr. Sinha submitted that it was the case of the Prosecution that there was dispute between the
prime accused Rajkumar Singh and the deceased Brahmapal Singh over the price of buffalo for
which Brahmapal Singh stopped Rajkumar Singh from harvesting his crops. There was no dispute
or enmity between the Appellant and the deceased.

23. Mr. Sinha further argued that it has been alleged that of the six accused persons, Rajkumar
Singh and Karan Singh were carrying rifles with them, the others carried single/double guns.
However, the witnesses did not see any of the other accused persons except Rajkumar Singh firing at
the deceased. There is, therefore, no eye-witness against Karan Singh.

24. Mr. Sinha argued that no weapon alleged to have been used by the Appellant was either
recovered or produced by the police in course of trial. Mr. Sinha argued that the main injured
witness Mahendra Singh had testified that he had not seen the Appellant at the spot when the
incident took place. The Prosecution has not declared this witness hostile but relied upon on his
evidence.

25. Mr. Sinha further argued that it is alleged that injured witness Mahender Singh is a relative of
the Appellant Karan Singh. This is contrary to the admission of the complainant as contained in the
FIR itself. Mr. Sinha argued that Mahender Singh is not a relative of Karan Singh but a close relative
of Rati Pal and Brahmapal Singh.

26. Mr. Sinha further argued that medical examination of the injured witness Mahender Singh and
the post mortem report of the deceased Brahmapal Singh revealed that all the injuries inflicted on
both the persons were gunshot injuries. No injury has been caused from the rifle. The body of the
deceased contained pellets fired from the gun. There is no injury caused by bullets fired from rifle.

27. Mr. Sinha argued that the Investigating Officer had stated that there was no recovery of any
empty cartridge or bullet from the site. No scattered gun pellets were recovered from the site. There
was no witness from the village even though the village had a population of 700-800 people. The
villagers had only stated that they had heard of the incident.

28. Mr. Sinha argued that the Trial Court had in its judgment recorded that “since Raj Kumar fired a
shot from rifle & his companions were armed with guns, therefore the witnesses got panicked & they
never tried to know the truth that whether in reality the bullet of rifle ever hit Brahmapal or not. The
best witness to state this reality could have been deceased Brahmapal himself that whether the
bullet fired by Rajkumar ever hit him or not, or did he fell on the takht just because he got panicked
since the bullet merely travelled from near his head. Since Brahmapal is dead therefore in this

4

Karan Singh vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 2 March, 2022

situation there is no witness left to prove this fact that whether the bullet fired by Rajkumar ever hit
Brahmapal or not. Therefore, even in this situation where there is no injury mark of bullet rifle on
the head of deceased Brahmapal, no effect is caused on the case of the prosecution because under
panic nobody is in this situation where he can assess the reality.”

29. According to Mr. Sinha, this establishes that the conviction made by the Trial Court was only
based on assumption/presumption. Mr. Sinha argued that all the prosecution witnesses namely,
PW2, PW3 and PW4 had stated that, as soon as the first shot was fired by Rajkumar Singh from his
rifle towards Brahmapal Singh, they all ran away with their back towards the accused and they did
not see who had fired but had nevertheless heard gun shots. Hence, none of the witnesses had
deposed as to which of the accused was involved in firing apart from Rajkumar Singh.

30. Mr. Sinha argued that the Trial Court erred in holding that the aforesaid material factors were
minor contradictions and minor lapses on the part of the Prosecution and proceeded to convict all
the accused persons guilty beyond doubt. Mr. Sinha argued that the Trial Court had completely
ignored the chain of evidence to wrongly conclude that the accused persons were guilty, particularly
the Appellant Karan Singh.

31. Mr. Sinha further argued that as per settled law, the doctrine of severability does not apply in the
case of a statement of a witness in a criminal trial. Either the whole statement has to be discarded by
declaring the witness hostile or else the entire statement has to be relied upon. In this context Mr.
Sinha cited Palvinder Kaur v. State of Punjab 1, and Hanumant Govind Nargundkar v. State of
Madhya Pradesh2. In Palvinder Kaur (supra) this court held that a statement that contains
self-exculpatory matter cannot amount to a confession, if the exculpatory statement is of some fact,
which if true, would negative the offence alleged to be confessed. In Hanumant (supra) this Court
held:-

“…It is settled law that an admission made by a person whether amounting to a
confession or not cannot be split up and part of it used against him. An admission
must be used either as a whole or not at all. If the statement of the accused is used as
a whole, it completely demolishes the prosecution case and, if it is not used at all,
then there remains no material on the record from which any inference could be
drawn that the letter was not written on the date it bears.”

32. The judgments of this Court in Palvinder Kaur (supra) and in Hamunant (supra), which pertain
to confession and/or admission are distinguishable on facts. On the other hand, in Mrinal Das and
Others v. State of Tripura 3, this Court held that it is well settled that in a criminal trial, credible
evidence of even hostile witnesses can form the basis of conviction. 1 AIR 1952 SC 354 2 AIR 1952
SC 343 3 AIR 2011 SC 3753

33. Mr. Sinha also referred to Navaneethakrishnan v. State By Inspector of Police4, where this Court
re-affirmed: -

5

Karan Singh vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 2 March, 2022

“…every incriminating circumstance must be clearly established by reliable and
clinching evidence and the circumstances so proved must form a chain of events from
which the only irresistible conclusion about the guilt of the accused can be safely
drawn and no other hypothesis against the guilt is possible.”

34. Mr. Sinha concluded by submitting that the Prosecution has failed to prove Appellant’s guilt
beyond reasonable doubt. There were clear discrepancies in evidence visible on the face of the
record. The appeal therefore ought to be allowed.

35. On the other hand, on behalf of the State, Mr. Sanjay Kumar Tyagi, Advocate on Record,
submitted that this Court should not interfere with a concurrent finding of the Trial Court and the
High Court.

36. On post mortem, the dead body of the deceased was found to have a large number of gun shots,
multiple shot wounds. Some bullets penetrated and exited the body. The injured Mahender Singh
had medically been examined by Dr. R. N. Rastogi, who had found gunshot wounds, pellet injuries
etc. 4 (2018) 16 SCC 161

37. Mr. Tyagi argued and rightly that the Prosecution case was proved from the statements of three
eye witnesses namely, Rati Pal (PW2), Shivpal (PW3) and Mahender Singh (PW4), apart from PW1
being the Doctor who had examined injured witnesses and PW5 being the Doctor who had
conducted the post mortem.

38. As argued by Mr. Tyagi, there may have been some minor discrepancies in the evidence of the
PW’s. However, all material particulars have been corroborated. PW2 and PW3 more or less
corroborated the prosecution story. They both said that the Appellant Karan Singh was there at the
place of occurrence with a rifle. They said the accused Raj Kumar Singh opened fire first, after which
all the others started firing. PW2 said he did not actually see the others firing, but he heard the
sound of firing from which he knew that the others were firing bullets. However, PW2 categorically
stated that all the others had opened fire. When the accused opened fire all these three PWs ran
away. They went inside the house of Sher Singh. When they came out after a few minutes they found
Brahmapal dead. PW4, Mahender Singh, the injured witness has not, however, named Karan Singh.
No question was put to him as to whether he had seen Karan Singh.

39. PW1, Dr. R.N. Rastogi who had examined Mahender Singh said that he had been hit on the back.
This tallies with the version of the PWs that he was hit by bullet while they were all running away.
PW5, being the Doctor who conducted the post mortem on the body of the deceased said he found
gunshot injury on the center of the forehead, 3 centimetre above the nose. Many bones of the head
were fractured. He described various other gunshot wounds. There were multiple gunshot wounds.
There were also gunshot wounds of exit of bullets apart from gunshot wounds of entry. The thigh
bone was fractured. Upon internal examination, brain was ruptured, right and left membrane were
ruptured, lungs were ruptured. 45 pellets, small and large were recovered. The Doctor opined that
the cause of death was bleeding and shock caused by the injuries. He opined that all the injuries
were sufficient to cause death.

6

Karan Singh vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 2 March, 2022

40. The tenor of the evidence of the Doctor who conducted the post mortem tends to support the
case of the prosecution witnesses that all the accused persons, who were present, carrying arms had
fired. The injured witness Mahender Singh may not have specifically named the Appellant Karan
Singh. However, two of the other eye-witnesses, that is, PW2 and PW3 confirmed that he was
present at the place of occurrence and was carrying rifle. PW3 had seen the Appellant Karan Singh
fire.

41. From the evidence of Mahender Singh, PW-4, it appears that no specific question was put to him
as to whether the Appellant was present at the place of occurrence or not. This Court, in Rohtash
Kumar v. State of Haryana5 held:-

“24. ... The court has to examine whether evidence read as a whole appears to have a
ring of truth. Once that impression is formed, it is undoubtedly necessary for the
court to scrutinise the evidence more particularly keeping in view the deficiencies,
drawbacks and infirmities pointed out in the evidence as a whole and evaluate them
to find out whether it is against the general tenor of the evidence given by the
witnesses and whether the earlier evaluation of the evidence is shaken, as to render it
unworthy of belief. Thus, the court is not supposed to give undue importance to
omissions, contradictions and discrepancies which do not go to the heart of the
matter, and shake the basic version of the prosecution witness...”

42. Referring to Narayan Chetanram Chaudhary and Another v. State of Maharashtra6, Mr. Tyagi
argued that minor discrepancies caused by lapses in memory were acceptable, contradictions were
not. In this case, there was no contradiction, only minor discrepancies.

43. In Kuriya and Anr. v. State of Rajasthan7, this Court held:

5 (2013) 14 SCC 434 6 AIR 2000 SC 3352 7 (2012) 10 SCC 433 “30. This Court has
repeatedly taken the view that the discrepancies or improvements which do not
materially affect the case of the prosecution and are insignificant cannot be made the
basis for doubting the case of the prosecution. The courts may not concentrate too
much on such discrepancies or improvements. The purpose is to primarily and
clearly sift the chaff from the grain and find out the truth from the testimony of the
witnesses. Where it does not affect the core of the prosecution case, such discrepancy
should not be attached undue significance. The normal course of human conduct
would be that while narrating a particular incident, there may occur minor
discrepancies. Such discrepancies may even in law render credential to the
depositions. The improvements or variations must essentially relate to the material
particulars of the prosecution case. The alleged improvements and variations must be
shown with respect to material particulars of the case and the occurrence. Every such
improvement, not directly related to the occurrence, is not a ground to doubt the
testimony of a witness. The credibility of a definite circumstance of the prosecution
c a s e   c a n n o t   b e   w e a k e n e d   w i t h   r e f e r e n c e   t o   s u c h   m i n o r   o r   i n s i g n i f i c a n t
improvements.

7

Karan Singh vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 2 March, 2022

Reference in this regard can be made to the judgments of this Court in Kathi Bharat Vajsur v. State
of Gujarat 8, Narayan Chetanram Chaudhary v. State of Maharashtra 9, Gura Singh v. State of
Rajasthan10 and Sukhchain Singh v. State of Haryana 11.

31. What is to be seen next is whether the version presented in the Court was substantially similar to
what was said during the investigation. It is only when exaggeration fundamentally changes the
nature of the case, the Court has to consider whether the witness was stating the truth or not. [(Ref.
Sunil Kumar v. State (Govt. of NCT of Delhi)]12.

32. These are variations which would not amount to any serious consequences. The Court has to
accept the normal conduct of a person. The witness who is watching the murder of a person being
brutally beaten by 15 persons can hardly be expected to a state a minute by minute description of the
event. Everybody, and more particularly a person who is known to or is related to the deceased,
would give all his attention to take steps to prevent the assault on the victim and then to make every
effort to provide him with the medical aid and inform the police. The statements which are recorded
immediately upon the incident would have to be given a little leeway with regard to the statements
being made and recorded with utmost exactitude. It is a settled principle of law that every
improvement or variation cannot be treated as an attempt to falsely implicate the accused by the
witness. The approach of the court has to be reasonable and practicable. Reference in this regard
can be made to 8 (2012) 5 SCC 724 9 (2000) 8 SCC 457 10 (2001) 2 SCC 205 11 (2002) 5 SCC 100 12
(2003) 11 SCC 367 Ashok Kumar v. State of Haryana13 and Shivlal v. State of Chhattisgarh14.”

44. In Shyamlal Ghosh v. State of West Bengal 15, this Court held:

“46. Then, it was argued that there are certain discrepancies and contradictions in the
statement of the prosecution witnesses inasmuch as these witnesses have given
different timing as to when they had seen the scuffling and strangulation of the
deceased by the accused. ………… Undoubtedly, some minor discrepancies or
variations are traceable in the statements of these witnesses. But what the Court has
to see is whether these variations are material and affect the case of the prosecution
substantially. Every variation may not be enough to adversely affect the case of the
prosecution.

49. It is a settled principle of law that the court should examine the statement of a
witness in its entirety and read the said statement along with the statement of other
witnesses in order to arrive at a rational conclusion. No statement of a witness can be
read in part and/or in isolation. We are unable to see any material or serious
contradiction in the statement of these witnesses which may give any advantage to
the accused.”

45. In Rohtash Kumar v. State of Haryana16, this Court held:-

“24. ... The court has to examine whether evidence read as a whole appears to have a
ring of truth. Once that impression is formed, it is undoubtedly necessary for the

8

Karan Singh vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 2 March, 2022

court to scrutinise the evidence more particularly keeping in view the deficiencies,
drawbacks and infirmities pointed out in the evidence as a whole and evaluate them
to find out whether it is against the general tenor of the evidence given by the
witnesses and whether the earlier evaluation of the evidence is shaken, as to render it
unworthy of belief. Thus, the court is not supposed to give undue importance to
omissions, contradictions and discrepancies which do not go to the heart of the
matter, and shake the basic version of the prosecution witness...”

46. As argued by Mr. Tyagi, appearing for the State both PW2 and PW3 had clearly mentioned that
the Appellant and PW4 13 (2010) 12 SCC 350 14 (2011) 9 SCC 561 15 (2012) 7 SCC 646 16 (2013) 14
SCC 434 Mahender Singh were both present at the place of occurrence. The Appellant’s presence
has been proved by two eye witnesses. It has been proved by the eye witnesses, that the Appellant
carried a rifle. But PW2 and PW3 deposed that all the accused had opened fire. The prosecution was
required to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt, which it has done, and not beyond all iota of
doubt. The fact that one of the injured witnesses may not have mentioned the name of Appellant
Karan Singh does not demolish the evidence of the other witnesses.

47. We find no grounds to interfere with the concurrent findings of the Trial Court and the High
Court. The fact that the trial/appeal should have taken years and that other accused should have
died during the appeal cannot be a ground for acquittal of the Appellant. The appeal is thus
dismissed.

. … … … … … … … … … … … … … . J .   [   I N D I R A   B A N E R J E E   ]   … … … … … … … … … … … … … . . J .   [   V .
RAMASUBRAMANIAN ] NEW DELHI;

MARCH 02, 2022

9