Kerala State Beverages Manufacturing ... vs The Assistant Commissioner Of Income ... on 3 January, 2022

Kerala State Beverages Manufacturing ... vs The Assistant
Commissioner Of Income ... on 3 January, 2022

Author: R. Subhash Reddy

Bench: Hrishikesh Roy, R. Subhash Reddy

C.A.@S.L.P.(C)No.12859 of 2020 etc.

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11 OF 2022
[Arising out of S.L.P.(C) No.12859 of 2020]

Kerala State Beverages Manufacturing &
Marketing Corporation Ltd.                           ...Appellant

v.

The Assistant Commissioner of Income Tax
Circle 1(1)                                          ...Respondent

WITH

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 12 OF 2022
[Arising out of S.L.P.(C) No.12162 of 2020]
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 13 OF 2022
[Arising out of S.L.P.(C) No.12768 of 2020]
AND
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 14 OF 2022
[Arising out of S.L.P.(C) No.14150 of 2020]

JUDGMENT

R. SUBHASH REDDY, J.

1. Leave granted.

2. These appeals are preferred, by the State−owned Undertaking, 16:37:04 IST Reason:

1

Kerala State Beverages Manufacturing ... vs The Assistant Commissioner Of Income ... on 3 January, 2022

Kerala State Beverages Manufacturing & Marketing Corporation Ltd., a
C.A.@S.L.P.(C)No.12859 of 2020 etc. company registered under the Companies Act,
1956, engaged in the wholesale and retail trade of beverages, aggrieved by the
common judgment and order dated 30.04.2020 passed in I.T.A. No.135; 146 and 313
of 2019 by the High Court of Kerala at Ernakulam. The Civil Appeal arising out of
S.L.P.(C)No.12859 of 2020 is filed by the assessee and other three appeals are
preferred by the revenue.

3. For the assessment year 2014−2015, the Deputy Commissioner of Income Tax, Circle−2(1),
Thiruvananthapuram finalised the assessment of income of the appellant under Section 143(3) of
the Income−tax Act, 1961 (in short, ‘the Act’) vide Assessment Order dated 14.12.2016. The Principal
Commissioner of Income Tax, Thiruvananthapuram has exercised power of revision as
contemplated under Section 263 of the Act and set aside order of assessment on the ground that
same is erroneous and is prejudicial to the interest of the revenue, to the extent it failed to disallow
the debits made in the Profit & Loss Account of the assessee, with respect to the amount of
surcharge on sales tax and turnover tax paid to the State Government, which ought to have been
disallowed under Section 40(a)(iib) of the Act. Against order of the Principal Commissioner, Income
Tax, dated C.A.@S.L.P.(C)No.12859 of 2020 etc. 25.09.2018, the appellant herein filed appeal
before the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (in short, ‘the Tribunal’) in ITA No.536/Coch/2018.

4. With respect to Assessment Year 2015−2016 assessment against the appellant was completed
under Section 143(3) of the Act by the Assistant Commissioner of Income Tax, Circle−1(1),
Thiruvananthapuram vide order of assessment dated 28.12.2017. Debits contained in the Profit &
Loss Account of the appellant with respect to payment of gallonage fee, licence fee, shop rental (kist)
and surcharge on sales tax, amounting to a total sum of Rs.811,90,88,115/− were disallowed under
Section 40(a)(iib) of the Act. Aggrieved by the said order, appellant herein has filed appeal before
the Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals), Thiruvananthapuram and the same was dismissed. The
appellant carried the matter by way of second appeal before the Tribunal in ITA No.537/Coch/2018.

The Tribunal has dismissed the ITA Nos.536−537/Coch/2018 by a common order dated 12.03.2019.
The appellant herein thereafter has filed miscellaneous application in MP No.47/Coch/2019 on the
ground that the Tribunal had failed to consider the issue agitated against the disallowance of the
surcharge on sales tax. The said miscellaneous application was allowed by recalling earlier order
dated 12.03.2019 passed in I.T.A.No.537/Coch/2018 and a fresh order was passed on
C.A.@S.L.P.(C)No.12859 of 2020 etc. 11.10.2019, finding the issue against the appellant and
dismissing the appeal. Aggrieved by the aforesaid three orders, the appellant herein has filed
Income Tax Appeals before the High Court in ITA Nos.135; 146 and 313 of 2019 which are disposed,
by the common impugned order. In the common impugned order passed by the High Court, the
question of law raised, was answered partly in favour of the assessee/appellant and partly in favour
of the revenue. Para 23 and 24 of the judgment read as under :

“23. While summing up the conclusions, we are persuaded to answer the question of
law raised, partly in favour of the revenue and partly in favour of the assessee. We
hold that the levy of Gallonage Fee, Licence Fee and Shop Rental (kist) with respect

2

Kerala State Beverages Manufacturing ... vs The Assistant Commissioner Of Income ... on 3 January, 2022

to the FL−9 licences granted to the appellant will clearly fall within the purview of
Section 40 (a) (iib) and the amount paid in this regard is liable to be disallowed. The
amount of Gallonage Fee, Licence Fee, or Shop Rental (kist) paid with respect to FL−
1 licences granted in favour of the appellant, with respect to the retail business in
foreign liquor, is not an exclusive levy on the appellant, which is a state government
undertaking. Therefore the disallowance made with respect to those amounts cannot
be sustained. The surcharge on sales tax and turnover tax is not a 'fee or charge'
coming within the scope of Section 40 (a) (iib) and is not an amount which can be
disallowed under the said provision. Therefore the disallowance made in this regard
is liable to be set aside.

24. In the result the assessment completed against the appellants with respect to the
assessment years 2014− 2015, 2015−2016 are hereby set aside. The matter is remitted
to the Assessing Officer to pass revised orders, after computing the I.T. Appeal Nos.
135, 146 & C.A.@S.L.P.(C)No.12859 of 2020 etc. 313/2019 −32− liability in
accordance with the position settled hereinabove, on affording an opportunity of
hearing to the appellant. The needful steps in this regard shall be completed at the
earliest, at any rate, within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this
judgment.”

5. For the purpose of disposal, we refer to the parties, as arrayed in the appeal filed by
Kerala State Beverages Manufacturing & Marketing Corporation Ltd. (KSBC).

6. We have heard Sri S. Ganesh, learned senior advocate for the appellant and Sri N.
Venkataraman, learned Additional Solicitor General appearing for the respondent.

7. Section 40 of the Income−tax Act, 1961 is the provision dealing with ‘amounts not
deductible’. The amounts as detailed in the Section are not deductible, in computing
the income chargeable under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”.
By the Finance Act, 2013 (Act 17 of 2013), Section 40 of the Act is amended by
inserting Section 40(a)(iib), which has come into force from 01.04.2014. The said
provision under Section 40(a)(iib) reads as under :

“40. Amounts not deductible.− Notwithstanding any− thing contrary in sections 30 to
38, the following amounts shall not be deducted in computing the income chargeable
u n d e r   t h e   h e a d   “ P r o f i t s   a n d   g a i n s   o f   b u s i n e s s   o r   p r o f e s s i o n ” , −
C.A.@S.L.P.(C)No.12859 of 2020 etc.

(a) in the case of any assessee−

(i) … … … … ………… (iib) any amount − (A) paid by way of royalty, licence fee, service
fee, privilege fee, service charge or any other fee or charge, by whatever name called,
which is levied exclusively on; or (B) which is appropriated, directly or indirectly,
from, a State Government undertaking by the State Gov− ernment.

3

Kerala State Beverages Manufacturing ... vs The Assistant Commissioner Of Income ... on 3 January, 2022

Explanation.−For the purposes of this sub−clause, a State Government undertaking includes−

(i) a corporation established by or under any Act of the State Government;

(ii) a company in which more than fifty per cent of the paid−up equity share capital is held by the
State Government;

(iii) a company in which more than fifty per cent of the paid−up equity share capital is held by the
en− tity referred to in clause (i) or clause (ii) (whether singly or taken together);

(iv) a company or corporation in which the State Gov− ernment has the right to appoint the majority
of the directors or to control the management or policy decisions, directly or indirectly, including by
virtue of its shareholding or management rights or shareholders agreements or voting agreements
or in any other manner;

C.A.@S.L.P.(C)No.12859 of 2020 etc.

(v) an authority, a board or an institution or a body established or constituted by or under any Act of
the State Government or owned or controlled by the State Government;".

8. While it is the case of the assessee/appellant that the gallonage fees, licence fee and shop rental
(kist) for FL−9 licence and FL− 1 licence, the surcharge on sales tax and turnover tax do not fall
within the purview of the abovesaid amended Section, the case of the revenue is that all the
aforesaid amounts are covered under Section 40(a)(iib) as such, such amounts are not deductible
for the purpose of computation of income, for the assessment years 2014−2015 and 2015−2016.

9. During the assessment years 2014−2015 and 2015−2016 the appellant was holding FL−9 and FL−
1 licences to deal in wholesale and retail of, Indian Made Foreign Liquor (IMFL) and Foreign Made
Foreign Liquor (FMFL) granted by the Excise Department. FL−9 licence was issued to deal in
wholesale liquor, which they were selling to FL−1, FL− 3, FL−4, 4A, FL−11, FL−12 licence holders.
The FL−1 licence was for sale of foreign liquor in sealed bottles, without privilege of consumption
within the premises. The gallonage fee is payable as per Section 18A of the Kerala Abkari Act and
Rule 15A of the Foreign Liquor Rules. The appellant was the only licence holder for the relevant
years so far as FL− C.A.@S.L.P.(C)No.12859 of 2020 etc. 9 licence to deal in wholesale, and so far as
FL−1 licences are concerned, it was also granted to one other State owned Undertaking, i.e., Kerala
State Co−operatives Consumers’ Federation Ltd.. By interpreting the word ‘exclusively’ as worded in
Section 40(a)(iib)(A) of the Act, High Court in the impugned order has held that the levy of
gallonage fee, licence fee and shop rental (kist) with respect to FL−9 licences granted to the
appellant will clearly fall within the purview of Section 40(a)(iib) of the Act and the amounts paid in
this regard is liable to be disallowed. At the same time the amount of gallonage fee, licence fee and
shop rental (kist) paid with respect to FL−1 licences granted in favour of the appellant for retail
business, the High Court has held that it is not an exclusive levy, as such disallowance made with
respect to the same cannot be sustained. With regard to surcharge on sales tax and turnover tax, it is
held that same is not a ‘fee’ or ‘charge’ within the meaning of Section 40(a)(iib) as such same is not

4

Kerala State Beverages Manufacturing ... vs The Assistant Commissioner Of Income ... on 3 January, 2022

an amount which can be disallowed under the said provision.

10. Sri Ganesh, learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant by referring to Explanatory Note
to the Finance Act, 2013, and Section 40(a)(iib) of the Act, has submitted that the levy of gallonage
fees, licence fee and shop rental (kist) on FL−9 licence is not on any State Government Undertaking
but same is a levy on the licensee. It is C.A.@S.L.P.(C)No.12859 of 2020 etc. submitted that the levy
was on the licence holder whoever he or it might be and only in view of the Abkari Policy of the
relevant years licences were granted to the appellant as such it cannot be said that same was
exclusive levy on the appellant attracting Section 40(a)(iib) of the Act so as to disallow the same. It
is submitted that the mere fact that in a particular year, the licence holder happens to be State
Government Undertaking does not make the levy, one, which is imposed directly and exclusively on
the State Government Undertaking. It is submitted that High Court has failed to appreciate that the
decision as to whom FL−9 licences are to be granted, depends only on the State Government’s
Abkari Policy, which may vary from year to year. It is submitted that said submission also holds
good with regard to gallonage fee, licence fee and shop rental for FL−1 licence, which issue is already
decided in favour of appellant, by the High Court. With regard to surcharge on sales tax and
turnover tax, it is submitted that taxes levied, are completely outside the ambit of Section 40(a)(iib)
of the Act. It is submitted that the Kerala Surcharge on Taxes Act, 1957 (for short, ‘KST Act’) is
enacted only to increase the taxes, inter alia, on the sale or purchase of goods, as such it is nothing
but an increment to the basic sales tax levied under Section 5(1) of Kerala General Sales Tax Act,
1963 (for short, ‘KGST Act’). It is submitted that surcharge on C.A.@S.L.P.(C)No.12859 of 2020 etc.
sales tax is nothing but an enhancement of tax itself. In support of the said submission, the learned
counsel has placed reliance on the judgments of this Court in the case of C.I.T. v. K. Srinivasan1 and
in the case of Sarojini Tea Co. Ltd. v. Collector, Dibrugarh2. Reference is also made on the CBDT
Circular No.3/2018 dated 11.07.2018, to buttress the said submission. Learned counsel, by drawing
our attention to the distinction between ‘fee’ and ‘taxes’ which is maintained throughout the scheme
under Section 40(a) has submitted that, the sales tax and turnover tax is outside the scope of Section
40(a) (iib) of the Act. Lastly it is submitted that for the assessment year 2014−2015, the assessing
officer has allowed deductions in respect of surcharge on sales tax and turnover tax, the
Commissioner interfered, in exercise of power of revision under Section 263 of the Act. It is
submitted that the view taken by the assessing officer was a possible view, as such the very
invocation of revisional power was not permissible, to interfere with the order of the assessing
officer. With the aforesaid submissions, learned counsel has submitted to allow the appeal filed by
the assessee and dismiss the appeals filed by the revenue.

(1972(4) SCC 526 (1992) 2 SCC 156 C.A.@S.L.P.(C)No.12859 of 2020 etc.

11. Sri Venkataraman, learned ASG appearing for the revenue, by drawing our attention to the
provisions under Articles 285 and 289 of the Constitution of India, has explained the intent behind
the amendment to Section 40 of the Income−tax Act, 1961, by Act 17 of 2013. It is submitted that in
terms of Article 289 of the Constitution, the property and income of a State is exempted from Union
taxation. The constitutional protection under Article 289 had led the States in shifting
income/profits from the State Government Undertakings into Consolidated Fund of the States. It is
submitted that State Government Undertaking – KSBC, which in this case is a company like any

5

Kerala State Beverages Manufacturing ... vs The Assistant Commissioner Of Income ... on 3 January, 2022

other commercial concern, is engaged in trade and business and commercial activity, therefore, is to
be treated like any other business entity. However, when it came to filing of Return of Income, the
State as the only shareholder or major shareholder in this type of undertakings, exercise control
over it and shift profits by appropriating the whole of the surplus or a part of it by way of taxes, fee
or similar such appropriations. It is submitted that this resulted in erosion of profits in the hands of
State Government Undertakings leading to lesser payment of taxes, since these appropriations by
the respective States from their State Government Undertakings were accounted for as allowable
expenditure under Section 40(a) and these undertakings C.A.@S.L.P.(C)No.12859 of 2020 etc.
claimed deduction of the same from the income earned, therefore could not be taxed in the hands of
the State Government Undertakings. It is further submitted that the shifted profit, upon its transfer,
went into the Consolidated Fund of the States and on this basis constitutional protection under
Article 289 were claimed as a result of which, these amounts could neither be taxed in the hands of
the State Government Undertakings nor in the hands of the respective States. Precisely the
underlined spirit in bringing out the said amendment by inserting Section 40(a)(iib), is to plug the
possible diversion or shifting of profits from these undertakings into State’s treasury. Learned
counsel also referred to the Memorandum attached to the Finance Bill of 2013 which explains the
provisions relating to direct taxes. The relevant portion of the Memorandum reads as under :

“Disallowance of certain fee, charge, etc. in the case of State Government
Undertakings The existing provisions of section 40 specifies the amounts which shall
not be deducted in computing the income chargeable under the head “Profits and
gains of business or profession”. The non−deductible expense under the said section
also includes statutory dues like fringe benefit tax, income−tax, wealth−tax, etc.
Disputes have arisen in respect of income−tax assessment of some State Government
undertakings as to whether any sum paid by way of privilege fee, license fee, royalty,
etc. levied or charged by the State Government exclusively C.A.@S.L.P.(C)No.12859
of 2020 etc. on its undertakings are deductible or not for the purposes of
computation of income of such undertakings. In some cases, orders have been issued
to the effect that surplus arising to such undertakings shall vest with the State
Government. As a result it has been claimed that such income by way of surplus is
not subject to tax. It is a settled law that State Government undertakings are separate
legal entities than the State and are liable to income−tax.

In order to protect the tax base of State Government undertakings vis−à−vis exclusive
levy of fee, charge, etc. or appropriation of amount by the State Governments from its
undertakings, it is proposed to amend section 40 of the Income−tax Act to provide
that any amount paid by way of fee, charge, etc., which is levied exclusively on, or any
amount appropriated, directly or indirectly, from a State Government undertaking,
by the State Government, shall not be allowed as deduction for the purposes of
computation of income of such undertakings under the head “Profits and gains of
business or profession”. It is also proposed to define the expression “State
Government Undertaking” for this purpose.

6

Kerala State Beverages Manufacturing ... vs The Assistant Commissioner Of Income ... on 3 January, 2022

This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 2014 and will, accordingly, apply in
relation to the assessment year 2014−15 and subsequent assessment years.” 11.1.
With regard to gallonage fees, licence fee and the shop rental (kist), it is submitted
that High Court has upheld the disallowance in favour of the revenue with regard to
FL−9 licence on the ground that the appellant – KSBC is the exclusive licence holder,
so far as FL−9 licences are concerned. It is submitted that so far as FL−1 licences are
c o n c e r n e d   o n l y   o n   t h e   g r o u n d   t h a t   s i m i l a r   l i c e n c e s   a r e   a l s o   g i v e n   f o r
C.A.@S.L.P.(C)No.12859 of 2020 etc. another licence holder, viz., to Kerala State Co−
operatives Consumers’ Federation Ltd., the High Court has held that there is no
exclusivity so far as FL−1 licences are concerned. It is the contention of the learned
counsel that the disallowance under Section 40(a)(iib) is not contingent upon the
nature of licence. The test should be whether levy under the Abkari Act is exclusive or
not and in this case it is exclusive. It is submitted that the restricted interpretation
made by the High Court to the extent of FL−1 licences issued in favour of the
appellant runs contrary to object and intent of Section 40(a)(iib) of the Act and
makes the said provision redundant and otiose. It is the case of the revenue that the
aspect of exclusivity used under Section 40(a)(iib) of the Act, has to be viewed from
the nature of undertaking on which levy is imposed and not on the number of
undertakings on which levy is imposed. It is further submitted that the KSBC and the
Kerala State Co−operatives Consumers’ Federation Ltd. are undertakings of the State
of Kerala, therefore, the levy is an exclusive levy on such State Government
Undertakings which are licensees.

11.2. So far as surcharge on sales tax is concerned, again it is submitted that such a levy is an
exclusive levy on KSBC alone, therefore, attracts Section 40(a)(iib)(A) itself. Alternatively, it is
f u r t h e r   s u b m i t t e d   t h a t   e v e n   a s s u m i n g   t h a t   s u c h   t a x   i s   n o t   a t t r a c t e d   b y   S e c t i o n
C.A.@S.L.P.(C)No.12859 of 2020 etc. 40(a)(iib)(A), it would fall under Section 40(a)(iib)(B) for the
reason that surcharge on sales tax is a ‘tax’ and tax is a form of appropriation by the State from
KSBC. It is submitted that the surcharge levied under Section 3(1) of the KST Act is on the tax
payable by a dealer in foreign liquor under Section 5(1) of the KGST Act. It is the contention of the
learned counsel that, the cumulative reading of Section 3(1) of the KST Act and Section 5(1)(b) of the
KGST Act would reveal that surcharge is levied on the tax payable by a dealer in foreign liquor under
Section 5(1) of KGST Act. It is submitted that Section 3(1) does not deal with any other category and
specifically pertain only to a dealer in foreign liquor. It is submitted that as much as Section 5(1)(b)
of the KGST Act refers to trade in foreign liquor and it applies specifically and exclusively to KSBC
and further surcharge levied under Section 3(1) of KST Act is on the sales tax, exclusively payable by
KSBC under Section 5(1)(b) of KGST Act. As such, the inevitable conclusion, therefore is that it
qualifies as an exclusive levy attracting Section 40(a)(iib) of the Act. To show that the distinction
between a ‘tax’ and a ‘fee’ has substantially been effaced in the development of constitutional
jurisprudence, learned counsel, has placed reliance on a recent judgment of this Court
C.A.@S.L.P.(C)No.12859 of 2020 etc. in the case of Jalkal Vibhag Nagar Nigam & Ors. v Pradeshiya
Industrial and Investment Corporation and Another3. 11.3. With regard to turnover tax, it is
submitted that unlike surcharge which is an exclusive levy on KSBC, it is fairly submitted that such
tax was imposed not only on KSBC under Section 5(1)(b) of the KGST Act, but also was being

7

Kerala State Beverages Manufacturing ... vs The Assistant Commissioner Of Income ... on 3 January, 2022

imposed on various other retail dealers specified under Section 5(2) of KGST Act. It is submitted
that as the issue has not been dealt and examined in detail by the High Court, made a request to
leave it open for fresh adjudication since facts and figures need to be verified.

With the above submissions, learned ASG has pleaded to allow the appeals filed by the revenue and
dismiss the appeal filed by the KSBC.

12. Having heard the learned counsels on both sides we have perused the impugned order and other
material placed on record.

13. Section 40 of the Income−tax Act, 1961 is a provision which deals with the amounts which are
not deductible while computing the income chargeable under the head ‘Profits and gains of business
or profession’. Section 40 of the Act is amended in the year 2013, and 40(a)(iib) is inserted by
Amending Act 17 of 2013, which has come into force from 01.04.2014. In terms of Article 289 of the
Constitution of 2021 SCC OnLine SC 960 C.A.@S.L.P.(C)No.12859 of 2020 etc. India, the property
and income of a State shall be exempt from Union taxation. Therefore, in terms of Article 289, the
Union is prevented from taxing the States on its income and property. It is the constitutional
protection granted to the States in terms of the abovesaid Article. This protection has led the States
in shifting income/ profits from the State Government Undertakings into Consolidated Fund of the
respective States to have a protection under Article 289. In the instant case the KSBC, a State
Government Undertaking, is a company like any other commercial entity, which is engaged in the
business and trade like any other business entity for the purpose of wholesale and retail business in
liquor. As much as these kind of undertakings are under the control of the States as the total
shareholding or in some cases majority of shareholding, is held by States. As such they exercise
control over it and shift the profits by appropriating whole of the surplus or a part of it to the
Government by way of fees, taxes or similar such appropriations. From the relevant Memorandum
to the Finance Act, 2013 and underlying object for amendment of Income−tax Act by Act 17 of 2013,
by which Section 40(a)(iib)(A)(B) is inserted, it is clear that the said amendment is made to plug the
possible diversion or shifting of profits from these undertakings into State’s treasury. In view of
Section 40(a)(iib) of the Act any amount, as indicated, which is C.A.@S.L.P.(C)No.12859 of 2020
etc. levied exclusively on the State owned undertaking (KSBC in the instant case), cannot be claimed
as a deduction in the books of State owned undertaking, thus same is liable to income tax.

14. In the instant case the gallonage fee, licence fee, shop rental (kist), surcharge and turnover tax
are the amounts of which assessee claims that they are not attracted by Section 40(a)(iib) of the Act.
On the other hand it is the case of the respondent/revenue that all the said components attract the
ingredients of Section 40(a)(iib)(A) or Section 40(a)(iib)(B), as such they are not deductible.
Broadly these levies can be divided into three categories. Gallonage fee, licence fee and shop rental
(kist) are in the nature of fee imposed under the Abkari Act of 1902. These are the fees payable for
the licences issued under FL−9 and FL−1. In the impugned order, the High Court has held that the
gallonage fee, licence fee and shop rental (kist) with respect to FL−9 licence are not deductible, as it
is an exclusive levy on the Corporation. Further a distinction is drawn from FL−1 licence from FL−9
licence, to apply Section 40(a)(iib), only on the ground that, FL−1 licences are issued not only to the
appellant/KSBC but also issued to one other Government Undertaking, i.e., Kerala State Co−

8

Kerala State Beverages Manufacturing ... vs The Assistant Commissioner Of Income ... on 3 January, 2022

operatives Consumers’ Federation Ltd. High Court has held that as there is no other player holding
licences under FL−9 like KSBC as such the word ‘exclusivity’ C.A.@S.L.P.(C)No.12859 of 2020 etc.
used in Section 40(a)(iib) attract such amounts. At the same time only on the ground that FL−1
licences are issued not only to the KSBC but also to Kerala State Co−operatives Consumers’
Federation Ltd., High Court has held that exclusivity is lost so as to apply the provision under
Section 40(a)(iib). If the amended provision under Section 40(a) (iib) is to be read in the manner, as
interpreted by the High Court, it will literally defeat the very purpose and intention behind the
amendment. The aspect of exclusivity under Section 40(a)(iib) is not to be considered with a narrow
interpretation, which will defeat the very intention of Legislature, only on the ground that there is
yet another player, viz., Kerala State Co−operatives Consumers’ Federation Ltd. which is also
granted licence under FL−1. The aspect of ‘exclusivity’ under Section 40(a)(iib) has to be viewed
from the nature of undertaking on which levy is imposed and not on the number of undertakings on
which the levy is imposed. If this aspect of exclusivity is viewed from the nature of undertaking, in
this particular case, both KSBC and Kerala State Co−operatives Consumers’ Federation Ltd. are
undertakings of the State of Kerala, therefore, levy is an exclusive levy on the State Government
Undertakings. Therefore, we are of the considered view that any other interpretation would defeat
the very object behind the amendment to Income−tax Act, 1961. C.A.@S.L.P.(C)No.12859 of 2020
etc. 14.1. It is fairly well settled that the interpretation is to be in the manner which will subserve and
promote the object and intention behind the legislation. If it is not interpreted in the manner as
aforesaid it would defeat the very intention of the legislation. To defeat the said provision, the State
Governments may issue licences to more than one State owned undertakings and may ultimately say
it is not an exclusive undertaking and therefore Section 40(a)(iib) is not attracted. The submission
of Sri Ganesh, learned senior counsel for the appellant is that the gallonage fee, licence fee and the
shop rental (kist) are the levies under the Abkari Act on all the licence holders, as such it cannot be
said that same is an exclusive levy on the appellant/KSBC. It is submitted that because of the Abkari
Policy in particular year, licences are issued in favour of the appellant – State owned Undertaking,
as such it cannot be said that the statutory levies under the Abkari Act are on the State Government
Undertaking and such levies are only on the licensees but not on the State−owned Undertakings like
KSBC. The said submission cannot be accepted for the reason that by virtue of licence which is
granted in favour of State−owned Undertaking, the statutory fees etc., viz., gallonage fees, licence fee
and shop rental (kist) are payable by the appellant−Undertaking, i.e., KSBC. Once the State
Government Undertaking takes licence, the statutory levies referred C.A.@S.L.P.(C)No.12859 of
2020 etc. above are on the Government Undertaking because it is granted licences. Therefore, we
are of the view that the finding of the High Court that gallonage fee, licence fee and shop rental (kist)
so far as FL−1 licences are concerned, is not attracted by Section 40(a)(iib), cannot be accepted and
such finding of the High Court runs contrary to object and intention behind the legislation.

14.2. Further, because another State Government Undertaking, i.e., Kerala State Co−operatives
Consumers’ Federation Ltd. was also granted licences during the relevant years, as such exclusivity
mentioned in Section 40(a)(iib) is lost, also cannot be accepted, for the reason that exclusivity is to
be considered with reference to nature of licence and not on number of State owned Undertakings.
If the interpretation, as held by the High Court, is accepted, the legislative intent can be defeated by
issuing licences in FL−1 to several State Government Undertakings and then make a contention that
exclusivity is lost. Said interpretation runs contrary to the intent of the amendment.

9

Kerala State Beverages Manufacturing ... vs The Assistant Commissioner Of Income ... on 3 January, 2022

14.3. So far as surcharge on sales tax is concerned, the High Court has held in favour of KSBC and
against the revenue. The reasoning of the High Court is that surcharge on sales tax is a tax and
Section 40(a) (iib) does not contemplate ‘tax’ and surcharge on sales tax is not a ‘fee’
C.A.@S.L.P.(C)No.12859 of 2020 etc. or a ‘charge’. Therefore, High Court was of the view that
surcharge levied on KSBC does not attract Section 40(a)(iib) of the Act. The submission of Sri
Venkataraman, learned ASG with regard to surcharge on sales tax is two−fold. One is that the levy of
surcharge on sales tax is also an exclusive levy on KSBC, therefore, attracts Section 40(a)(iib) (A)
itself. Secondly, it is submitted, as an alternative submission that if the same is not covered by
Section 40(a)(iib)(A) it would fall under Section 40(a)(iib)(B) of the Act, for the reason that the
surcharge on sales tax is a tax and tax is a form of appropriation by the State from KSBC. The
learned counsel placed reliance on a recent judgment of this Court in the case of Jalkal Vibhag
Nagar Nigam and Others3. On the other hand it is the case of the appellant/assessee that the sales
tax is outside the scope of Section 40(a)(iib) and the surcharge is nothing but is an enhancement of
the tax. By referring to words used in Section 40(a)(iib), learned counsel Sri Ganesh has submitted
that the said provision is to be interpreted by applying the doctrine of ejusdem generis. It is
submitted that the words ‘any other fee or charge’ immediately following the words ‘royalty, licence
fee, service fee, privilege fee, service charge’ relate to such similar charges and none of the terms can
possibly cover a tax, like sales tax or surcharge on sales tax. With regard to surcharge on sales tax,
we are in agreement with C.A.@S.L.P.(C)No.12859 of 2020 etc. the submission of Sri Ganesh,
learned senior counsel appearing for appellant. The ‘fee’ or ‘charge’ as mentioned in Section
40(a)(iib) is clear in terms and that will take in only ‘fee’ or ‘charge’ as mentioned therein or any fee
or charge by whatever name called, but cannot cover tax or surcharge on tax and such taxes are
outside the scope and ambit of Section 40(a)(iib)(A) and Section 40(a)(iib)(B) of the Act. The
surcharge which is imposed on KSBC is under Section 3(1) of the KST Act which reads as under :

“3. Levy of surcharge on sales and purchase taxes. – (1) The tax payable under sub−
section (1) of section 5 of the Kerala General Sales Tax Act, 1963, by a dealer in
foreign liquor shall be increased by a surcharge at the rate of ten per cent, and the
provisions of the Kerala General Sales Tax Act 1963 shall apply in relation to the said
surcharge as they apply in relation to the tax payable under the said Act.

Provided that where in respect of declared goods as defined in clause (c) of section 2 of the Central
Sales Tax Act, 1956 the tax payable by such dealer under the Kerala General Sales Tax Act, 1963
together with the surcharge payable under this sub−section, exceeds four per centum of the sale or
purchase price, the rate of surcharge in respect of such goods shall be reduced to such an extent that
the tax and the surcharge together shall not exceed four per centum of the sale or purchase price.”
Section 5(1)(b) of the Kerala General Sales Tax Act, 1963 reads as under :

C.A.@S.L.P.(C)No.12859 of 2020 etc.

5. Levy of tax on sale or purchase of goods: − (1) Every dealer (other than a casual
trader or agent of a non− resident dealer or the Central Government, or Government
of Kerala or the Government of any other state or of any Union Territory, or any local
authority) whose total turnover for a year is not less than two lakhs rupees and every

10

Kerala State Beverages Manufacturing ... vs The Assistant Commissioner Of Income ... on 3 January, 2022

casual trader or agent of a non−resident dealer, the Central Government,
Government of Kerala, the Government of any other state or of any Union Territory,
or any local authority whatever be its total turnover for the year in respect of goods
included in the Schedule at the rate mentioned against such goods,−

(a) … … … …

(b) in respect of Foreign liquor, at the point of sale by the Kerala State Beverages
(Manufacturing and Marketing) Corporation Limited and at the point of first sale in
the State by a dealer liable to tax under this section except where the sale is to the
Kerala State Beverages (Manufacturing and Marketing) Corporation Limited.

(c) … … … …” 14.4. A reading of preamble and Section 3(1) of the KST Act, make it abundantly clear
that the surcharge on sales tax levied by the said Act is nothing but an increase of the basic sales tax
levied under Section 5(1) of the KGST Act, as such the surcharge is nothing but a sales tax. It is also
settled legal position that a surcharge on a tax is nothing but the enhancement of the tax. In this
regard, in support the said view, ready reference can be made to the judgments of this Court in the
case C.A.@S.L.P.(C)No.12859 of 2020 etc. of K. Srinivasan1 and Sarojini Tea Co. Ltd.2. Para 7 of the
judgment in the case of K. Srinivasan1 reads as under :

“7. The above legislative history of the Finance Acts, as also the practice, would
appear to indicate that the term “Income tax” as employed in Section 2 includes sur−
charge as also the special and the additional surcharge whenever provided which are
also surcharges within the meaning of Article 271 of the Constitution. The phraseol−
ogy employed in the Finance Acts of 1940 and 1941 showed that only the rates of
income tax and supertax were to be increased by a surcharge for the purpose of the
Central Government. In the Finance Act of 1958 the language used showed that
income tax which was to be charged was to be increased by a surcharge for the pur−
pose of the Union. The word “surcharge” has thus been used to either increase the
rates of income tax and super tax or to increase these taxes. The scheme of the
Finance Act of 1971 appears to leave no room for doubt that the term “Income tax” as
used in Section 2 includes sur− charge.” Para 20 of the judgment in the case of
Sarojini Tea Co. Ltd.2 reads as under :

“20. For the reasons aforesaid, we are unable to endorse the view of the High Court
that surcharge on land rev− enue payable under the Surcharge Act is not land rev−
enue but a levy which is distinct from land revenue. In consonance with the law laid
down by this Court in Vish− wesha Thirtha Swamiar case [(1972) 3 SCC 246 : (1972) 1
SCR 137 : AIR 1971 SC 2377] it must be held that the surcharge on land revenue
levied under the Surcharge Act, being an enhancement of the land revenue, is part of
the land revenue and has to be treated as such for the C.A.@S.L.P.(C)No.12859 of
2020 etc. purpose of assessing compensation under Section 12 of the Ceiling Act.”
14.5. Further, CBDT itself has issued circular in Circular No.3/2018 which is issued,
as a measure for reducing litigation, by revision of monetary limits for filing appeals

11

Kerala State Beverages Manufacturing ... vs The Assistant Commissioner Of Income ... on 3 January, 2022

by the Department before the Income− tax Appellate Tribunal, High Courts and
SLP/appeals before this Court.

In the said circular it is clearly mentioned that for considering tax effect it includes applicable
surcharge and cess. Same will also strengthen the stand of the assessee. Thus it is clear that the
surcharge which is sought to be levied is nothing but the enhancement of sales tax, which is levied
under Section 5(1) of the KGST Act. When the basic sales tax paid by KSBC under Section 5(1)(b) of
the KGST Act, deduction was allowed, there is no reason not to allow deduction of surcharge on
sales tax. If the revenue does not consider Section 40(a)(iib) is applicable to the basic sales tax paid
by KSBC under Section 5(1)(b) of the KGST Act, it is not known how the surcharge on sales tax,
which is nothing but the sales tax, can be brought in the net of Section 40(a)(iib)(A) or 40(a) (iib)(B)
of the Act. Further a clear distinction between ‘fee’ and ‘tax’ is carefully maintained throughout the
scheme under Section 40(a) of the Act itself. Wherever the Parliament intended to cover the tax it
specifically mentioned as a tax. Section 40(a)(i) and 40(a)(ia) specifically C.A.@S.L.P.(C)No.12859
of 2020 etc. relate to tax related items. Section 40(a)(ic) refers to a sum paid on account of fringe
benefit tax. At the same time, Section 40(a)(iib) refers to royalty, licence fee, service fee, privilege fee
or any other fee or charge. If these words are considered to include a tax or surcharge like sales tax,
the distinction so carefully spelt out in Section 40 between a tax and a fee will be obliterated and
rendered meaningless. It is settled principle of interpretation that where the same Statute, uses
different terms and expressions, then it is clear that Legislature is referring to distinct and different
things. To support the said view ready reference can be made to judgments of this Court in the case
of DLF Qutab Enclave Complex Educational Charitable Trust v. State of Haryana & Ors.4; Kailash
Nath Agarwal & Ors. v. Pradeshiya Industrial & Investment Corporation of U.P. Ltd. & Anr. 5; and
Shri Ishar Alloy Steels Ltd. v. Jayaswals Neco Ltd.6. The judgment relied on by the learned ASG in
the case of Jalkal Vibhag Nagar Nigam and Others3 would not render any assistance to support the
case of the revenue. The said judgment only considers whether the levy of water tax under Section
52A of the U.P. Water Supply and Sewerage Act is a fee or whether it is a tax covered by Entry 49 of
List II of the seventh schedule (2003) 5 SCC 622 (2003) 4 SCC 305 (2001) 3 SCC 609
C.A.@S.L.P.(C)No.12859 of 2020 etc. to the Constitution. The said judgment in fact maintains and
does not take away the basic constitutional distinction between ‘fee’ and ‘tax’. Having regard to
language used in Section 40(a)(iib), we are of the view that the aforesaid judgment does not support
the case of the revenue. Even the other alternative submission of the learned counsel that it may
attract Section 40(a)(iib)(B) also cannot be accepted for the reason that wherever the Parliament
intended to include tax, referred clearly to taxes clearly in the very Section 40. That itself indicates
that the surcharge or tax were never intended to be included in the net of amended Section
40(a)(iib)(A) or 40(a)(iib)(B) of the Income−tax Act, 1961.

15. So far as turnover tax is concerned it is submitted by the learned ASG appearing for the revenue
that such tax was imposed not only on KSBC in terms of Section 5(1)(b) of KGST Act, but it is
imposed on various other retail dealers specified under Section 5(2) of the said Act. Further
turnover tax is also a tax. The very same reason which we have assigned above for surcharge, equally
apply to the turnover tax also. As such turnover tax is also outside the purview of Section 40(a)
(iib)(A) and 40(a)(iib)(B).

12

Kerala State Beverages Manufacturing ... vs The Assistant Commissioner Of Income ... on 3 January, 2022

16. For the aforesaid reasons, we hold that the gallonage fee, licence fee and shop rental (kist) with
respect to FL−9 and FL−1 licences C.A.@S.L.P.(C)No.12859 of 2020 etc. granted to the appellant
will, squarely fall within the purview of Section 40(a)(iib) of the Income−tax Act, 1961. The
surcharge on sales tax and turnover tax, is not a fee or charge coming within the scope of Section
40(a)(iib)(A) or 40(a)(iib)(B), as such same is not an amount which can be disallowed under the
said provision and disallowance made in this regard is rightly set aside by the High Court.

17. Accordingly, the civil appeal filed by the assessee is dismissed and the civil appeals filed by the
revenue are partly allowed to the extent indicated above. In result, the assessments completed
against the assessee with respect to assessment years 2014−2015 and 2015− 2016 stand set aside.
The assessing officer to pass revised orders after computing the liability in accordance with the
directions as indicated above. As the dispute relates to assessment years 2014−2015 and 2015−2016,
the assessing officer shall pass appropriate orders, within a period of two months from the date of
receipt of this judgment.

………………………………J. [R. Subhash Reddy] ………………………………J. [Hrishikesh Roy] New Delhi.

January 03, 2022.

13