Krishna Murthy @ Gunodu vs The State Of Karnataka on 16 February, 2022

Krishna Murthy @ Gunodu vs The State Of Karnataka on 16
February, 2022

Author: Sanjiv Khanna

Bench: Bela M. Trivedi, Sanjiv Khanna

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.        288 OF 2022
(ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRL.) NO. 6893 OF 2021)

KRISHNAMURTHY @ GUNODU AND OTHERS                   ...     APPELLANTS

VERSUS

STATE OF KARNATAKA                                  ...    RESPONDENT

JUDGMENT

SANJIV KHANNA, J.

Leave granted.

2. This appeal by Krishnamurthy (also described as Krishna Murthy), Gopala and Thimmappa takes
exception to the judgment dated 20th February 2021 passed in Criminal Appeal No. 200147 of 2017,
whereby the Division Bench of the High Court of Karnataka, Kalaburagi Bench, has affirmed their
conviction under Section 302 read with Section 34 and individually for the offences under Sections
447, 504, 506 and 341 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short, ‘IPC’).

3. Having examined the evidence in detail, we agree that Krishnamurthy has been rightly convicted
under the aforesaid Sections, including Section 302 of the IPC. Testimonies of Channamma (PW-1),
Ramanjaneya (PW-4), Dullaiah (PW-6) and Dodda Narasimha (PW-7), all eyewitnesses, implicate
Krishnamurthy as the perpetrator who had assaulted the deceased-Venkatarama after he had fallen
down. In view of our analysis of the testimonies in the ensuing paragraphs, we have reservations in
entirely relying upon the depositions of Dullaiah (PW-6) and Dodda Narasimha (PW-7). But we
have no reservation in accepting the depositions of Channamma (PW-1) and Ramanjaneya (PW-4)
implicating Krishnamurthy. We have subsequently reproduced the relevant portions of their
depositions. Suffice at this stage is to aver that the specific acts attributed to Krishnamurthy are that
after Venkatarama had fallen- down, he had kicked and assaulted him on the neck with his legs and

1

Krishna Murthy @ Gunodu vs The State Of Karnataka on 16 February, 2022

hands. The version on the role of Krishnamurthy deposed by Channamma (PW-1) and Ramanjaneya
(PW-4) gets corroboration from the Post-Mortem Report (Exhibit P-6) and the deposition of Dr.
Sharanabasava (PW-9) who had conducted the post-mortem. Venkatarama had suffered abraded
contusion of reddish blue colour on the neck area and abraded contusion reddish in colour on the
left side of the chest. Internal dissection had revealed profuse bleeding over the muscles of the neck
surrounding the arteries that were ruptured. The left side ribs 4, 5, 6 and 7 were fractured. The utral
part of the stemum was broken into two pieces. The spinal cord at the level of C-5, C-6 and C-7 was
contused, edematous and elongated. The cause of death was opined as haemorrhagic shock as a
result of multiple injuries.

4. The assault by Krishnamurthy, who though not armed with any weapon, was fearsome, brutal and
cruel. He had pinned down and tromped Venkatarama using his legs and hands fracturing four ribs,
contusing, and injuring the spinal cord, the chest, and the neck of the deceased. Given that the
injuries caused were intended, third limb of Section 300 IPC would get attracted. The post mortem
report and deposition of Dr. Sharanabasava (PW-9) prove the cause of death on account of injuries
caused in the chest region, asphyxia, and facture of bones. The death was instantaneous, as has been
deposed by Channamma (PW-1) and Ramanjaneya (PW-4). The injuries were sufficient in ordinary
course of nature to have caused death. The death of Venkatarama is homicidal as a result and direct
consequence of the injuries inflicted by Krishnamurthy.

5. This brings us to the role and acts of Gopala and Thimmappa and whether they can be
individually convicted for murder of Venkatarama. We begin by referring to the depositions of
Dullaiah (PW-6) and Dodda Narasimha (PW-7), which are verbatim identical, and, therefore, the
suspicion that the said witnesses were prompted. However, we would not doubt their presence at
the place of occurrence as their presence was natural, they being farmers who were undertaking
cultivation in the adjacent fields. On the actual occurrence they both have deposed:

“While on my way, Venkatarama, his wife, and their son Ramanjineya (sic) were in
the land on Gangawara road. Then, accused Thimmappa, ‘A’ (identity suppressed
being a juvenile) were holding Venkataramana’s (sic) hands. Accused Gopala was
pulling down Venkataramana’s (sic) legs and as such he fell down on his back. Then,
Gopala, Krishnamurthy assaulted with hands, kicked with legs and attacked with
their hands when Venkataramana (sic) had fallen down. At that time, I along with
Ramanjineya (sic), Dodda Narasimhalu were present. We did not try to save hence
since accused had threatened us not to go near them.” Dullaiah (PW-6) and Dodda
Narasimha (PW-7) in their cross-examination had vacillated and hesitantly accepted
that they did not know as to who amongst the accused ‘A’ and Thimmappa had held
the hands of the deceased and which one had pulled the legs of the deceased making
him fall down. They testified that the accused ‘Venkatarama’ kicked with both legs
and assaulted with hands. This statement is erroneous and could well be a
typographical error as Venkatarama was the deceased and not an accused. However,
it appears from the depositions that one of the accused had kicked with both legs and
assaulted the deceased with his hands, a fact affirmatively deposed to by Channamma
(PW-1) and Ramanjaneya (PW-4).

2

Krishna Murthy @ Gunodu vs The State Of Karnataka on 16 February, 2022

6. Channamma (PW-1), in her examination in chief on the occurrence and the acts and role of the
accused, has deposed:

“Accused No.3 Thimmappa and accused No.4 ‘A’ twisted back my husband’s both
hands and held them. Accused No.2 Gopala pulled my husband down through his leg.
Accused No.1 Krishnamurthy stamped my husband’s neck with his left leg and
jumped upon it.” In her cross-examination she denied the suggestion that
Thimmappa and ‘A’, had neither twisted nor held the hands of her husband and
Gopala had not pulled him down with his legs. She has also denied that
Krishnamurthy had not jumped on her husband’s legs and stomped with his legs.

Ramanjaneya (PW-4), about twelve years old when his evidence was recorded, avers
that he along with his mother and father were at their farm land harvesting and piling
up Sajje crop.

At about noon, the four accused came to the spot and had threatened their father who
had tried to run away. Thereupon:

“All the four of them chased him and accused Thimmappa and ‘A’ held both hands of
my father. Accused Gopala held both legs of my father and pulled him. Then, my
father pleaded and fell down with his head down. Accused Krishnamurthy kicked
with his hands and legs and assaulted heavily on the neck. At that time, when my
mother went ahead to save him, all the accused persons threatened to do away with
our lives. Then, afraid by the same, we did not go ahead. Accused Thimmappa told
that, my father is dead and left and went away.”

7. We would accept the versions given by Channamma (PW-1) and Ramanjaneya (PW-4), albeit
record that there could be some minor exaggerations. However, what is clearly discernible, and
which all eyewitnesses including Dullaiah (PW-6) and Dodda Narasimha (PW-7) accept, is that the
accused were unarmed and they did not even have a stick with them. This indicates absence of a
premediated attack to murder Venkatarama. Further, the roles attributed to Thimmappa and
Gopala are different from the brutal assault leashed by Krishnamurthy after Venkatarama had fallen
down. Roles of Thimmappa and ‘A’, as per the versions given by Channamma (PW-1) and
Ramanjaneya (PW-4), were limited to holding and twisting the hands of Venkatarama. Gopala had
pulled down the deceased by holding his legs. As per Dullaiah (PW-6) and Dodda Narasimha
(PW-7), Gopala and Krishnamurthy had then assaulted Venkatarama, but as per the versions of
Channamma (PW-1) and Ramanjaneya (PW-4), only Krishnamurthy had assaulted and not Gopala.
All of them in unison state that Thimmappa had not participated in the assault after Venkatarama
had fallen down. Given the above discrepancy and for reasons recorded above casting doubt on the
versions given by Dullaiah (PW-6) and Dodda Narasimha (PW-7), we accept that it was
Krishnamurthy alone who had swung into action, kicked and assaulted the deceased with his hands
and legs and stomped with his left leg on his neck. He had also jumped on his chest. The post
mortem report and the deposition of Dr. Sharanabasava (PW-9) have attributed the death of the
deceased on account of injuries caused by Krishnamurthy. The deceased had not suffered any

3

Krishna Murthy @ Gunodu vs The State Of Karnataka on 16 February, 2022

fracture on his hands, arms or legs. Thus, we accept that Thimmappa and Gopala had not assaulted
Venkatarama after he had fallen down and were not responsible for the injuries suffered by
Venkatarama resulting in his death.

8. The underlying basic assumption or foundation in criminal law is the principle of personal
culpability. A person is criminally responsible for act or transactions in which he is personally
engaged or in some other way had participated. However, there are various modes and capacities in
which a person can participate in a crime. He can instigate, be a facilitator or otherwise aid
execution of a crime. Section 34 IPC incorporates the principle of shared intent, that is, common
design between the two perpetrators, which makes the second or other participants also an equal or
joint perpetrator as the main or principal perpetrator1. The question which arises is whether
Thimmappa 1 We have used the said terms for want of a better phrase. Section 34 IPC does not
postulate such distinction and Gopala can be attributed common intention under Section 34 IPC to
commit murder under Section 300 or even offence under Section 304 IPC.

9. In Suresh and Another v. State of Uttar Pradesh,2 R.P. Sethi, J.

in his concurring judgment (for himself and B.N. Agarwal, J.) on the question of common intention
has observed:

“38. Section 34 of the Penal Code, 1860 recognises the principle of vicarious liability
in criminal jurisprudence. It makes a person liable for action of an offence not
committed by him but by another person with whom he shared the common
intention. It is a rule of evidence and does not create a substantive offence. The
section gives statutory recognition to the commonsense principle that if more than
two persons intentionally do a thing jointly, it is just the same as if each of them had
done it individually. There is no gainsaying that a common intention presupposes
prior concert, which requires a prearranged plan of the accused participating in an
offence. Such preconcert or preplanning may develop on the spot or during the
course of commission of the offence but the crucial test is that such plan must
precede the act constituting an offence. Common intention can be formed previously
or in the course of occurrence and on the spur of the moment. The existence of a
common intention is a question of fact in each case to be proved mainly as a matter of
inference from the circumstances of the case.

39. The dominant feature for attracting Section 34 of the Penal Code, 1860
(hereinafter referred to as “the Code”) is the element of participation in absence
resulting in the ultimate “criminal act”. The “act” referred to in the later part of
Section 34 means the ultimate criminal act with which the accused is charged of
sharing the common intention. The accused is, therefore, made responsible for the 2
(2001) 3 SCC 673 ultimate criminal act done by several persons in furtherance of the
common intention of all. The section does not envisage the separate act by all the
accused persons for becoming responsible for the ultimate criminal act. If such an
interpretation is accepted, the purpose of Section 34 shall be rendered infructuous.

4

Krishna Murthy @ Gunodu vs The State Of Karnataka on 16 February, 2022

40. Participation in the crime in furtherance of the common intention cannot
conceive of some independent criminal act by all accused persons, besides the
ultimate criminal act because for that individual act law takes care of making such
accused responsible under the other provisions of the Code.

The word “act” used in Section 34 denotes a series of acts as a single act. What is required under law
is that the accused persons sharing the common intention must be physically present at the scene of
occurrence and be shown not to have dissuaded themselves from the intended criminal act for which
they shared the common intention. Culpability under Section 34 cannot be excluded by mere
distance from the scene of occurrence. The presumption of constructive intention, however, has to
be arrived at only when the court can, with judicial servitude, hold that the accused must have
preconceived the result that ensued in furtherance of the common intention. A Division Bench of the
Patna High Court in SatrughanPatar v. Emperor held that it is only when a court with some
certainty holds that a particular accused must have preconceived or premeditated the result which
ensued or acted in concert with others in order to bring about that result, that Section 34 may be
applied.”

10. Appropriate at this stage would be reference to an earlier decision of this Court in Afrahim
Sheikh and Others v. State of West Bengal3, which referred to with approval the following quote on
the expression “act” explained by Judicial Commissioner in Barendra Kumar Ghosh v. The
King-Emperor4:

3 AIR 1964 SC 1263 4 ILR (1925) 52 Cal. 197 “criminal act means that unity of
criminal behaviour, which results in something, for which an individual would be
punishable, if it were all done by himself alone i.e. a criminal offence”.

This “criminal act” under Section 34 IPC, it was held, applies where a criminal act is done by several
persons in furtherance of common intention of all. The criminal offence is the final result or
outcome but it may be through achievement of individual or several criminal acts. Each individual
act may not constitute or result in the final offence. When a person is assaulted by a number of
accused, the “ultimate criminal act” normally will constitute the offence which finally results or
which may result in death, simple hurt, grievous hurt, etc. This is the final result, outcome or
consequence of the criminal act, that is, action or act of several persons. Each person will be
responsible for his own act as stipulated in Section 38 IPC. However, Sections 34 and 35 expand the
scope and stipulate that if the criminal act is a result of common intention, every person, who has
committed a part of the criminal act with the common intention, will be responsible for the offence.
It was accordingly held in Afrahim Sheikh and Ors. (supra) as under:

“8. …Provided there is common intention, the whole of the result perpetrated by
several offenders, is attributable to each offender, notwithstanding that individually
they may have done separate acts, diverse or similar. Applying this test to the present
case, if all the appellants shared the common intention of severely beating Abdul
Sheikh and some held him down and others beat him with their weapons, provided
the common intention is accepted, they would all of them be responsible for the

5

Krishna Murthy @ Gunodu vs The State Of Karnataka on 16 February, 2022

whole of the criminal act, that is to say, the criminal offence of culpable homicide not
amounting to murder which was committed, irrespective of the part played by them.
The common intention which is required by the section is not the intention which s.
299 mentions in its first part. That intention is individual to the offender unless it is
shared with others by a prior concert in which case Sections 34 or 35 again come into
play. Here, the common intention was to beat Abdul Sheikh, and that common
intention was, as we have held above, shared by all of them. That they did diverse acts
would ordinarily make their responsibility individual for their own acts, but because
of the common intention, they would be responsible for the total effect that they
produced if any of the three conditions in s. 299, I.P.C. applied to their case. If it were
a case of the first two conditions, the matter is simple. They speak of intention and s.
34 also speaks of intention.

9. The question is whether the second part of s. 304 can be made applicable. The
second part no doubt speaks of knowledge and does not refer to intention which has
been segregated in the first part. But knowledge is the knowledge of the likelihood of
death.

Can it be said that when three or four persons start beating a man with heavy lathis, each hitting his
blow with the common intention of severely beating him and each possessing the knowledge that
death was the likely result of the beating, the requirements of s. 304, Part II are not satisfied in the
case of each of them? If it could be said that knowledge of this type was possible in the case of each
one of the appellants, there is no reason why s. 304, Part II cannot be read with s. 34. The common
intention is with regard to the criminal act, i.e., the act of beating. If the result of the beating is the
death of the victim, and if each of the assailants possesses the knowledge that death is the likely
consequence of the criminal act, i.e., beating, there is no reason why s. 34 or s. 35 should not be read
with the second part of s. 304 to make each liable individually.”

11. Accordingly, to attract applicability of Section 34 IPC, the prosecution is under an obligation to
establish that there existed a common intention before a person can be vicariously convicted for the
criminal act of another. The ultimate act should be done in furtherance of common intention.
Common intention requires a pre-arranged plan, which can be even formed at the spur of the
moment or simultaneously just before or even during the attack. For proving common intention, the
prosecution can rely upon direct proof of prior concert or circumstances which necessarily lead to
that inference. However, incriminating facts must be incompatible with the innocence of the
accused and incapable of explanation by any other reasonable hypothesis. By Section 33 of IPC, a
criminal act in Section 34 IPC includes omission to act. Thus, a co-perpetrator who has done
nothing but has stood outside the door, while the offence was committed, may be liable for the
offence since in crimes as in other things “they also serve who only stand and wait”. Thus, common
intention or crime sharing may be by an overt or covert act, by active presence or at distant location
but there should be a measure of jointness in the commission of the act. Even a person not doing a
particular act but only standing as a guard to prevent any prospective aid to the victim may be guilty
of common intention. 5 Normally, however, in a 5 See Tukaram Ganpat Pandare v. State of
Maharashtra, (1974) 4 SCC 544 case of offence involving physical violence, physical presence at the

6

Krishna Murthy @ Gunodu vs The State Of Karnataka on 16 February, 2022

place of actual commission is considered to be safe for conviction but it may not be mandatory when
pre-arranged plan is proved and established beyond doubt. Facilitation in execution of the common
design may be possible from a distance and can tantamount to actual participation in the criminal
act. The essence and proof that there was simultaneous consensus of mind of co- participants in the
criminal action is however, mandatory and essential.6 In Krishnan and Another v. State of Kerala,7
it has been observed that an overt act is not a requirement of law for Section 34 IPC to operate but
prosecution must establish that the persons concerned shared the common intention, which can be
also gathered from the proved facts.

12. In Suresh’s case (supra), this Court also examined whether a passive co-perpetrator can be liable
under Section 34 IPC. This case quotes with approval the following passage from the judgment of
Richardson, J. in King Emperor v. Barendra Kumar Ghose8:

“It appears to me that Section 34 regards the act done as the united act of the
immediate perpetrator and his confederates present at the time and that the language
used is susceptible of that meaning. The language follows a common mode of speech.
In R. v.

6 See Ramaswami Ayyangar v. State of Tamil Nadu, (1976) 3 SCC 779 7 (1996) 10
SCC 508 8 AIR 1924 Calcutta 257 Salmon three men had been negligently firing at a
mark. One of them — it was not known which — had unfortunately killed a boy in the
rear of the mark. They were all held guilty of manslaughter. Lord Coleridge, C.J.,
said: ‘The death resulted from the action of the three and they are all liable.’ Stephen,
J., said: ‘Firing a rifle’ under such circumstances ‘is a highly dangerous act, and all
are responsible; for they unite to fire at the spot in question and they all omit to take
any precautions whatever to prevent danger’.

Moreover, Sections 34, 35 and 37 must be read together, and the use in Section 35 of the phrase
‘each of such persons who joins in the act’ and in Section 37 of the phrase, ‘doing any one of those
acts, either singly or jointly with any other person’ indicates the true meaning of Section 34. So
Section 38 speaks of ‘several persons engaged or concerned in a criminal act’. The different modes of
expression may be puzzling but the sections must, I think, be construed as enunciating a consistent
principle of liability. Otherwise the result would be chaotic.

To put it differently, an act is done by several persons when all are principals in the doing of it, and
it is immaterial whether they are principals in the first degree or principals in the second degree, no
distinction between the two categories being recognised.

This view of Section 34 gives it an intelligible content in conformity with general notions. The
opposing view involves a distinction dependent on identity or similarity of act which, if admissible at
all, is wholly foreign to the law, both civil and criminal, and leads nowhere.”

13. At this stage, we would like to refer to an old judgment of a Division Bench of the Allahabad High
Court in the case of Bashir v. State9, which by giving examples explains the scope and significance of

7

Krishna Murthy @ Gunodu vs The State Of Karnataka on 16 February, 2022

the words “in furtherance” used in Section 34 of the 9 AIR 1953 All 668 IPC in the following
manner:

“18. The use of the words “in furtherance” suggests that Section 34 is applicable also
where the act actually done is not exactly the act jointly intended by the conspirators
to be done, otherwise, the words would not be needed at all. The common intention
can be to do one act and another act can be done in furtherance of the common
intention. It may be a preliminary act necessary to be done before achieving the
common intention; or it may become necessary to do it after achieving the common
intention or it may be done while achieving the common intention. Going to the spot
in a motor car is an act in furtherance of the common intention to commit a crime
there; but if while going there the driver runs over and kills a pedestrian, the collision
is merely incidental and the running aver of the pedestrian is not in furtherance of
the common intention. If, however, a conspirator who wishes to commit a crime
involving violence against X is impeded by Y and throws Y aside in order to get at X,
the attack upon Y is made in furtherance of the common intention; see Russell on
Crime, pages 557 and 558.” The aforesaid quotation emphasizes that it is essential
that each co-perpetrator should have necessary intent to participate or otherwise
have requisite awareness or knowledge that the offence is likely to be committed in
view of the common design. It also follows that in some cases merely accompanying
the principal accused may not establish common intention. A co-perpetrator, who
shares a common intention, will be liable only to the extent that he intends or could
or should have visualized the possibility or probability of the final act. If the final
outcome or offence committed is distinctly remote and unconnected with the
common intention, he would not be liable. This test obviously is fact and
circumstance specific and no straitjacket universal formula can be applied. Two
examples quoted in Bashir's case (supra) are relevant and explain the widest and
broad boundaries of Section 34 IPC and at the same time warn that the ambit should
not be extended so as to hold a person liable for remote possibilities, which were not
probable and could not be envisaged. The examples also bring out the distinction
between the criminal acts and the intent of a co-perpetrator; and the actual offence
committed by the principal or main perpetrator.

14. In Surendra Chauhan v. State of Madhya Pradesh,10 it has been observed:

“11. Under Section 34 a person must be physically present at the actual commission
of the crime for the purpose of facilitating or promoting the offence, the commission
of which is the aim of the joint criminal venture. Such presence of those who in one
way or the other facilitate the execution of the common design is itself tantamount to
actual participation in the criminal act. The essence of Section 34 is simultaneous
consensus of the minds of persons participating in the criminal action to bring about
a particular result. Such consensus can be developed at the spot and thereby intended
by all of them. (Ramaswami Ayyangar v. State of T.N.) The existence of a common
intention can be inferred from the attending circumstances of the case and the

8

Krishna Murthy @ Gunodu vs The State Of Karnataka on 16 February, 2022

conduct of the parties. No direct evidence of common intention is necessary. For the
purpose of common intention even the participation in the commission of the offence
need not be proved in all cases. The common intention can develop even during the
course of an occurrence. (Rajesh Govind Jagesha v. State of Maharashtra) To

10 (2000) 4 SCC 110 apply Section 34 IPC apart from the fact that there should be two or more
accused, two factors must be established : (i) common intention, and (ii) participation of the
accused in the commission of an offence. If a common intention is proved but no overt act is
attributed to the individual accused, Section 34 will be attracted as essentially it involves vicarious
liability but if participation of the accused in the crime is proved and a common intention is absent,
Section 34 cannot be invoked. In every case, it is not possible to have direct evidence of a common
intention. It has to be inferred from the facts and circumstances of each case.”

15. In Mithu Singh v. State of Punjab,11 this Court acquitted Mithu Singh under Section 302 read
with Section 34 IPC, but upheld his conviction under Section 27 of the Arms Act, 1959 observing
that inference as to common intention should not be readily drawn; culpable liability can arise only
if such inference can be drawn with a degree of assurance. In the facts of the said case, it was
observed that the required degree of assurance was missing. At the same time, it was observed that
while examining the question of common intention, the court should be conscious and aware that it
is difficult, if not impossible, to collect and produce direct evidence and in most cases inference as to
the intention shall be drawn from the acts and conduct of the accused and other relevant
circumstances as available. The entire observation or ratio of this Court has to be kept in mind.

11 (2001) 4 SCC 193

16. In Rajesh Kumar v. State of Himachal Pradesh,12 this Court had elucidated and laid down the
following principles as applicable to Section 34 IPC:

“13. Section 34 has been enacted on the principle of joint liability in the doing of a
criminal act. The Section is only a rule of evidence and does not create a substantive
offence. The distinctive feature of the Section is the element of participation in action.
The liability of one person for an offence committed by another in the course of
criminal act perpetrated by several persons arises under Section 34 if such criminal
act is done in furtherance of a common intention of the persons who join in
committing the crime. Direct proof of common intention is seldom available and,
therefore, such intention can only be inferred from the circumstances appearing from
the proved facts of the case and the proved circumstances. In order to bring home the
charge of common intention, the prosecution has to establish by evidence, whether
direct or circumstantial, that there was plan or meeting of mind of all the accused
persons to commit the offence for which they are charged with the aid of Section 34,
be it pre-arranged or on the spur of moment; but it must necessarily be before the
commission of the crime. The true contents of the Section are that if two or more
persons intentionally do an act jointly, the position in law is just the same as if each
of them has done it individually by himself. As observed in Ashok Kumar v. State of

9

Krishna Murthy @ Gunodu vs The State Of Karnataka on 16 February, 2022

Punjab (AIR 1977 SC 109), the existence of a common intention amongst the
participants in a crime is the essential element for application of this Section. It is not
necessary that the acts of the several persons charged with commission of an offence
jointly must be the same or identically similar. The acts may be different in character,
but must have been actuated by one and the same common intention in order to
attract the provision.” After referring to the facts in Rajesh Kumar (supra), the 12
(2008) 15 SCC 705 conviction was converted from Section 302 IPC to one under
Section 326 IPC highlighting the factual position that the accused in question had
assaulted the victim by a danda on a non-vital part.

17. In Arun v. State by Inspector of Police, Tamil Nadu,13 reference was made to the decision in
Hardev Singh and Another v. State of Punjab14 and benefit was given to one of the accused as he did
not act conjointly with others in committing the murder. This Court referred to Dharam Pal and
Others v. State of Haryana,15 on the test which should be applied to invoke and convict a co-accused
under Section 34 IPC. We also deem it appropriate to reproduce the said test:

“14. It may be that when some persons start with a pre-arranged plan to commit a
minor offence, they may in the course of their committing the minor offence come to
an understanding to commit the major offence as well. Such an understanding may
appear from the conduct of the persons sought to be made vicariously liable for the
act of the principal culprit or from some other incriminatory evidence but the
conduct or other evidence must be such as not to leave any room for doubt in that
behalf.

15. A criminal court fastening vicarious liability must satisfy itself as to the prior
meeting of the minds of the principal culprit and his companions who are sought to
be constructively made liable in respect of every act committed by the former. There
is no law to our knowledge which lays down that a person 13 (2008) 15 SCC 501 14
(1975) 3 SCC 731 15 (1978) 4 SCC 440 accompanying the principal culprit shares his
intention in respect of every act which the latter might eventually commit. The
existence or otherwise of the common intention depends upon the facts and
circumstances of each case. The intention of the principal offender and his
companions to deal with any person who might intervene to stop the quarrel must be
apparent from the conduct of the persons accompanying the principal culprit or some
other clear and cogent incriminating piece of evidence. In the absence of such
material, the companion or companions cannot justifiably be held guilty for every
offence committed by the principal offender.”

18. Section 34 IPC makes a co-perpetrator, who had participated in the offence, equally liable on the
principle of joint liability. For Section 34 to apply there should be common intention between the
co-perpetrators, which means that there should be community of purpose and common design or
pre-arranged plan. However, this does not mean that co-perpetrators should have engaged in any
discussion, agreement or valuation. For Section 34 to apply, it is not necessary that the plan should
be pre-arranged or hatched for a considerable time before the criminal act is performed. Common

10

Krishna Murthy @ Gunodu vs The State Of Karnataka on 16 February, 2022

intention can be formed just a minute before the actual act happens. Common intention is
necessarily a psychological fact as it requires prior meeting of minds. In such cases, direct evidence
normally will not be available and in most cases, whether or not there exists a common intention has
to be determined by drawing inference from the facts proved. This requires an inquiry into the
antecedents, conduct of the co- participants or perpetrators at the time and after the occurrence.

The manner in which the accused arrived, mounted the attack, nature and type of injuries inflicted,
the weapon used, conduct or acts of the co-assailants/perpetrators, object and purpose behind the
occurrence or the attack etc. are all relevant facts from which inference has to be drawn to arrive at a
conclusion whether or not the ingredients of Section 34 IPC are satisfied. We must remember that
Section 34 IPC comes into operation against the co-perpetrators because they have not committed
the principal or main act, which is undertaken/performed or is attributed to the main culprit or
perpetrator. Where an accused is the main or final perpetrator, resort to Section 34 IPC is not
necessary as the said perpetrator is himself individually liable for having caused the injury/offence.
A person is liable for his own acts. Section 34 or the principle of common intention is invoked to
implicate and fasten joint liability on other co-participants. Further, the expression/term “criminal
a c t ”   i n   S e c t i o n   3 4   I P C   r e f e r s   t o   t h e   p h y s i c a l   a c t ,   w h i c h   h a s   b e e n   d o n e   b y   t h e
co-perpetrators/participants as distinct from the effect, result or consequence. In other words,
expression “criminal act” referred to in Section 34 IPC is different from “offence”. For example, if A
and B strike Lathi at X, the criminal act is of striking lathis, whereas the offence committed may be
of murder, culpable homicide or simple or grievous injuries. The expression “common intention”
should also not be confused with “intention” or “mens rea” as an essential ingredient of several
offences under the IPC. Intention may be an ingredient of an offence and this is a personal matter.
For some offences, mental intention is not a requirement but knowledge is sufficient and constitutes
necessary mens rea. Section 34 IPC can be invoked for the said offence also [refer Afrahim Sheikh
and Ors. (supra)]. Common intention is common design or common intent, which is akin to motive
or object. It is the reason or purpose behind doing of all acts by the individual participant forming
the criminal act. In some cases, intention, which is ingredient of the offence, may be identical with
the common intention of the co-perpetrators, but this is not mandatory.

19. Section 34 IPC also uses the expression “act in furtherance of common intention”. Therefore, in
each case when Section 34 is invoked, it is necessary to examine whether the criminal offence
charged was done in furtherance of the common intention of the participator. If the criminal offence
is distinctly remote and unconnected with the common intention, Section 34 would not be
applicable. However, if the criminal offence done or performed was attributable or was primarily
connected or was a known or reasonably possible outcome of the preconcert/contemporaneous
engagement or a manifestation of the mutual consent for carrying out common purpose, it will fall
within the scope and ambit of the act done in furtherance of common intention. Thus, the word
“furtherance” propounds a wide scope but should not be expanded beyond the intent and purpose of
the statute. Russell on Crime, (10th edition page 557), while examining the word “furtherance” had
stated that it refers to “the action of helping forward” and “it indicates some kind of aid or assistance
producing an effect in the future” and that “any act may be regarded as done in furtherance of the
ultimate felony if it is a step intentionally taken for the purpose of effecting that felony.” An act
which is extraneous to the common intention or is done in opposition to it and is not required to be

11

Krishna Murthy @ Gunodu vs The State Of Karnataka on 16 February, 2022

done at all for carrying out the common intention, cannot be said to be in furtherance of common
intention [refer judgment of R.P. Sethi J. in Suresh (supra)].

20. When we apply the aforesaid principles relating to applicability of Section 34 IPC to the facts of
the present case, we feel that Thimmappa and Gopala are entitled to the benefit of doubt on the
ground that it cannot be with certainty held that they had common intention, viz. the injuries
inflicted by Krishnamurthy on Venkatarama after he had fallen down. They did not participate
thereafter by physically assaulting or causing any injury to Venkatarama. They did not facilitate and
help Krishnamurthy in the assault he perpetuated. We have no grounds to accept that they could
have preconceived the brutal assault by Krishnamurthy who had put his knees on the neck and
jumped on the chest of the deceased to cause the injuries resulting in his death. We cannot hold that
these two accused could have premeditated the result which ensued when Krishnamurthy behaved
and acted in the manner he did. Clearly, they had not joined Krishnamurthy when he had acted and
have stood by. There is nothing to indicate that their acts, that is, holding the hands and pulling the
legs of the deceased making him fall down, were done in furtherance of the common intention that
Krishnamurthy would thereupon put his leg on the neck of the deceased, crushed his chest and
fracture the ribs. We would, in favour of the appellants Thimmappa and Gopala, hold that their acts
cannot be primarily connected with the violence perpetuated by Krishnamurthy. Given the acts
attributed to Thimmappa and Gopala, the assault by Krishnamurthy and the resultant outcome were
unexpected. We are also not prepared to hold that these two accused should have known the final
outcome, or it was known to them, or it was a reasonably possible outcome of the preconcert/
contemporaneous engagement or a manifestation of mutual consent for carrying out a common
purpose. We, therefore, would not hold them guilty for the offence under Section 300 or even
Section 299 of the IPC on the ground that they shared common intention as understood on
application of Section 34 IPC.

21. Consequently, we convert their conviction to that under Section 323 read with Section 34 IPC
and we would sentence them to the maximum sentence specified therein of one year. We also
uphold the conviction of Thimmappa and Gopala for individual offences under Sections 447, 504,
506 and 341 IPC and the sentences imposed under the aforesaid Sections, which are up to three
years of rigorous imprisonment and fine with default stipulations.

22. Before concluding, we would like to mention the secondary argu-

ment raised by the appellant that juvenile ‘A’ was acquitted from all the charges and hence, the
appellants are entitled to acquittal on the ground of parity. This contention is to be rejected in view
of Sections 40 to 44 of the Evidence Act, 1872. In particular, Section 43 states judgments other than
those mentioned in Sections 40 to 42 are irrelevant unless the existence of that judgment, order or
decree is a fact in issue or is relevant under some other provisions of this Act. We have decided this
appeal based on the evidence adduced and led by the prosecution in the chargesheet in ques- tion.
We cannot decide this appeal based on the evidence and material led by the prosecution in the
proceedings against the ju-

12

Krishna Murthy @ Gunodu vs The State Of Karnataka on 16 February, 2022

venile ‘A’ which were independent and separate proceedings. Evi- dence, reasoning and findings
recorded therein are not in appeal before us.

23. As Thimmappa and Gopala are on bail and have not undergone the sentence, they shall
surrender within a period of one month from today. In case they do not surrender, the police will
take coercive steps for their arrest to undergo the remaining sentence. The sentence awarded to
Krishnamurthy would be modified to life imprisonment without any further stipulation. The
direction that life imprisonment shall be till the end of natural life to imply that Krishnamurthy shall
not be entitled to premature release/remission in accordance with the applicable policy is set aside.
There is no reason and justification for this condition to be imposed. The sentences as awarded to
the appellants will run concurrently. The appellants would be entitled to the benefit of Section 428
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

24. The appeal is, accordingly, partly allowed in the aforesaid terms.

………………....................J. (SANJIV KHANNA) ..……………....................J. (BELA M. TRIVEDI) NEW
DELHI;

FEBRUARY 16, 2022.

13