Karuppudayar vs State Rep. By The Deputy Superintendent ... on 31 January, 2025

Karuppudayar vs State Rep. By The Deputy Superintendent ...
on 31 January, 2025

Author: B.R. Gavai

Bench: B.R. Gavai

2025 INSC 132

                                                                     REPORTABLE

                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                              CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS.____________ OF 2025
                       [Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Criminal) No.8778-
                                             8779 of 2024]

                  KARUPPUDAYAR                                    …APPELLANT(S)
                                                 VERSUS

                  STATE REP. BY THE DEPUTY
                  SUPERINTENDENT OF POLICE, LALGUDI
                  TRICHY & ORS.                     …RESPONDENT(S)

                                             JUDGMENT

B.R. GAVAI, J.

1. Leave granted.

2. The present appeals challenge the judgment and final order dated 28th February 2024 in
Criminal Original Petition (MD) No. 6676 of 2022 and Criminal Miscellaneous Petition (MD)
No.4621 of 2022 passed by the learned Single Judge of the High Court of Madras at Madurai.

3. By way of the impugned order, the High Court dismissed NARENDRA PRASAD Date: 2025.01.31
13:14:15 IST Reason:

the petitions filed by the Appellant under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter, “CrPC”) wherein the Appellant has prayed to call for
records relating to proceedings in Spl.S.C.No.7 of 2022 pending before the I-

Additional District and Sessions Judge (PCR), Tiruchirappalli and to quash the same.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6118227/

1

Karuppudayar vs State Rep. By The Deputy Superintendent ... on 31 January, 2025

4. The facts, in brief, giving rise to the present appeals are as under:

4.1 The prosecution story is that on 2nd September 2021 the Appellant approached
the Respondent No. 3 (Mr. Ravikumar, Revenue Inspector) in order to inquire
regarding the status of a petition filed in the name of Appellant’s father concerning
inclusion of Appellant’s father’s name in the patta1 for the land situated in Natham
UDR, Sembarai village.

4.2 A quarrel developed between Appellant and Respondent No. 3 whereby the
Appellant abused Respondent No.3 by using his caste name in the Revenue
Divisional Office, Lalgudi, Tiruchirappalli.

4.3 Consequently, Respondent No. 3 filed a complaint before the Respondent No. 2
(Sub-Inspector of Police, Lalgudi Police 1 ‘Patta’ is a government issued document
which contains various details such as landowner’s name, land survey number, type
of land, location of land, etc. that validates the ownership of land.

Station, Trichy) and case being Crime No. 676 of 2021 was registered against the Appellant for the
offences punishable under Sections 294(b) and 353 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter,
“IPC”) read with Sections 3(1)(r) and 3(1)(s) of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
(Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 (hereinafter, “SC-ST Act”). 4.4 After completion of investigation,
the charge sheet was filed by the Respondent No.1 (Investigating Officer/Deputy Superintendent of
Police) in the court of Judicial Magistrate, Lalgudi, Tiruchirappalli and the case was committed to
the Sessions Court.

4.5 As a result of the same, a case being Spl. S.C. No. 7 of 2022 was initiated against the Appellant
before the I- Additional District and Sessions Judge (PCR), Tiruchirappalli (hereinafter, “trial
court”).

4.6 Aggrieved by the initiation of criminal proceedings so also the trial, the Appellant filed petitions
under Section 482 of CrPC before the High Court to call for the records relating to Spl. S.C. No. 7 of
2022 and to quash the same. 4.7 The learned Single Judge of the High Court, vide the impugned
judgment and final order, held that no prejudice would be caused to Appellant if he is subjected to
trial and dismissed his petitions.

4.8 Aggrieved thereby, the present appeals arise by way of special leave.

5. We have heard Smt. Vanshaja Shukla, the leaned counsel appearing on behalf of the Appellant
and Shri Sabarish Subramanian, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the Respondents.

6. Smt. Vanshaja Shukla submitted that the learned Single Judge of the High Court has grossly erred
in rejecting the petition of the Appellant. She submits that even taking the allegations in the FIR at
its face value, the ingredients to constitute an offence under Sections 3(1)(r) and 3(1)(s) of the SC-ST
Act are not made out. She, therefore, submits that the learned Single Judge of the High Court ought

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6118227/

2

Karuppudayar vs State Rep. By The Deputy Superintendent ... on 31 January, 2025

to have exercised his jurisdiction under Section 482 of the CrPC and quashed the proceedings.

7. As against this, Shri Sabarish Subramanian, learned counsel for the Respondents submits that
upon detailed investigation a charge-sheet was filed by the then Investigating Officer (Respondent
No.1 herein). Learned Single Judge of the High Court, on a perusal of the charge-sheet, found that
no case for quashing of the proceedings was made out. He, therefore, submits that no interference is
warranted in the facts and circumstances of the present case.

8. For appreciating the rival submissions, it will be apposite to refer to the provisions of Sections
3(1)(r) and 3(1)(s) of the SC-ST Act, which read thus:

“3. Punishments for offences of atrocities.—(1) Whoever, not being a member of a Scheduled Caste
or a Scheduled Tribe,--

          (a) ………………………………………………

          (b)    ………………………………………………

                             xxx xxx xxx

          (r)    intentionally insults or intimidates

with intent to humiliate a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe in any place within
public view;

(s) abuses any member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe by caste name in any place within
public view;”

9. A perusal of Section 3(1)(r) of the SC-ST Act would reveal that for constituting an offence
thereunder, it has to be established that the accused intentionally insults or intimidates with intent
to humiliate a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe in any place within public view.
Similarly, for constituting an offence under Section 3(1)(s) of the SC-ST Act, it will be necessary that
the accused abuses any member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe by caste name in any
place within public view.

10. The term “any place within public view” initially came up for consideration before this Court in
the case of Swaran Singh and others v. State through Standing Counsel and another2. This Court in
the case of Hitesh Verma v. State of Uttarakhand and another3 referred to Swaran Singh (supra)
and reiterated the legal position as under:

“14. Another key ingredient of the provision is insult or intimidation in “any place
within public view”. What is to be regarded as “place in public view” had come up for
consideration before this Court in the judgment reported as Swaran Singh v. State
[Swaran Singh v. State, (2008) 8 SCC 435 : (2008) 3 SCC (Cri) 527] . The Court had
drawn distinction between the expression “public place” and “in any place within

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6118227/

3

Karuppudayar vs State Rep. By The Deputy Superintendent ... on 31 January, 2025

public view”. It was held that if an offence is committed outside the building e.g. in a
lawn outside a house, and the lawn can be seen by someone from the road or lane
outside the boundary wall, then the lawn would (2008) 8 SCC 435 (2020) 10 SCC 710
certainly be a place within the public view.

On the contrary, if the remark is made inside a building, but some members of the public are there
(not merely relatives or friends) then it would not be an offence since it is not in the public view (sic)
[Ed. :

This sentence appears to be contrary to what is stated below in the extract from
Swaran Singh, (2008) 8 SCC 435, at p. 736d-e, and in the application of this principle
in para 15, below:“Also, even if the remark is made inside a building, but some
members of the public are there (not merely relatives or friends) then also it would be
an offence since it is in the public view.”] . The Court held as under : (SCC pp. 443-44,
para 28) “28. It has been alleged in the FIR that Vinod Nagar, the first informant,
was insulted by Appellants 2 and 3 (by calling him a “chamar”) when he stood near
the car which was parked at the gate of the premises. In our opinion, this was
certainly a place within public view, since the gate of a house is certainly a place
within public view. It could have been a different matter had the alleged offence been
committed inside a building, and also was not in the public view. However, if the
offence is committed outside the building e.g. in a lawn outside a house, and the lawn
can be seen by someone from the road or lane outside the boundary wall, the lawn
would certainly be a place within the public view. Also, even if the remark is made
inside a building, but some members of the public are there (not merely relatives or
friends) then also it would be an offence since it is in the public view. We must,
therefore, not confuse the expression “place within public view” with the expression
“public place”. A place can be a private place but yet within the public view. On the
other hand, a public place would ordinarily mean a place which is owned or leased by
the Government or the municipality (or other local body) or gaon sabha or an
instrumentality of the State, and not by private persons or private bodies.” (emphasis
in original)”

11. It could thus be seen that, to be a place ‘within public view’, the place should be open where the
members of the public can witness or hear the utterance made by the accused to the victim. If the
alleged offence takes place within the four corners of the wall where members of the public are not
present, then it cannot be said that it has taken place at a place within public view.

12. If we take the averments/allegations in the FIR at its face value, what is alleged is as under:

That on 2nd September 2021, while the complainant was engaged in his office doing
his duty, the accused came to the office in the morning in order to enquire about the
petition given by him already to the Revenue Divisional Officer regarding entering
the name of his father in the ‘patta’. On such enquiry being made, the complainant
informed the accused that the said petition has been sent to the Taluk office, Lalgudi

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6118227/

4

Karuppudayar vs State Rep. By The Deputy Superintendent ... on 31 January, 2025

and that appropriate action would be taken after receipt of the reply from the Taluk
Office, Lalgudi. It is alleged that at that stage, the accused asked the complainant as
to what caste he belongs to and stated that the complainant belongs to ‘Parayan’
caste. Thereafter, the accused stated that, “if you people are appointed in
Government service you all will do like this only…”. Thereafter, he scolded the
complainant calling his caste name and insulted him using vulgar words. The further
allegation is that thereafter the colleagues of the complainant came there, pacified the
accused and took him away.

13. Taking the allegations in the FIR at their face value, it would reveal that what is alleged is that
when the complainant was in his office the accused came there; enquired with the complainant; not
being satisfied, started abusing him in the name of his caste; and insulted him. Thereafter, three
colleagues of the complainant came there, pacified the accused and took him away.

14. It is thus clear that even as per the FIR, the incident has taken place within the four corners of
the chambers of the complainant. The other colleagues of the complainant arrived at the scene after
the occurrence of the incident.

15. We are, therefore, of the considered view that since the incident has not taken place at a place
which can be termed to be a place within public view, the offence would not come under the
provisions of either Section 3(1)(r) or Section 3(1)(s) of the SC-ST Act.

16. We may gainfully refer to the following observations of this Court in the case of State of Haryana
and others v. Bhajan Lal and others4. The law as laid down therein by this 1992 Supp (1) SCC 335
Court has been consistently followed.

“102. In the backdrop of the interpretation of the various relevant provisions of the Code under
Chapter XIV and of the principles of law enunciated by this Court in a series of decisions relating to
the exercise of the extraordinary power under Article 226 or the inherent powers under Section 482
of the Code which we have extracted and reproduced above, we give the following categories of cases
by way of illustration wherein such power could be exercised either to prevent abuse of the process
of any court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice, though it may not be possible to lay down any
precise, clearly defined and sufficiently channelised and inflexible guidelines or rigid formulae and
to give an exhaustive list of myriad kinds of cases wherein such power should be exercised.

(1) Where the allegations made in the first information report or the complaint, even if they are
taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie constitute any offence or
make out a case against the accused.

(2) Where the allegations in the first information report and other materials, if any, accompanying
the FIR do not disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an investigation by police officers under
Section 156(1) of the Code except under an order of a Magistrate within the purview of Section
155(2) of the Code.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6118227/

5

Karuppudayar vs State Rep. By The Deputy Superintendent ... on 31 January, 2025

(3) Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR or complaint and the evidence collected
in support of the same do not disclose the commission of any offence and make out a case against
the accused.

(4) Where, the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a cognizable offence but constitute only a
non-

cognizable offence, no investigation is permitted by a police officer without an order of a Magistrate
as contemplated under Section 155(2) of the Code.

(5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so absurd and inherently improbable on
the basis of which no prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion that there is sufficient ground
for proceeding against the accused.

(6) Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any of the provisions of the Code or the
concerned Act (under which a criminal proceeding is instituted) to the institution and continuance
of the proceedings and/or where there is a specific provision in the Code or the concerned Act,
providing efficacious redress for the grievance of the aggrieved party. (7) Where a criminal
proceeding is manifestly attended with mala fide and/or where the proceeding is maliciously
instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance on the accused and with a view to spite
him due to private and personal grudge.

103. We also give a note of caution to the effect that the power of quashing a criminal proceeding
should be exercised very sparingly and with circumspection and that too in the rarest of rare cases;
that the court will not be justified in embarking upon an enquiry as to the reliability or genuineness
or otherwise of the allegations made in the FIR or the complaint and that the extraordinary or
inherent powers do not confer an arbitrary jurisdiction on the court to act according to its whim or
caprice.”

17. No doubt, that the power under Section 482 of the CrPC is required to be exercised sparingly and
with circumspection and that too in the rarest of rare cases. It is equally settled that the court will
not be justified in embarking upon an enquiry as to the reliability or genuineness or otherwise of the
allegations made in the FIR or the complaint. However, the court would be justified in exercising its
discretion if the case falls under any of the clauses carved out by this Court in Paragraph 102 in the
case of Bhajan Lal (supra)

18. We find, as already observed herein, that the allegations made in the FIR, even if they are taken
at their face value and accepted in their entirety, do not prima facie constitute an offence either
under Section 3(1)(r) or under Section 3(1)(s) of the SC-ST Act. We are of the considered view that
the case would fall under the first category, listed by this Court in Paragraph 102 in the case of
Bhajan Lal (supra).

19. On a perusal of the order of the High Court, we find that the High Court has not at all considered
this aspect of the matter though it was strenuously argued on behalf of the petitioner before the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6118227/

6

Karuppudayar vs State Rep. By The Deputy Superintendent ... on 31 January, 2025

High Court (Appellant herein) that the allegations made in the FIR do not make out a case that the
offence is committed in public view. The High Court did not even deal with the said contention,
leave aside considering the same.

20. In that view of the matter, we find that the present appeals deserve to be allowed.

21. In the result, we pass the following order:

(i) The appeals are allowed.

(ii) The judgment and final order dated 28th February 2024 in Criminal Original Petition (MD) No.
6676 of 2022 and Criminal Miscellaneous Petition (MD) No.4621 of 2022 passed by the learned
Single Judge of the High Court of Madras at Madurai is quashed and set aside.

(iii) The charge-sheet in Special S.C. No. 7 of 2022 on the file of I Additional District and Sessions
Judge (PCR), Tiruchirappalli and all proceedings pursuant thereto shall stand quashed and set
aside.

22. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.

..............................J (B.R. GAVAI) ……………..............................J (AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH)
NEW DELHI;

JANUARY 31, 2025

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6118227/

7

