M/S. Emaar India Ltd. vs Tarun Aggarwal Projects Llp on 30 September, 2022

M/S. Emaar India Ltd. vs Tarun Aggarwal Projects Llp on 30
September, 2022

Author: M.R. Shah

Bench: Krishna Murari, M.R. Shah

REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6774 OF 2022

M/s. EMAAR INDIA LTD.                                      ...APPELLANT(S)

VERSUS

TARUN AGGARWAL PROJECTS LLP & ANR. …RESPONDENT(S)

JUDGMENT

M.R. SHAH, J.

1. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment and order dated 24.12.2021
passed by the High Court of Delhi at New Delhi in Arbitration Petition No. 637 of 2021, by which,
the High Court in exercise of powers under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,
1996 (hereinafter referred to as the Arbitration Act) has appointed arbitrators to resolve the dispute
between the parties, the original respondent – M/s EMMAR India Limited has preferred the present
appeal.

2. That the original petitioners – respondents herein entered into a Collaboration Agreement dated
07.05.2009 for development of a residential colony in Sector 62 and 65, Gurugram. That thereafter,
a further Addendum Agreement dated 19.04.2011 was executed between the parties. The dispute
arose between the parties and it was the case on behalf of the original applicants – respondents
herein that the appellant herein did not comply with the obligations under the Addendum
Agreement dated 19.04.2011. The respondents – original applicants/petitioners issued a legal notice
dated 20.11.2019 raising demand for physical possession of 5 plots measuring 2160 sq. yds. and
claiming a sum of Rs. 10 crores for the losses/damages suffered by them. As according to the
original petitioners – respondents herein the dispute between the parties were arbitrable, the
original petitioners appointed a former judge of the High Court as their arbitrator. The appellant
herein denied appointment of the arbitrator. Therefore, the respondents herein approached the
High Court for appointment of the arbitrators in terms of Clause 37 of the Addendum Agreement by
submitting an application under Section 11(5) & (6) of the Arbitration Act seeking appointment of

1

M/S. Emaar India Ltd. vs Tarun Aggarwal Projects Llp on 30 September, 2022

arbitrators by the Court.

2.1 The said arbitration petition was opposed by the appellant herein by raising various grounds
including one of the grounds that the dispute falls under Clause 36 of the Addendum Agreement and
not under Clause 37 which incorporates arbitration clause.

2.2 Despite having noted that the Clause 36 of the Addendum Agreement stipulates that in the event
of any dispute with regard to Clauses 3, 6 and 9, other party shall have a right to get the agreement
specifically enforced through appropriate court of law, the High Court has appointed the arbitrators
in terms of Clause 37 of the Addendum Agreement by observing that conjoint reading of Clauses 36
and 37 makes it clear that a party does have a right to seek enforcement of agreement before the
Court of law but it does not bar settlement of disputes through Arbitration and Conciliation Act,
1996. By observing so, the High Court has allowed the application under Section 11(5) & (6) and has
appointed the arbitrators, who shall appoint the third arbitrator in terms of Clause 37.

2.3 Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment and order passed by the High
Court allowing the application under Section 11(5) & (6) of the Arbitration Act and appointing the
arbitrators with respect to the dispute between the parties, the original opponent – respondent has
preferred the present appeal.

3. Shri Dhanesh Relan, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant has vehemently
submitted that while allowing the application under Section 11(5) & (6) and appointing the
arbitrators, the High Court has not at all considered that according to the appellant the dispute falls
within Clause 36 of the Agreement and not under Clause

37. It is submitted that as per Clause 36 in case of any conflict or difference arising between the
parties or in case the either party refuses or neglects to perform its part of the obligations under
Addendum Collaboration Agreement, inter−alia, as mentioned in Clauses 3, 6 and 9, then the other
party shall have every right to get the agreement specifically enforced through the appropriate court
of law. It is submitted that as per Clause 37, save and except Clause 36 or any dispute arising out of
or touching upon or in relation to the terms of the addendum agreement…… shall be settled through
under the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. It is submitted that therefore any
dispute with regard to the Clauses 3, 6, 9 shall have to be resolved through the appropriate court of
law and such dispute is not arbitrable at all. It is submitted that despite the High Court has noted
Clauses 36 & 37, without deciding whether the dispute falls within Clause 36 the High Court
appointed the arbitrators. 3.1 Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant submitted that
as observed and held by this Court in the case of Uttarakhand Purv Sainik Kalyan Nigam Limited Vs.
Northern Coal Field Limited; (2020) 2 SCC 455, the appointment of an arbitrator may be refused if
the arbitration agreement is not in writing, or the dispute is beyond the arbitration agreement.

3.2 Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant has further submitted that as observed and
held by this Court in the case of Vidya Drolia and Ors. Vs. Durga Trading Corporation; (2021) 2 SCC
1, the Court may interfere at Section 8 or 11 stage when it is manifestly and ex facie certain that the
arbitration agreement is non−existent, invalid or the disputes are non−arbitrable, though the nature

2

M/S. Emaar India Ltd. vs Tarun Aggarwal Projects Llp on 30 September, 2022

and facet of non−arbitrability would, to some extent, determine the level and nature of judicial
scrutiny. It is further submitted that in the said decision it is also observed that such restricted and
limited review is to check and protect parties from being forced to arbitrate when the matter is
demonstrably “non−arbitrable” and to cut off the deadwood.

3.3 Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant has also relied upon the recent decision of
this Court in the case of Indian Oil Corporation Limited Vs. NCC Limited; 2022 SCC OnLine SC 896
(Civil Appeal No. 341 of 2022, decided on 20.07.2022), in which after considering the decision of
this Court in the case of Vidya Drolia (supra), this Court after taking into consideration other
decisions has observed and held that at the stage of Section 11 of the Arbitration Act, a preliminary
inquiry is permissible if the dispute is raised with respect to the arbitrability.

3.4 Relying upon the above decisions, it is vehemently submitted by learned counsel appearing on
behalf of the appellant that in the facts and circumstances of the case, the High Court has virtually
ignored Clause 36 of the Agreement. It is submitted that the High Court was required to hold a
preliminary inquiry on whether considering Clause 36 of the Agreement, the dispute between the
parties falls within Clause 36 or not. It is submitted that if in preliminary inquiry it is found that the
dispute falls within Clause 36 in that case such a dispute is not arbitrable at all. It is, therefore,
prayed to allow the present appeal and quash and set aside the judgment and order passed by the
High Court.

4. While opposing the present appeal Shri Siddharth Bhatnagar, learned Senior Advocate appearing
on behalf of the respondents has vehemently submitted that even as observed and held by this Court
in the case of Vidya Drolia (supra) whether the dispute is arbitrable or not, it should be best left to
the arbitrator in an application under Section 16 of the Arbitration Act and it is for the arbitrator to
decide the arbitrability of the dispute. 4.1 It is submitted that on conjoint reading of Clauses 36 and
37 of the Agreement and the intention of the parties to resolve the dispute through arbitration under
the Arbitration Act, no error has been committed by the High Court in appointing the arbitrators.

5. We have heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respective parties at length.

6. The short question which is posed for consideration of this Court is whether in the facts and
circumstances of the case, the High Court is justified in appointing the arbitrators in an application
under Section 11(5) and (6) of the Arbitration Act without holding any preliminary inquiry or
inquiry on whether the dispute is arbitrable or not? 6.1 While considering the aforesaid
question/issue, the relevant provisions of the Agreement, namely, Clauses 36 and 37, are required to
be referred to, which are as under:

− “Dispute Resolution & Jurisdiction

36. In case of any conflict or difference arising between the parties or in case the
either party refused or neglects to perform its part of the obligations under this
Addendum Collaboration Agreement, inter−alia as mentioned in Clauses 3, 6 & 9
hereinabove, then the other party shall have every right to get this agreement

3

M/S. Emaar India Ltd. vs Tarun Aggarwal Projects Llp on 30 September, 2022

specifically enforced through the appropriate court of law.

37. Save & except clause 36 hereinabove mentioned, all or any dispute arising out of
or touching upon or in relation to the terms of this Agreement including the
interpretation and validity thereof, and the respective rights and obligations of the
parties, shall be settled through under the provisions of Arbitration & Conciliation
Act, 1996 wherein both the parties shall be entitled to appoint one Arbitrator each
and the Arbitrators so appoint shall appoint a third Arbitrator or rank of Retired
Judge of any High Court. The arbitration proceedings shall be governed by the
p r o v i s i o n s   o f   A r b i t r a t i o n   a n d   C o n c i l i a t i o n   A c t ,   1 9 9 6   o r   a n y   s t a t u t o r y
amendments/modification thereto for the time being in force. The arbitration
proceedings shall be held at Delhi.” On a bare reading of Clause 36 of the Agreement,
it clearly stipulates that in the event of any dispute as mentioned in Clauses 3, 6 and
9, other party shall have a right to get the Agreement specifically enforced through
the appropriate court of law. As per Clause 37, save and except Clause 36, all or any
dispute arising out of or touching upon or in relation to the terms of the addendum
agreement……. shall be settled through under the provisions of Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996. Thus, with respect to any dispute as mentioned in Clauses 3, 6
& 9, such disputes are not arbitrable at all. It cannot be disputed that both the parties
are governed by the Addendum Agreement dated 19.04.2011.

6.2 In the case of Oriental Insurance Co Ltd. Vs. Narbheram Power and Steel (P) Ltd.,
(2018) 6 SCC 534, it is observed and held by this Court that the parties are bound by
the Clauses enumerated in the policy and the Court does not transplant any equity to
the same by rewriting a clause. It is further observed and held that an arbitration
clause is required to be strictly construed. Any expression in the clause must
unequivocally express the intent of arbitration. It can also lay the postulate in which
situations the arbitration clause cannot be given effect to.

It is further observed that if a clause stipulates that under certain circumstances there can be no
arbitration and they are demonstrably clear then the controversy pertaining to appointment of
Arbitrator has to be put to rest (Paras 10−

23).

6.3 In the case of Rajasthan State Industrial Development and Investment Corporation Vs. Diamond
and Gem Development Corporation Ltd.; (2013) 5 SCC 470, it is observed and held by this Court
that a party cannot claim anything more than what is covered by the terms of the contract, for the
reason that the contract is a transaction between two parties and has been entered into with open
eyes and by understanding the nature of contract. It is further observed that thus the contract being
a creature of an agreement between two or more parties has to be interpreted giving literal
meanings unless there is some ambiguity therein. The contract is to be interpreted giving the actual
meaning to the words contained in the contract and it is not permissible for the Court to make a new
contract, however reasonable, if the parties have not made it themselves. It is further observed that

4

M/S. Emaar India Ltd. vs Tarun Aggarwal Projects Llp on 30 September, 2022

the terms of the contract have to be construed strictly without altering the nature of a contract as it
may affect the interest of either of the parties adversely (Para 23).

6.4 In the case of Harsha Construction Vs. Union of India and Ors.; (2014) 9 SCC 246, it is observed
and held by this Court in paragraphs 18 and 19 as under: − “18. Arbitration arises from a contract
and unless there is a specific written contract, a contract with regard to arbitration cannot be
presumed. Section 7(3) of the Act clearly specifies that the contract with regard to arbitration must
be in writing. Thus, so far as the disputes which have been referred to in Clause 39 of the contract
are concerned, it was not open to the Arbitrator to arbitrate upon the said disputes as there was a
specific clause whereby the said disputes had been “excepted”. Moreover, when the law specifically
makes a provision with regard to formation of a contract in a particular manner, there cannot be any
presumption with regard to a contract if the contract is not entered into by the mode prescribed
under the Act.

19. If a non−arbitrable dispute is referred to an Arbitrator and even if an issue is framed by the
Arbitrator in relation to such a dispute, in our opinion, there cannot be a presumption or a
conclusion to the effect that the parties had agreed to refer the issue to the Arbitrator. In the instant
case, the respondent authorities had raised an objection relating to the arbitrability of the
aforestated issue before the Arbitrator and yet the Arbitrator had rendered his decision on the said
“excepted” dispute. In our opinion, the Arbitrator could not have decided the said “excepted”
dispute. We, therefore, hold that it was not open to the Arbitrator to decide the issues which were
not arbitrable and the award, so far as it relates to disputes regarding non−arbitrable disputes is
concerned, is bad in law and is hereby quashed.” 6.5 In the recent decision in the case of Vidya
Drolia (supra), which, as such, is post−insertion of Section 11(6−A) of the Arbitration Act, it is
observed and held that the issue of non−arbitrability of a dispute is basic for arbitration as it relates
to the very jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal. An Arbitral Tribunal may lack jurisdiction for
several reasons and non−arbitrability has multiple meanings. After referring to another decision of
this Court in the case of Booz Allen & Hamiltan Inc. Vs. SBI Home Finance Ltd. [(2011) 5 SCC 532
(Para 34)], it is observed and held that there are facets of non−arbitrability, namely “(i) Whether the
disputes are capable of adjudication and settlement by arbitration? That is, whether the disputes,
having regard to their nature, could be resolved by a private forum chosen by the parties (the
Arbitral Tribunal) or whether they would exclusively fall within the domain of public fora (courts).

(ii) Whether the disputes are covered by the arbitration agreement? That is, whether the disputes
are enumerated or described in the arbitration agreement as matters to be decided by arbitration or
whether the disputes fall under the “excepted matters” excluded from the purview of the arbitration
agreement.

(iii) Whether the parties have referred the disputes to arbitration? That is, whether the disputes fall
under the scope of the submission to the Arbitral Tribunal, or whether they do not arise out of the
statement of claim and the counterclaim filed before the Arbitral Tribunal. A dispute, even if it is
capable of being decided by arbitration and falling within the scope of an arbitration agreement, will
not be “arbitrable” if it is not enumerated in the joint list of disputes referred to arbitration, or in the
absence of such a joint list of disputes, does not form part of the disputes raised in the pleadings

5

M/S. Emaar India Ltd. vs Tarun Aggarwal Projects Llp on 30 September, 2022

before the Arbitral Tribunal.” 6.6 After referring to and considering in detail the earlier decisions on
the point, more particularly, with respect to non−arbitrability and the ‘excepted matters’, it is
ultimately concluded in para 76 as under:

“76. In view of the above discussion, we would like to propound a four−fold test for
determining when the subject matter of a dispute in an arbitration agreement is not
arbitrable:

76.1.(1) When cause of action and subject−matter of the dispute relates to actions in
rem, that do not pertain to subordinate rights in personam that arise from rights in
rem.

76.2.(2) When cause of action and subject−matter of the dispute affects third−party
rights; have erga omnes effect;

require centralized adjudication, and mutual adjudication would not be appropriate and
enforceable;

76.3.(3) When cause of action and subject−matter of the dispute relates to inalienable sovereign and
public interest functions of the State and hence mutual adjudication would be unenforceable;

76.4 (4) When the subject−matter of the dispute is expressly or by necessary implication non−
arbitrable as per mandatory statute(s).

76.5 These tests are not watertight compartments; they dovetail and overlap, albeit when applied
holistically and pragmatically will help and assist in determining and ascertaining with great degree
of certainty when as per law in India, a dispute or subject matter is non−arbitrable. Only when the
answer is affirmative that the subject matter of the dispute would be non−arbitrable.

76.6 However, the aforesaid principles have to be applied with care and caution as observed in
Olympus Superstructures (P) Ltd. Vs. Meena Vijay Khetan and Ors.; (1999) 5 SCC 651: (SCC p. 669,
para 35) “35. …Reference is made there to certain disputes like criminal offences of a public nature,
disputes arising out of illegal agreements and disputes relating to status, such as divorce, which
cannot be referred to arbitration. It has, however, been held that if in respect of facts relating to a
criminal matter, say, physical injury, if there is a right to damages for personal injury, then such a
dispute can be referred to arbitration (Keir v. Leeman). Similarly, it has been held that a husband
and a wife may refer to arbitration the terms on which they shall separate, because they can make a
valid agreement between themselves on that matter (Soilleux v. Herbst, Wilson v. Wilson and Cahill
v. Cahill).” 6.7 On the question, who decides on non−arbitrability of the dispute, after referring to
and considering the earlier decisions on the point, more particularly, the decisions in the cases of
Garware Wall Ropes Ltd. Vs. Coastal Marine Constructions & Engg.; (2019) 9 SCC 209; United
India Insurance Co. Ltd. Vs. Hyundai Engg. & Construction Co. Ltd.; (2018) 17 SCC 607, and
Narbheram Power & Steel (P) Ltd. (supra), it is observed and held that the question of non−
arbitrability relating to the inquiry, whether the dispute was governed by the arbitration clause, can

6

M/S. Emaar India Ltd. vs Tarun Aggarwal Projects Llp on 30 September, 2022

be examined by the Courts at the reference stage itself and may not be left unanswered, to be
examined and decided by the Arbitral Tribunal. Thereafter, in para 153, it is observed and held that
the expression, “existence of arbitration agreement” in Section 11 of the Arbitration Act, would
include aspect of validity of an arbitration agreement, albeit the Court at the reference stage would
apply the prima facie test. It is further observed that in cases of debatable and disputable facts and,
good reasonably arguable case etc., the Court would force the parties to abide by the arbitration
Agreement as the Arbitral Tribunal has the primary jurisdiction and authority to decide the disputes
including the question of jurisdiction and non−arbitrability. Ultimately in para 154, the proposition
of law is crystallized as under:

“154. Discussion under the heading ‘Who decides Arbitrability?’ can be crystallized as
under:

154.1. Ratio of the decision in Patel Engineering Ltd. on the scope of judicial review
by the court while deciding an application under Sections 8 or 11 of the Arbitration
Act, post the amendments by Act 3 of 2016 (with retrospective effect from 23−10−
2015) and even post the amendments vide Act 33 of 2019 (with effect from 9−8−
2019), is no longer applicable.

154.2. Scope of judicial review and jurisdiction of the court under Section 8 and 11 of
the Arbitration Act is identical but extremely limited and restricted.

154.3. The general rule and principle, in view of the legislative mandate clear from
Act 3 of 2016 and Act 33 of 2019, and the principle of severability and competence−
competence, is that the arbitral tribunal is the preferred first authority to determine
and decide all questions of non− arbitrability. The court has been conferred power of
“second look” on aspects of non−arbitrability post the award in terms of sub−clauses
(i), (ii) or (iv) of Section 34(2)(a) or sub−clause

(i) of Section 34(2)(b) of the Arbitration Act.

154.3. Rarely as a demurrer the court may interfere at the Section 8 or 11 stage when it is manifestly
and ex facie certain that the arbitration agreement is non−existent, invalid or the disputes are non−
arbitrable, though the nature and facet of non−arbitrability would, to some extent, determine the
level and nature of judicial scrutiny. The restricted and limited review is to check and protect parties
from being forced to arbitrate when the matter is demonstrably “non−arbitrable” and to cut off the
deadwood. The court by default would refer the matter when contentions relating to non−
arbitrability are plainly arguable; when consideration in summary proceedings would be insufficient
and inconclusive; when facts are contested; when the party opposing arbitration adopts delaying
tactics or impairs conduct of arbitration proceedings. This is not the stage for the court to enter into
a mini trial or elaborate review so as to usurp the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal but to affirm
and uphold integrity and efficacy of arbitration as an alternative dispute resolution mechanism.” 6.8
In the case of Vidya Drolia (supra), it is specifically observed and held by this Court that rarely as a
demurrer, the Court may interfere at Section 8 or 11 stage when it is manifestly and ex facie certain

7

M/S. Emaar India Ltd. vs Tarun Aggarwal Projects Llp on 30 September, 2022

that “the arbitration agreement is non−existent, invalid or the disputes are non−arbitrable”, though
the nature and facet of non− arbitrability would, to some extent, determine the level and nature of
judicial scrutiny. It is further observed that the restricted and limited review is to check and protect
parties from being forced to arbitrate when the matter is demonstrably “non−arbitrable and to cut
off the deadwood.” It is further observed that the prima facie review at the reference stage is to cut
the deadwood and trim off the side branches in straightforward cases where dismissal is barefaced
and pellucid and when on the facts and law the litigation must stop at the first stage.

7. Applying the law laid down by this Court in the aforesaid decisions and considering Clauses 36
and 37 of the Agreement and when a specific plea was taken that the dispute falls within Clause 36
and not under Clause 37 and therefore, the dispute is not arbitrable, the High Court was at least
required to hold a primary inquiry/review and prima facie come to conclusion on whether the
dispute falls under Clause 36 or not and whether the dispute is arbitrable or not. Without holding
such primary inquiry and despite having observed that a party does have a right to seek enforcement
of agreement before the Court of law as per Clause 36, thereafter, has appointed the arbitrators by
solely observing that the same does not bar settlement of disputes through Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996. However, the High Court has not appreciated and considered the fact that in
case of dispute as mentioned in Clauses 3, 6 and 9 for enforcement of the Agreement, the dispute is
not arbitrable at all. In that view of the matter, the impugned judgment and order passed by the
High Court appointing the arbitrators is unsustainable and the same deserves to be quashed and set
aside. However, at the same time, as the High Court has not held any preliminary inquiry on
whether the dispute is arbitrable or not and/or whether the dispute falls under Clause 36 or not, we
deem it proper to remit the matter to the High Court to hold a preliminary inquiry on the aforesaid
in light of the observations made by this Court in the case of Vidya Drolia (supra) and in the case of
Indian Oil Corporation Limited (supra) and the observations made hereinabove and thereafter, pass
an appropriate order.

8. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above the present appeal succeeds. The impugned
judgment and order passed by the High Court appointing the arbitrators in terms of Clause 37 of the
Addendum Agreement dated 19.04.2011 is hereby quashed and set aside. The matter is remitted to
the High Court to decide the application under Section 11(5) and (6) of the Arbitration Act afresh
and to pass an appropriate order after holding a preliminary inquiry/review on whether the dispute
is arbitrable or not and/or whether the dispute falls within Clause 36 of the Addendum Agreement
or not. The present appeal is accordingly allowed. No costs.

………………………………….J.
[M.R. SHAH]

NEW DELHI;                            ………………………………….J.
SEPTEMBER 30, 2022                    [KRISHNA MURARI]

8

M/S. Emaar India Ltd. vs Tarun Aggarwal Projects Llp on 30 September, 2022

9