M/S N.G. Projects Limited vs M/S Vinod Kumar Jain on 21 March, 2022

M/S N.G. Projects Limited vs M/S Vinod Kumar Jain on 21
March, 2022

Author: Hemant Gupta

Bench: V. Ramasubramanian, Hemant Gupta

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1846 OF 2022
(ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO. 2103 OF 2022)

M/S. N.G. PROJECTS LIMITED                                         .....APPELLANT(S)

VERSUS

M/S. VINOD KUMAR JAIN & ORS.                                    .....RESPONDENT(S)

ORDER

HEMANT GUPTA, J.

1. The challenge in the present appeal is to an order dated 6.1.2022 passed by the Division Bench of
the High Court of Jharkhand at Ranchi whereby the appeal filed by the State against the order of the
learned Single Bench allowing the Writ Petition No. 5416 of 2019 was dismissed.

2. The Special Leave Petition came up for hearing before this Court on 7.3.2022, when the following
order was passed: -

“Leave granted.

The appeal is allowed.

The appellant shall be permitted to complete the project but will not claim escalation
for the period the matter was pending before the Court.

Detailed Judgment/Order to follow”.

3. The Road Construction Department of Jharkhand invited tenders on Date:
2022.03.21 16:46:49 IST Reason:

1

M/S N.G. Projects Limited vs M/S Vinod Kumar Jain on 21 March, 2022

7.6.2019 for reconstruction of Nagaruntari – Dhurki – Ambakhoriya Road.

Respondent No. 1 participated in the tender process and also submitted Bank Guarantee as bid
security but such tender was cancelled on 20.8.2019 and fresh Notice Inviting Tender1 was invited
for reconstruc- tion of the said Nagaruntari – Dhurki – Ambakhoriya road.

4. The Tender Evaluation Committee held a meeting for technical evaluation of bids and 13 out of 15
bids were held to be non-responsive in terms of Standard Bidding Document2, including that of
respondent No. 1. The reason for arriving at such conclusion was that respondent No. 1 submitted a
letter along with the amended Bank Guarantee to the effect that such letter forms an integral part of
Bank Guarantee. Such Bank Guarantee was not in the format as prescribed in the SBD. It was also
found that the Bank Guarantee was valid from 8.7.2019 to 7.3.2020, which was prior to the date on
which NIT was issued on 20.8.2019, apart from the fact that the amount mentioned in numerical
and in words were different. Still further, the bid capacity of respondent No. 1 amounting to
Rs.60.66 crores was less than the estimated cost of work of Rs.1,05,71,13,019/-. Additionally, the
affidavit and undertaking supporting the bid were not properly notarized.

5. The technical bid of the appellant was declared to be substantially responsive and after due
evaluation of its financial bid, work contract was issued to the appellant on 3.10.2019. The appellant
started the work on the stipulated date of commencement on 22.10.2019 and completed earth work
for 21.9 kms out of the 24 kms proposed road. As per the 1 For short, the ‘NIT’ 2 For short, the ‘SBD’
appellant, it had completed work of approximately Rs.8.5 crores and had mobilized the plants and
machinery to Garwa.

6. Respondent No. 1 filed a Writ Petition on 11.10.2019 for quashing of the decision of the Technical
Evaluation Committee holding its bid to be non- responsive.

7. The State in its counter affidavit has taken the following objections:

(i) State could not have accepted the amended bank guarantee as it had conditions
beyond what was stipulated in the format.

(ii) An amendment changes the prescribed format.

(iii) By abundant caution, the Bank was asked to verify the said Bank Guarantee but
there has been no reply as on date.

(iv) NIT is of 20.8.2019 but the Bank Guarantee is from 9.7.2019 to 8.3.2020.

(v) The undertaking and affidavit has not been duly notarized.

(vi) Bid Capacity is also negative.

(vii) The other tender referred to in the writ has since been cancelled.

2

(viii) Financial details of bid cannot be known till opening of the bid.

M/S N.G. Projects Limited vs M/S Vinod Kumar Jain on 21 March, 2022

8. After the pleadings were completed, the learned Single Bench of the High Court passed a common
order in respect of two other works and the work in question on 14.1.2020, setting aside award of
contract granted to the appellant. The learned Single Bench of the High Court passed the following
directions:

“48. Under the aforesaid facts and circumstances, all the writ petitions are disposed
of by passing following orders:-

(i) xx xx xx

(ii) The decision of the Tender Committee dated 3 rd October, 2019, for the work,
namely, “Reconstruction of Nagaruntari-

Dhurki-Ambakhoriya Road (MDR-139)” in relation to W.P.(C) No. 5416 of 2019 is hereby quashed.
All the consequential action of the State respondents taken in relation to the said tender including
the award of the tender in favour of the private respondent – M/s. N.G. Projects Limited is also
quashed. The State respondents are directed to issue fresh tender for the said work and to proceed
accordingly.

(iii) xx xx xx”

9. The Division Bench of the High Court dismissed two appeals against two other tenders on
7.10.2021. However, in appeal against the work in question, the Division Bench of the High Court
noticed the fact that the appellant had already started the execution of the work and that part of the
work had already completed but held that there was no valid distinction with the case of other two
works against which Letters Patent Appeal was dismissed on 7.10.2021. The Division Bench of the
High Court returned the following findings:

“22. On a comprehensive comparison of the bid security document submitted by the
writ petitioner and the appellant, we gather that the bid security document submitted
by both the tenderers failed to adhere to the specifications professed by the employer.
While the appellant in the final paragraph of the bid security document made the
bank guarantee extendable at the bank’s sole discretion contrary to the requirement
of the format and the bid document whereunder the employer had the right reserved
to get the bank guarantee extended and notice for such extensions to the bank
waived, the writ petitioner had also deviated on this count by introducing a
notwithstanding clause which was not part of the format…

23. The principles of law as enunciated by the Apex Court and profusely relied upon
by this Court in the judgment dated 7 th October, 2021 therefore do squarely apply to
the facts of the present case as well. If the opinion of the learned Single Judge on
those counts do not suffer from any perversity, there is no reason for the appellate

3

M/S N.G. Projects Limited vs M/S Vinod Kumar Jain on 21 March, 2022

court to take a different view of the matter and substitute its opinion.

xx xx xx

25. Having analyzed the reasonings rendered by the learned single Judge in the
conspicuous facts of the case, we are of the view that the decision of the tender
evaluation committee in accepting the technical bid of the successful tenderer M/s.
N.G. Projects Limited while rejecting the technical bid of the petitioner did not
conform to uniform standards as professed by it. The selection of one and rejection of
another was neither in consonance with the specific terms of the NIT and SBD read
with the addendum, nor was on uniform yardstick.”

10. We find that the interference in contract awarded to the appellant is wholly unwarranted and has
caused loss to public interest. Construction of roads is an essential part of development of
infrastructure in any State. The learned Single Bench and the Division Bench of the High Court were
exercising power of judicial review to find out whether the decision of the State was manifestly
arbitrary or unjust as laid down by this Court in Tata Cellular v. Union of India3 and to act as
appellate authority over the decision of the State. This Court in Tata Cellular held as under:

“70. It cannot be denied that the principles of judicial review would apply to the
exercise of contractual powers by Government bodies in order to prevent
arbitrariness or 3 (1994) 6 SCC 651 favouritism. However, it must be clearly stated
that there are inherent limitations in exercise of that power of judicial review.
Government is the guardian of the finances of the State.

It is expected to protect the financial interest of the State . The right to refuse the lowest or any other
tender is always available to the Government. But, the principles laid down in Article 14 of the
Constitution have to be kept in view while accepting or refusing a tender. There can be no question
of infringement of Article 14 if the Government tries to get the best person or the best quotation. The
right to choose cannot be considered to be an arbitrary power. Of course, if the said power is
exercised for any collateral purpose the exercise of that power will be struck down.

xx xx xx

77. The duty of the court is to confine itself to the question of legality. Its concern should be:

1. Whether a decision-making authority exceeded its powers?

2. Committed an error of law,

3. committed a breach of the rules of natural justice,

4. reached a decision which no reasonable tribunal would have reached or,

4

M/S N.G. Projects Limited vs M/S Vinod Kumar Jain on 21 March, 2022

5. abused its powers.

Therefore, it is not for the court to determine whether a particular policy or particular decision taken
in the fulfilment of that policy is fair. It is only concerned with the manner in which those decisions
have been taken. The extent of the duty to act fairly will vary from case to case. Shortly put, the
grounds upon which an administrative action is subject to control by judicial review can be classified
as under:

(i) Illegality : This means the decision-maker must understand correctly the law that
regulates his decision-making power and must give effect to it.

(ii) Irrationality, namely, Wednesbury unreasonableness.

(iii) Procedural impropriety.

The above are only the broad grounds but it does not rule out addition of further grounds in course
of time. As a matter of fact, in R. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex Brind [(1991) 1
AC 696] , Lord Diplock refers specifically to one development, namely, the possible recognition of
the principle of proportionality. In all these cases the test to be adopted is that the court should,
“consider whether something has gone wrong of a nature and degree which requires its
intervention”.

xx xx xx

94. The principles deducible from the above are:

(1) The modern trend points to judicial restraint in administra-

tive action.

(2) The court does not sit as a court of appeal but merely re-

views the manner in which the decision was made.

(3) The court does not have the expertise to correct the ad-

ministrative decision. If a review of the administrative de- cision is permitted it will be substituting
its own decision, without the necessary expertise which itself may be falli- ble.

(4) The terms of the invitation to tender cannot be open to ju-

dicial scrutiny because the invitation to tender is in the realm of contract. Normally speaking, the
decision to ac- cept the tender or award the contract is reached by process of negotiations through
several tiers. More often than not, such decisions are made qualitatively by ex- perts.

5

M/S N.G. Projects Limited vs M/S Vinod Kumar Jain on 21 March, 2022

(5) The Government must have freedom of contract. In other words, a fair play in the joints is a
necessary concomitant for an administrative body functioning in an administra- tive sphere or
quasi-administrative sphere. However, the decision must not only be tested by the application of
Wednesbury principle of reasonableness (including its other facts pointed out above) but must be
free from arbi- trariness not affected by bias or actuated by mala fides. (6) Quashing decisions may
impose heavy administrative bur-

den on the administration and lead to increased and un- budgeted expenditure.

Based on these principles we will examine the facts of this case since they commend to us as the
correct principles.”

11. Learned counsel for the appellant also referred to a judgment reported as Central Coalfields
Limited & Anr. v. SLL-SML (Joint Venture Consortium) & Ors.4 wherein it was held that it was not
for the Court to substitute its opinion in respect of acceptance of bank guarantee. It was held that
when a particular format for a bank guarantee is prescribed, then the bidder is required to stick to
that particular format alone with the caveat that the State reserves the right to deviate from the
terms of the bid document within the acceptable parameters. This Court held as under:

“32. The core issue in these appeals is not of judicial review of the administrative
action of CCL in adhering to the terms of NIT and the GTC prescribed by it while
dealing with bids furnished by participants in the bidding process. The core issue is
whether CCL acted perversely enough in rejecting the bank guarantee of JVC on the
ground that it was not in the prescribed format, thereby calling for judicial review by
a constitutional court and interfering with CCL's decision.

xx xx xx

37. For JVC to say that its bank guarantee was in terms stricter than the prescribed
format is neither here nor there. It is not for the employer or this Court to scrutinise
every bank guarantee to determine whether it is stricter than the prescribed format
or less rigorous. The fact is that a format was prescribed and there was no reason not
to adhere to it. The goalposts cannot be rear- 4 (2016) 8 SCC 622 ranged or asked to
be rearranged during the bidding process to affect the right of some or deny a
privilege to some.

xx xx xx

47. The result of this discussion is that the issue of the accep-

tance or rejection of a bid or a bidder should be looked at not only from the point of view of the
unsuccessful party but also from the point of view of the employer. As held in Ramana Da- yaram
Shetty [Ramana Dayaram Shetty v. International Airport Authority of India, (1979) 3 SCC 489] the
terms of NIT cannot be ignored as being redundant or superfluous. They must be given a meaning

6

M/S N.G. Projects Limited vs M/S Vinod Kumar Jain on 21 March, 2022

and the necessary significance. As pointed out in Tata Cellular [Tata Cellular v. Union of India,
(1994) 6 SCC 651] there must be judicial restraint in interfering with administrative ac- tion.
Ordinarily, the soundness of the decision taken by the em- ployer ought not to be questioned but the
decision-making process can certainly be subject to judicial review. The sound- ness of the decision
may be questioned if it is irrational or mala fide or intended to favour someone or a decision “that
no re- sponsible authority acting reasonably and in accordance with rel- evant law could have
reached” as held in Jagdish Man- dal [Jagdish Mandal v. State of Orissa, (2007) 14 SCC 517] fol-
lowed in Michigan Rubber [Michigan Rubber (India) Ltd. v. State of Karnataka, (2012) 8 SCC 216] .

xx xx xx

49. Again, looked at from the point of view of the employer if the courts take over the
decision-making function of the employer and make a distinction between essential and
non-essential terms contrary to the intention of the employer and thereby re- write the
arrangement, it could lead to all sorts of problems in- cluding the one that we are grappling with.
For example, the GTC that we are concerned with specifically states in Clause 15.2 that “Any bid not
accompanied by an acceptable Bid Security/EMD shall be rejected by the employer as
non-responsive”. Surely, CCL ex facie intended this term to be mandatory, yet the High Court held
that the bank guarantee in a format not prescribed by it ought to be accepted since that requirement
was a non-essen- tial term of the GTC. From the point of view of CCL, the GTC has been
impermissibly rewritten by the High Court.”

12. In Afcons Infrastructure Limited v. Nagpur Metro Rail Corporation Limited & Anr.5, this Court
held that the owner or the employer of a project, having authored the tender documents, is the best
person to un- derstand and appreciate its requirements and interpret its documents. It was held as
under:

“13. In other words, a mere disagreement with the decision-mak- ing process or the
decision of the administrative authority is no reason for a constitutional court to
interfere. The threshold of mala fides, intention to favour someone or arbitrariness,
irra- tionality or perversity must be met before the constitutional court interferes
with the decision-making process or the deci- sion.

xx xx xx

15. We may add that the owner or the employer of a project, having authored the
tender documents, is the best person to un-

derstand and appreciate its requirements and interpret its docu- ments. The constitutional courts
must defer to this understand- ing and appreciation of the tender documents, unless there is mala
fide or perversity in the understanding or appreciation or in the application of the terms of the
tender conditions. It is possi- ble that the owner or employer of a project may give an interpre-
tation to the tender documents that is not acceptable to the con- stitutional courts but that by itself
is not a reason for interfering with the interpretation given.”

7

M/S N.G. Projects Limited vs M/S Vinod Kumar Jain on 21 March, 2022

13. This Court sounded a word of caution in another judgment reported as Silppi Constructions
Contractors v. Union of India and Ors.6, wherein it was held that the Courts must realize their
limitations and the havoc which needless interference in commercial matters could cause. In
contracts involving technical issues, the Courts should be even more 5 (2016) 16 SCC 818 6 2019
SCC OnLine SC 1133 reluctant because most of us in judges' robes do not have the necessary
expertise to adjudicate upon technical issues beyond our domain . As laid down in the judgments
cited above, the Courts should not use a magnifying glass while scanning the tenders and make
every small mistake appear like a big blunder. In fact, the courts must give "fair play in the joints" to
the government and public sector undertakings in matters of contract. Courts must also not
interfere where such interference would cause unnecessary loss to the public exchequer. It was held
as under:-

“19. This Court being the guardian of fundamental rights is duty bound to interfere
when there is arbitrariness, irrationality, mala fides and bias. However, this Court in
all the aforesaid decisions has cautioned time and again that courts should exercise a
lot of restraint while exercising their powers of judicial review in contractual or
commercial matters. This Court is normally loathe to interfere in contractual matters
unless a clear-cut case of arbitrariness or mala fides or bias or irrationality is made
out. One must remember that today many public sector undertakings compete with
the private industry. The contracts entered into between private parties are not
subject to scrutiny under writ jurisdiction. No doubt, the bodies which are State
within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution are bound to act fairly and are
amenable to the writ jurisdiction of superior courts, but this discretionary power
must be exercised with a great deal of restraint and caution. The Courts must realize
their limitations and the havoc which needless interference in commercial matters
can cause. In contracts involving technical issues the courts should be even more
reluctant because most of us in judges' robes do not have the necessary expertise to
adjudicate upon technical issues beyond our domain. As laid down in the judgments
cited above the courts should not use a magnifying glass while scanning the tenders
and make every small mistake appear like a big blunder. In fact, the courts must give
"fair play in the joints" to the government and public sector undertakings in matters
of contract. Courts must also not interfere where such interference will cause
unnecessary loss to the public exchequer.

20. The essence of the law laid down in the judgments referred to above is the
exercise of restraint and caution; the need for overwhelming public interest to justify
judicial intervention in matters of contract involving the state instrumentalities; the
courts should give way to the opinion of the experts unless the decision is totally
arbitrary or unreasonable; the court does not sit like a court of appeal over the
appropriate authority; the court must realize that the authority floating the tender is
the best judge of its requirements and, therefore, the court's interference should be
minimal. The authority which floats the contract or tender and has authored the
tender documents is the best judge as to how the documents have to be interpreted. If
two interpretations are possible then the interpretation of the author must be

8

M/S N.G. Projects Limited vs M/S Vinod Kumar Jain on 21 March, 2022

accepted. The courts will only interfere to prevent arbitrariness, irrationality, bias,
mala fides or perversity. With this approach in mind, we shall deal with the present
case.” (Emphasis supplied)

14. In National High Speed Rail Corpn. Ltd. v. Montecarlo Ltd.7, this Court sounded
a word of caution while entertaining the writ petition and/or granting stay which
ultimately may delay the execution of the Mega projects. It was held as under:

“95. Even while entertaining the writ petition and/or granting the stay which
ultimately may delay the execution of the Mega projects, it must be remembered that
it may seriously impede the execution of the projects of public importance and
disables the State and/or its agencies/instrumentalities from discharging the
constitutional and legal obligation towards the citizens. Therefore, the High Courts
should be extremely careful and circumspect in exercise of its discretion while
entertaining such petitions and/or while granting stay in such matters. Even in a case
where the High Court is of the prima facie opinion that the decision is as such
perverse and/or arbitrary and/or suffers from mala fides and/or favouritism, while
entertaining such writ petition and/or pass any appropriate interim order, High
Court may put to the writ petitioner's notice that in case the petitioner loses and there
is a delay in execution of the project due to such

7 2022 SCC OnLine SC 111 proceedings initiated by him/it, he/they may be saddled with the
damages caused for delay in execution of such projects, which may be due to such frivolous
litigations initiated by him/it. With these words of caution and advise, we rest the matter there and
leave it to the wisdom of the concerned Court(s), which ultimately may look to the larger public
interest and the national interest involved.”

15. In Uflex Ltd. v. Government of T.N.8, this Court stated that the enlarged role of the Government
in economic activity and its corresponding ability to give economic “largesse” was the bedrock of
creating what is commonly called the “tender jurisdiction”. The objective was to have greater
transparency and the consequent right of an aggrieved party to invoke the jurisdiction of the High
Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India beyond the issue of strict enforcement of
contractual rights under the civil jurisdiction. However, the ground reality today is that almost no
tender remains unchallenged. Unsuccessful parties or parties not even participating in the tender
seek to invoke the jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution. The Court
held as under:-

“2. The judicial review of such contractual matters has its own limitations. It is in this
context of judicial review of administrative actions that this Court has opined that it
is intended to prevent arbitrariness, irrationality, unreasonableness, bias and mala
fides. The purpose is to check whether the choice of decision is made lawfully and not
to check whether the choice of decision is sound. In evaluating tenders and awarding
contracts, the parties are to be governed by principles of commercial prudence. To
that extent, principles of equity and natural justice have to stay at a distance.

9

M/S N.G. Projects Limited vs M/S Vinod Kumar Jain on 21 March, 2022

[Jagdish Mandal v. State of Orissa, (2007) 14 SCC 517] 8 (2022) 1 SCC 165

3. We cannot lose sight of the fact that a tenderer or contractor with a grievance can
always seek damages in a civil court and thus, “attempts by unsuccessful tenderers
with imaginary grievances, wounded pride and business rivalry, to make mountains
out of molehills of some technical/procedural violation or some prejudice to self, and
persuade courts to interfere by exercising power of judicial review, should be
resisted”. [Jagdish Mandal v. State of Orissa, (2007) 14 SCC 517] xx xx xx

42. We must begin by noticing that we are examining the case, as already stated
above, on the parameters discussed at the inception. In commercial tender matters
there is obviously an aspect of commercial competitiveness. For every succeeding
party who gets a tender there may be a couple or more parties who are not awarded
the tender as there can be only one L-1.

The question is should the judicial process be resorted to for downplaying the freedom which a
tendering party has, merely because it is a State or a public authority, making the said process even
more cumbersome. We have already noted that element of transparency is always required in such
tenders because of the nature of economic activity carried on by the State, but the contours under
which they are to be examined are restricted as set out in Tata Cellular [Tata Cellular v. Union of
India, (1994) 6 SCC 651] and other cases. The objective is not to make the Court an appellate
authority for scrutinising as to whom the tender should be awarded. Economics must be permitted
to play its role for which the tendering authority knows best as to what is suited in terms of
technology and price for them.” (Emphasis supplied)

16. In Galaxy Transport Agencies v. New J.K. Roadways9, a three-judge bench again reiterated that
the authority that authors the tender document is the best person to understand and appreciate its
requirements, and thus, its interpretation should not be second-guessed by a court in judicial review
proceedings. It was observed as thus:

9 2020 SCC OnLine SC 1035 “17. In accordance with these judgments and noting that
the interpretation of the tendering authority in this case cannot be said to be a
perverse one, the Division Bench ought not to have interfered with it by giving its
own interpretation and not giving proper credence to the word “both” appearing in
Condition No. 31 of the N.I.T. For this reason, the Division Bench's conclusion that
JK Roadways was wrongly declared to be ineligible, is set aside.

18. Insofar as Condition No. 27 of the N.I.T. prescribing work experience of at least 5
years of not less than the value of Rs. 2 crores is concerned, suffice it to say that the
expert body, being the Tender Opening Committee, consisting of four members,
clearly found that this eligibility condition had been satisfied by the Appellant before
us. Without therefore going into the assessment of the documents that have been
supplied to this Court, it is well settled that unless arbitrariness or mala fide on the
part of the tendering authority is alleged, the expert evaluation of a particular tender,

10

M/S N.G. Projects Limited vs M/S Vinod Kumar Jain on 21 March, 2022

particularly when it comes to technical evaluation, is not to be second-guessed by a
writ court.

Thus, in Jagdish Mandal v. State of Orissa, (2007) 14 SCC 517, this Court noted:

“22. Judicial review of administrative action is intended to prevent arbitrariness,
irrationality, unreasonableness, bias and mala fides. Its purpose is to check whether
choice or decision is made “lawfully” and not to check whether choice or decision is
“sound”. When the power of judicial review is invoked in matters relating to tenders
or award of contracts, certain special features should be borne in mind. A contract is
a commercial transaction. Evaluating tenders and awarding contracts are essentially
commer- cial functions. Principles of equity and natural justice stay at a distance. If
the decision relating to award of contract is bona fide and is in public interest, courts
will not, in ex- ercise of power of judicial review, interfere even if a proce- dural
aberration or error in assessment or prejudice to a tenderer, is made out. The power
of judicial review will not be permitted to be invoked to protect private interest at the
cost of public interest, or to decide contractual dis- putes. The tenderer or contractor
with a grievance can al- ways seek damages in a civil court. Attempts by unsuc-
cessful tenderers with imaginary grievances, wounded pride and business rivalry, to
make mountains out of molehills of some technical/procedural violation or some
prejudice to self, and persuade courts to interfere by exer- cising power of judicial
review, should be resisted. Such in- terferences, either interim or final, may hold up
public works for years, or delay relief and succour to thousands and millions and may
increase the project cost manifold. Therefore, a court before interfering in tender or
contrac- tual matters in exercise of power of judicial review, should pose to itself the
following questions:

(i) Whether the process adopted or decision made by the authority is mala fide or
intended to favour someone;

or Whether the process adopted or decision made is so arbitrary and irrational that the court can
say:“ the decision is such that no responsible authority acting reasonably and in accordance with
relevant law could have reached”;

(ii) Whether public interest is affected.

If the answers are in the negative, there should be no interference under Article 226. Cases involving
blacklisting or imposition of penal consequences on a tenderer/contractor or distribution of State
largesse (allotment of sites/shops, grant of licences, dealerships and franchises) stand on a different
footing as they may require a higher degree of fairness in action.” xx xx xx

20. This being the case, we are unable to fathom how the Division Bench, on its own appraisal,
arrived at the conclusion that the Appellant held work experience of only 1 year, substituting the
appraisal of the expert four-member Tender Opening Committee with its own.”

11

M/S N.G. Projects Limited vs M/S Vinod Kumar Jain on 21 March, 2022

17. Therefore, the position of law with regard to the interpretation of terms of the contract is that the
question as to whether a term of the contract is essential or not is to be viewed from the perspective
of the employer and by the employer. Applying the aforesaid position of law to the present case, it
has been the contention of respondent No. 1 that the for-

mat for bank guarantee was not followed strictly by the State and that the relaxation given was not
uniform, in that respondent No. 1 was sin- gled out. The said contention has found favour with the
Courts below.

18. In the present matter, respondent No. 1 submitted its first bank guaran-

tee on 8.7.2019 in relation to the first tender for the same project. How- ever, this first tender was
cancelled through a notice, as acknowledged by respondent No. 1. This being the case, being fully
aware of the fact that the first tender was no more in force and given that there was specifically a
new tender in place, respondent No. 1 was required to sub- mit a bank guarantee in the format
specified as per the Agreement. However, respondent no. 1 opted to use the same bank guarantee
which was drawn on 8.7.2019, albeit with a letter from the bank indicating that there is now an
amendment with regard to the dates and the contract therein. It is patently clear that if the format
for a bank guarantee is an essential condition of the Contract, the format in which the respondent
has opted to submit it is a substantial variation in the terms of the con- tract. If the variation that is
done by respondent no. 1 is considered to be an acceptable variation, then it would create an
onerous burden on the tendering authority to ensure that each underlying bank guarantee is valid
and further to consider whether the amendment letter itself was with the full knowledge and
consent of the bank. As it were, on the facts of the case, the State informed the High Court that it
had attempted to verify the amendment but there was no response from the Bank. This being the
case, it is submitted that the relaxation in the format to bank guarantee was rightly not provided to
the respondent.

19. The Specific Relief Act, 1963 was amended by Central Act 18 of 2018 when clause (ha) was
inserted in Section 41 of the said Act to say:

“(ha) if it would impede or delay the progress or completion of any infrastructure
project or interfere with the continued provision of relevant facility related thereto or
services being the subject matter of such project.”

20. Such amendment was in pursuance of the report submitted on 20th June 2016 of the Expert
Committee. The report is as under:-

“The Expert Committee set on examining Specific Relief Act, 1963 submits its Report
to Union Law & Justice Minister Recommends modifications for ensuring ease of
doing business The Expert Committee set on examining the Specific Relief Act, 1963
today Submitted its Report To Union Law & Justice Minister Shri D.V.Sadananda
Gowda here in New Delhi. In its report the committee has recommended
modifications in the Specific Relief Act, 1963 for ensuring the ease of doing business.

12

M/S N.G. Projects Limited vs M/S Vinod Kumar Jain on 21 March, 2022

In the context of tremendous developments which have taken place since 1963 and
the present changed scenario involving contract based infrastructure developments,
public private partnerships and other public projects, involving huge investments;
and changes required in the present scheme of the Act so that specific performance is
g r a n t e d   a s   a   g e n e r a l   r u l e   a n d   g r a n t   o f   c o m p e n s a t i o n   o r   d a m a g e s   f o r
non-performance remains as an exception, the committee decided i. To change the
approach, from damages being the rule and specific performance being the exception,
to specific performance being the rule, and damages being the alternate remedy..

ii. To provide guidelines for reducing the discretion granted to Courts and tribunals
while granting performance and injunctive reliefs.

iii. To introduce provisions for rights of third parties (other than for Government
contracts).

iv. To consider addressing unconscionable contracts, unfair contracts, reciprocity in
contracts etc., and implied terms.

The committee observed that there is a need to classify diverse Public utility
Contracts as a distinct class recognising the inherent public interest/importance to be
addressed in the Act. Any public work must progress without interruption. This
requires consideration whether a court’s intervention in public works should be
minimal. Smooth functioning of Public works projects can be effectively managed
through a monitoring system and regulatory mechanism. The role of courts in this
exercise is to interfere to the minimum extent so that public works projects will not
be impeded or stalled.”

21. Since the construction of road is an infrastructure project and keeping in view the intent of the
legislature that infrastructure projects should not be stayed, the High Court would have been well
advised to hold its hand to stay the construction of the infrastructure project. Such provision should
be kept in view even by the Writ Court while exercising its juris- diction under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India.

22. The satisfaction whether a bidder satisfies the tender condition is primarily upon the authority
inviting the bids. Such authority is aware of expectations from the tenderers while evaluating the
consequences of non-performance. In the tender in question, there were 15 bidders. Bids of 13
tenderers were found to be unresponsive i.e., not satisfying the tender conditions. The writ
petitioner was one of them. It is not the case of the writ petitioner that action of the Technical
Evaluation Committee was actuated by extraneous considerations or was malafide. Therefore, on
the same set of facts, different conclusions can be arrived at in a bona-fide manner by the Technical
Evaluation Committee. Since the view of the Technical Evaluation Committee was not to the liking
of the writ petitioner, such decision does not warrant for interference in a grant of contract to a
successful bidder.

13

23. In view of the above judgments of this Court, the Writ Court should re-

M/S N.G. Projects Limited vs M/S Vinod Kumar Jain on 21 March, 2022

frain itself from imposing its decision over the decision of the employer as to whether or not to
accept the bid of a tenderer. The Court does not have the expertise to examine the terms and
conditions of the present- day economic activities of the State and this limitation should be kept in
view. Courts should be even more reluctant in interfering with contracts involving technical issues
as there is a requirement of the necessary ex- pertise to adjudicate upon such issues. The approach
of the Court should be not to find fault with magnifying glass in its hands, rather the Court should
examine as to whether the decision-making process is after com- plying with the procedure
contemplated by the tender conditions. If the Court finds that there is total arbitrariness or that the
tender has been granted in a malafide manner, still the Court should refrain from interfer- ing in the
grant of tender but instead relegate the parties to seek dam-

ages for the wrongful exclusion rather than to injunct the execution of the contract. The injunction
or interference in the tender leads to addi- tional costs on the State and is also against public
interest. Therefore, the State and its citizens suffer twice, firstly by paying escalation costs and
secondly, by being deprived of the infrastructure for which the present-day Governments are
expected to work.

24. The State has paid over a sum of Rs.3,98,52,396/- to the appellant till date, though the stand of
the appellant is that it had submitted bills of work of Rs.8.5 crores. The termination of contract
would cause additional financial burden on the State and also deprive the amenity of road for a
longer period. Learned counsel for the appellant has stated that it shall not claim escalation of costs
for the period when the writ petition before the High Court was pending and there was a stay
granted.

25. In view thereof, we find that the action of the respondent in setting aside the letter of acceptance
granted to the appellant suffers from manifest illegality and cannot be sustained. Consequently, the
appeal is disposed of with a direction to the respondent State to allow the appellant to resume and
complete the work by excluding the period spent in the stay of execution of the contract.

26. A word of caution ought to be mentioned herein that any contract of public service should not be
interfered with lightly and in any case, there should not be any interim order derailing the entire
process of the services meant for larger public good. The grant of interim injunction by the learned
Single Bench of the High Court has helped no-one except a contractor who lost a contract bid and
has only caused loss to the State with no corresponding gain to anyone.

27. We also find that multiple layers of exercise of jurisdiction also delay the final adjudication
challenging the grant of tender. Therefore, it would be open to the High Courts or the Hon’ble Chief
Justice to entrust these petitions to a Division Bench of the High Court, which would avoid at least
hearing by one of the forums.

.............................................J. (HEMANT GUPTA) .............................................J. (V.
RAMASUBRAMANIAN) NEW DELHI;

14

MARCH 21, 2022.

M/S N.G. Projects Limited vs M/S Vinod Kumar Jain on 21 March, 2022

15