M/S Puri Investments vs M/S Young Friends And Co. on 23 February, 2022

M/S Puri Investments vs M/S Young Friends And Co. on 23
February, 2022

Author: Vineet Saran

Bench: Aniruddha Bose, Vineet Saran

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1609 OF 2022
(Arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) No. 6516/2019)

M/S PURI INVESTMENTS                           ....APPELLANT(S)

VERSUS

M/S YOUNG FRIENDS
AND CO. & ORS.                                ....RESPONDENT(S)

JUDGMENT

Leave granted.

2. The appellant, as the landlord, is the original applicant in an eviction proceeding instituted under
Section 14 of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 (hereinafter referred to as “the Act”) seeking recovery
of possession of a shop room located at Connaught Place in the central part of Delhi. The eviction
proceeding was instituted in the year 1974. We shall henceforth refer to the shop room as
“subject-premises”. In that proceeding Rachna Date: 2022.03.08 16:42:48 IST Reason:

instituted before the Rent Controller, Delhi, altogether three individuals and three
firms were originally impleaded as respondents. In this appeal, however, only three
respondents have been impleaded, being the firm-Young Friends & Co. and two
individuals – Ashu Mohan Gupta and Shashi Gupta. They have been described as
contesting respondents. On that count, however, no controversy has been raised
before us. The appellant admittedly is the landlord of the subject-premises.

This was rented out to the then proprietor (since deceased) of the first respondent in
the year 1936. The appellant became the landlord thereof on having purchased the

1

M/S Puri Investments vs M/S Young Friends And Co. on 23 February, 2022

subject-premises from its erstwhile owner in the year 1958. The main ground on
which eviction was asked for was sub-letting without consent of the landlord.

3. The respondents run a retail outlet from the subject- premises and at the material point of time,
the respondents were operating from there a chemist shop. The substance of allegations of the
landlord was that the respondents had sub-let certain portions of the premises to three medical
practitioners, (including one dentist) and two other firms. They were included as respondent nos. 2,
3, 4, 5 and 6 in the eviction application. By an order passed on 5th June, 1997, the Additional Rent
Controller, Delhi dismissed the petition holding that the appellant had failed to show that there was
any sub-letting, assignment or parting with possession of the tenanted premises in favour of
persons/entities who were included in the array of respondents. So far as respondent no.5 (Young
Friends & Co.) is concerned, finding was that it was an entity of the respondent tenant only. As
regards the sixth respondent in the eviction petition, the Rent Controller held that no sub-letting,
assignment or parting with possession of any portion of the subject-premises. Respondent no. 6 was
found to be occupying a public verandah outside the tenanted premises. The appellant’s plea for
eviction was founded on certain other grounds as well, but those grounds also could not be
established before the Rent Controller. It was held by the said forum that the respondent nos. 2 to 4
were not in exclusive possession of the subject- premises.

4. The Appellate Tribunal, however, reversed the decision of the authority of the first instance, and
passed an order of eviction on the ground of sub-letting. The Tribunal tested the appellant’s case on
the basis of allegations pertaining to sub- letting to the three medical practitioners. The Tribunal
accepted the appellant’s stand that the facts of the case disclosed sub- letting of the subject-premises
in favour of respondent nos. 2 (Dr. Pradip Jayna), 3 (Dr. S. S. Pant) and 4 (Shri K. N. Mehta). We
find from the judgment under appeal that the landlord had pressed the petition on account of
respondent nos. 2, 3 and 4 having been inducted as sub-tenants without the consent in writing by
the landlord.

5. The respondents, thus, invoked the provisions of Article 227 of the Constitution of India before
the Delhi High Court assailing the order of the Tribunal. The respondents were successful in that
proceedings. The High Court, in the judgment delivered on 14th November, 2018 allowed the
application under Article 227 of the Constitution of India, inter alia, holding:-

“51. The prime conclusion of ARCT that the user of the space by R-2 to R-4 during the
period they were in their respective clinic renders it they being in “exclusive
possession” is not supported by any evidence, it being a conclusion based on
surmises. As observed earlier, in the proceedings before the ARC, the landlord resting
its case primarily on the evidence of its managing partner (AW-3) had failed to
adduce such material, as could show a third party being in possession to the
exclusion of the tenant. On the contrary, the evidence of the landlord, as indeed of the
tenant, unmistakably show that the tenant has always been in full control and
possession-physical and legal-of the tenanted premises. The presence of others was
temporary, for a few hours of the day when the tenant would also be present, and
clearly for permissive use, it having come to an end, such persons having left the

2

M/S Puri Investments vs M/S Young Friends And Co. on 23 February, 2022

premises on their own when called upon to do so by the tenant.

52. The view taken by the ARCT, clearly, was erroneous, it being based on
conclusions which are contrary to the evidence that was adduced, and by drawing
inferences which were not permissible in law, the appellate power having been
improperly exercised for substituting one subjective satisfaction with another without
there being a justifiable reason to do so.

53. Consequently, the petition is allowed. The impugned judgment dated 29.08.2007
of the Additional Rent Control Tribunal is set aside. The judgment dated 05.06.1997
of the Additional Rent Controller stands restored and revived. In the result, the
eviction case of the respondent stands dismissed.”

6. This judgment of the High Court is under appeal before us. Main argument of Mr.
Dhruv Mehta, learned senior counsel appearing with Mr. Jeevesh Nagrath, learned
counsel appearing for the appellant has been that sub-letting had been proved before
the final fact-finding forum (at the appellate stage) and the appellate forum had
returned findings on facts. In such circumstances, the High Court in its supervisory
jurisdiction ought not to have had upset the order of the Appellate Tribunal.

7. The legal point, which has been argued before us, is as to whether the act of the
respondents in inducting the three medical practitioners constituted sub-letting or
not. This point, no doubt, has to be determined on the basis of evidence adduced
before the fact-finding forum. The dispute involved in this appeal does not give rise to
any complex legal question. Thus, in exercise of our jurisdiction under Article 136 of
the Constitution of India, scope of our interference would be limited to the issue as to
whether the decision of the High Court in upsetting the order of eviction passed by
the Appellate Tribunal suffered from any element of perversity or not. It has been
urged before us on behalf of the appellant that the High Court ought not to have
interfered in the matter as the order of the Appellate Tribunal was based on
appreciation of evidence and bore no taint of perversity which would have warranted
interference under Article 227 of the Constitution of India. Several authorities have
been relied upon before us by the learned counsel appearing for the parties. These
authorities mainly deal with the nature and scope of occupation in a rented property
of persons not being tenant but inducted by the latter which would attract the
mischief of sub-letting. These authorities relate to specific instances of induction of
persons by the tenant based on the facts of each case. The appellant has cited the
cases of:-

(i) Flora Elias Nahoum & Ors. v. Idrish Ali Laskar [(2018) 2 SCC 485]

(ii) Celina Coelho Pereira (Ms) & Ors. v. Ulhas Mahabaleshwar Kholkar & Ors.
[(2010) 1 SCC 217]

3

M/S Puri Investments vs M/S Young Friends And Co. on 23 February, 2022

(iii) Bharat Sales Ltd. v. Life Insurance Corporation of India [(1998) 3 SCC 1]

(iv) Smt. Rajbir Kaur & Anr. v. S Chokesiri & Co. [(1989) 1 SCC 19]

(v) Chimajirao Kanhojirao Shirke & Anr. v. Oriental Fire & General Insurance Co.
Ltd. [(2000) 6 SCC 622].

Mr. Rana Mukherjee, learned senior counsel for the respondents, on the other hand, has cited the
following authorities including the case of Flora Elias Nahoum (supra). These cases are:-

(i) Dipak Banerjee v. Lilabati Chakraborty [(1987) 4 SCC 161]

(ii) Jagan Nath v. Chander Bhan & Ors. [(1988) 3 SCC 57]

(iii) Shalimar Tar Products Ltd. v. H. C. Sharma & Ors.

[(1988) 1 SCC 70]

(iv) Ram Murti Devi v. Pushpa Devi & Ors. [(2017) 15 SCC 230].

In our view, the guiding principles which emerge from these authorities on the question which we
are addressing in this judgment can be adopted from the following three decisions:-

(i)      Ram Murti Devi (supra)

(ii)      Flora Elias Nahoum (supra)

(iii)     Bharat Sales Ltd. (supra)

8. In the case of Ram Murti Devi (supra), it has been held:-

“21.1. In a suit by the landlord for eviction of the tenant on the ground of sub-letting
the landlord has to prove by leading evidence that:

(a) A third party was found to be in exclusive possession of the whole or part of
rented property.

(b) Parting of possession thereof was for monetary consideration.

21.2. The onus to prove sub-letting is on the landlord and if he has established parting of possession
in favour of a third party either wholly or partly, the onus would shift to the tenant to explain.” In
the case of Flora Elias Nahoum (supra) the question of burden to establish sub-letting has been
discussed and it has been observed:-

4

M/S Puri Investments vs M/S Young Friends And Co. on 23 February, 2022

“36. In our view, since the respondent had admitted the presence of Joynal Mullick in
the suit shop, the burden was on him to prove its nature and the capacity in which he
used to sit in the suit shop.” In that case, plea of sub-letting was made on the
allegation of inducting one Joynal Mullick in a shop room by the tenant.

9. On the question of onus to establish receipt of monetary consideration by the
tenant from the person whose induction gives rise to cause of action based on
sub-letting, it has been held in the case of Bharat Sales Ltd. (supra):-

“4. Sub-tenancy or sub-letting comes into existence when the tenant gives up
possession of the tenanted accommodation, wholly or in part, and puts another
person in exclusive possession thereof. This arrangement comes about obviously
under a mutual agreement or understanding between the tenant and the person to
whom the possession is so delivered. In this process, the landlord is kept out of the
scene. Rather, the scene is enacted behind the back of the landlord, concealing the
overt acts and transferring possession clandestinely to a person who is an utter
stranger to the landlord, in the sense that the landlord had not let out the premises to
that person nor had he allowed or consented to his entering into possession over the
demised property. It is the actual, physical and exclusive possession of that person,
instead of the tenant, which ultimately reveals to the landlord that the tenant to
whom the property was let out has put some other person into possession of that
property. In such a situation, it would be difficult for the landlord to prove, by direct
evidence, the contract or agreement or understanding between the tenant and the
sub-tenant. It would also be difficult for the landlord to prove, by direct evidence,
that the person to whom the property had been sub-let had paid monetary
consideration to the tenant. Payment of rent, undoubtedly, is an essential element of
lease or sub-lease. It may be paid in cash or in kind or may have been paid or
promised to the paid. It may have been paid in lump-sum in advance covering the
period for which the premises is let out or sub-let or it may have been paid or
promised to be paid periodically. Since payment of rent or monetary consideration
may have been made secretly, the law does not require such payment to be proved by
affirmative evidence and the court is permitted to draw its own inference upon the
facts of the case proved at the trial, including the delivery of exclusive possession to
infer that the premises were sub-let.”

10. In the case before us, occupation of a portion of the subject-premises by the three
doctors stands admitted. What has been argued by the learned counsel for the
appellant is that once the Tribunal had arrived at a finding on fact based on the
principles of law, which have been enunciated by this Court, and reflected in the
aforesaid passages quoted from the three authorities, the interference by the High
Court under Article 227 of the Constitution of India was unwarranted. To persuade us
to sustain the High Court’s order, learned counsel appearing for the respondents has
emphasized that full control over the premises was never ceded to the medical
practitioners and the entry and exit to the premises in question remained under

5

M/S Puri Investments vs M/S Young Friends And Co. on 23 February, 2022

exclusive control of the respondent(s)-tenant. This is the main defence of the tenant.
We have considered the submissions of the respective counsel and also gone through
the decisions of the fact-finding fora and also that of the High Court. At this stage, we
cannot revisit the factual aspects of the dispute. Nor can we re-appreciate evidence to
assess the quality thereof, which has been considered by the two fact-finding fora.
The view of the forum of first instance was reversed by the Appellate Tribunal. The
High Court was conscious of the restrictive nature of jurisdiction under Article 227 of
the Constitution of India. In the judgment under appeal, it has been recorded that it
could not subject the decision of the appellate forum in a manner which would
project as if it was sitting in appeal. It proceeded, on such observation being made, to
opine that it was the duty of the supervisory Court to interdict if it was found that
findings of the appellate forum were perverse. Three situations were spelt out in the
judgment under appeal as to when a finding on facts or questions of law would be
perverse. These are:-

(i) Erroneous on account of non-consideration of material evidence, or

(ii) Being conclusions which are contrary to the evidence, or

(iii) Based on inferences that are impermissible in law.

11. We are in agreement with the High Court’s enunciation of the principles of law on scope of
interference by the supervisory Court on decisions of the fact-finding forum. But having gone
through the decisions of the two stages of fact-finding by the statutory fora, we are of the view that
there was overstepping of this boundary by the supervisory Court. In its exercise of scrutinizing the
evidence to find out if any of the three aforesaid conditions were breached, there was
re-appreciation of evidence itself by the supervisory Court.

12. In our opinion, the High Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 227 of the Constitution
of India in the judgment under appeal had gone deep into the factual arena to disagree with the final
fact-finding forum. There is no dispute that the three medical practitioners were in occupation of
part of the premises in question. The onus, under such circumstances, was on the respondents to
establish the degree of control they were maintaining over the said premises for repelling the plea of
sub-letting or assignment or parting with possession. From the passage of the judgment of this
Court in the case of Bharat Sales Ltd. (supra) above, it transpires that it was also the respondents’
obligation to demonstrate that there was no monetary consideration on the basis of which the
medical practitioners were allowed to operate from the subject premises. Though, it was a chemist
shop, evidence reveals that the portion of the premises of which the three medical practitioners were
in occupation consisted of individual cabins and had separate telephone connections. These are the
factors, on the basis of which, the Appellate Tribunal came to its conclusion against the respondents.
The Appellate Forum found:-

“26. I may observe that the job of a doctor is basically to provide consultancy. He is
not to sell any goods. He is only to examine the patients and prescribe treatment and

6

M/S Puri Investments vs M/S Young Friends And Co. on 23 February, 2022

charge his fee. For doing so aforesaid, he only requires a place where he can sit, the
client can come, the doctor may have privacy and is able to write a prescription to the
client and, if required, to examine him either on a dental chair in the case of a
Dentists or a bed in case of other patients and nothing else. All these facilities were
being made available to the doctors who came to the suit premises and that also in
exclusive portion, i.e., Mezzanine floor without any interference even by the tenant.
Merely because the doctors had to come at fixed hours would not make their
occupation merely that of a licensee and not of a sub-tenant, because now it is a
matter of common sense and common knowledge that many buildings have a
common central door where a lock is put by a guard who opens the same in the
morning and closes the same in the evening while everyone occupying a portion of
the building uses his own portion as and when they are required to come as also it is
being done in the case of a lawyer. The lawyer also comes only in the office hours and
in the day is not expected to remain in his chamber. However, in the case of a lawyer,
he is required to maintain a library and records and might be using his library. But in
the case of a doctor, he is not required to keep any lock because what he is required to
do is to come, sit, provide consultancy and go. Thus, for the period for which he is in
his clinic, he has exclusive possession thereof. It does not matter that before starting
his practice and closing the same, the premises is not even locked by him. It is
nobody’s case that till such time, the doctors were permitted to run their practice in
the polyclinic, they were asked to go back even during the hours fixed for opening the
clinic. Merely because the first Respondent being a chemist was also being benefitted
in selling his medicines will not permit a tenant to allow number of doctors to sit and
run their own consultancy including the Dentist who otherwise may not have
anything to do with the sale of medicine and is required to fix teeth which are
prepared elsewhere and not by the first Respondent or by cleaning the teeth which is
the major service provided by the Dentist. Moreover, permitting a Dentist to have his
own chair in a clinic where visiting hours are limited, would not make the doctor only
a licencee.

27. At this juncture, I may observe that user of the property by licencees are those
cases where family members, a wife, or a son have been permitted to use a portion of
the suit property along with the tenant who happens to be either the father or the
husband or a near relative which is not the case here.

28. As a matter of fact, the arrangement which was being followed between the
tenant and the doctor, namely Respondent nos. 2 to 4, makes it explicit that that user
of the suit premises that too of Mezzanine floor was exclusive for the time they were
permitted to run their practice and must have been under a secret arrangement
between the tenant and the doctors to which the landlord cannot have access and he
can only infer that some kind of consideration must have passed by the sub-tenant in
favour of the tenant which must be the only reason as to why the first Respondent
permitted user of portion of suit property to Respondent nos. 2 to 4 on regular
intervals and also permitted them to put their names outside the polyclinic including

7

M/S Puri Investments vs M/S Young Friends And Co. on 23 February, 2022

the timings of their coming. The tenant even allowed them to have their own
telephones installed in the suit premises so as to facilitate the clients to have the
consultancy at a time convenient to the doctor and the patient without any
interference of the tenant in this regard. Such kind of arrangement cannot be termed
as mere licence and must be treated as exclusive possession though for a short period
and would certainly furnish a ground for eviction under Section 14(1)(b) of the Delhi
Rent Control Act. Accordingly, the Trial Court has not appreciated this fine
distinction of law and, therefore, the findings returned by the Trial Court suffer from
material irregularity and calls for interference by this appellate court.”

13. There was no perversity in the order of the Appellate Tribunal on the basis of which the High
Court could have interfered. In our view, the High Court tested the legality of the order of the
Tribunal through the lens of an appellate body and not as a supervisory Court in adjudicating the
application under Article 227 of the Constitution of India. This is impermissible. The finding of the
High Court that the appellate forum’s decision was perverse and the manner in which such finding
was arrived at was itself perverse.

14. For these reasons, we set aside the judgment of the High Court and restore the Appellate
Tribunal’s findings.

15. On conclusion of the dictation of this judgment, which was pronounced in open Court, Mr. Rana
Mukherjee, learned senior counsel prayed for some time to enable the respondents to vacate the
premises in question. We are also apprised that the respondents had paid occupation charges at the
rate of rupees thirty thousand per month from 15.05.2009 till 14.11.2018. It is an admitted position,
as confirmed by the learned counsel for the appellant as well as the respondents, that subsequent to
that date payment of occupation charges at the rate of rupees thirty thousand per month has been
stopped. It has been stated by Mr. Mukherjee that the respondents were remitting rupees ninety per
month thereafter, being the original rent, but the appellant had refused to receive the same.

16. We accordingly direct that the appellant would be entitled to occupation charges rupees thirty
thousand per month from 14.11.2018 till the subject-premises are vacated by the respondents, and
the respondents must vacate the premises within a period of 53 weeks from date. A sum of rupees
one lac shall be remitted to the appellant within one month from date and rupees twelve lacs within
six months from date. So far as the occupation charges for the period of 53 weeks from today is
concerned, by which period the respondents shall vacate the premises, the respondents shall remit
to the bank account of the appellant the said sum of rupees thirty thousand per month by the last
date of each month and if any further sum is found due on computation made in the manner
indicted above, such additional sum shall also be remitted within the aforesaid period of six months.

17. The period permitting the respondents to continue in occupation shall remain unconditional for
a month from today, by which time the respondents shall give an undertaking that they would
vacate the premises in question on or before 28.02.2023 and shall handover the peaceful and vacant
possession to the appellant also by that date, i.e., on or before 28.02.2023. Such undertaking shall
be in the form of an affidavit. This undertaking shall be filed in this Court within a period of one

8

M/S Puri Investments vs M/S Young Friends And Co. on 23 February, 2022

month from date. The respondents or any one of them shall not create any third-party rights qua the
premises in question in the meantime.

18. The appeal stands allowed in the above terms.

19. There shall be no order as to costs.

………………………………., J (VINEET SARAN) ………………………………., J (ANIRUDDHA BOSE) NEW
DELHI;

23rd February, 2022

9