Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

Author: S. Ravindra Bhat

Bench: Bela. M. Trivedi, S. Ravindra Bhat, Uday Umesh Lalit

1

REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 248-250 OF 2015

MANOJ & ORS.                                                                  ...APPELLANT(S)

VERSUS

STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH                                                     ...RESPONDENT(S)
JUDGMENT

S. RAVINDRA BHAT, J.

1. The present judgment will dispose of three appeals1 preferred by three accused persons. They
were convicted under Section 302 of Indian Penal Code (IPC) (3 counts) imposed with death penalty
by the judgment and orders of the First Additional Sessions Judge, Indore2. This was confirmed by
a Division Bench of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh at Indore3.

2. The appellants (Manoj, Rahul @ Govind and Neha Verma, hereafter referred by their names)
were convicted for offence punishable under Section 302 IPC (three counts) for committing the
murder, during the course of robbery, of Megha Deshpande, Ashlesha Deshpande and Smt. Rohini
Phadke on 19.06.2011. All three appellants were sentenced to capital punishment with fine of
(cid:128)1000/- on each count, and in default of payment of fine, to undergo 6 months additional rigorous
imprisonment (RI) on each count. Under Section 397 IPC, they were sentenced to undergo 10 years
RI with fine of (cid:128) 1000/- and in default of payment of fine, 6 months additional RI. Under Section
449 IPC, they were sentenced to undergo 10 years RI with fine of (cid:128)1000/-, and in default of
payment of fine, 6 months additional RI. Manoj and Rahul @ Govind were 19:43:01 IST Reason:

1 Criminal Appeal No. 248-250/2015 2 Dated 13.12.2013 passed in Sessions Case No.
536/2011 3 Dated 29.09.2014 passed in Criminal Appeal No. 3/2014, 266/2014 &
Criminal Reference No. 04/2013 also convicted for offence punishable under Section
25(1-B) (B) of the Arms Act and sentenced to undergo 1 year RI with fine of (cid:128)1000/-
and in default of payment of fine, 6 months additional RI. Rahul was also convicted

1

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

under Section 27 of the Arms Act and sentenced to undergo 3 years RI with fine of
(cid:128)3000/- and in default of payment of fine, 6 months additional RI.

Facts

3. The facts are that PW-1 Niranjan Deshpande rented a part of House no. 24 Shrinagar Main from
its landlord PW-5 Vishal Pandey, few days before the date of incident i.e., 19.06.2011. Niranjan’s
wife Megha, daughter Ashlesha and mother-in-law Smt. Rohini Phadke were at those premises,
residing there. In the evening of that day another tenant PW-2 Dipti Kapil who lived on the same
floor told PW-5 Vishal Pandey that Niranjan’s flat was bolted from the outside and reported seeing
patches of blood on the door. On receiving this information, the landlord went to enquire. When no
one opened the door, he looked through the open window and saw the dead bodies of the deceased
persons lying near the bedroom door and blood was on the floor. He called his neighbour PW-9
Mahesh Parmar and Mukesh on the spot, before telephoning PW-1 Niranjan Deshpande to reach
there immediately. PW-5 Vishal Pandey also lodged a first information report (FIR) at Police Station
MIG Colony, Indore 4 which was recorded by PW-31 Inspector Mohan Singh Yadav (investigating
officer “IO”). The FIR alleging that some unknown persons murdered the three deceased ladies with
sharp weapons and fled the scene, registered offences punishable under Section 302 IPC and 25
Arms Act.

4. The police reached the premises and prepared a spot map of the crime scene. Several articles
found at the spot were seized. It was later (on the next day) reported that Megha’s golden bangles
and Mangalsutra, Rohini Phadke’s two gold bangles, and Ashlesha’s mobile phone, camera and ATM
cards were missing. Investigation started and on 22.06.2011 at around 06:00 AM, PW-28 Vijay
Chauhan while on patrolling duty, spotted Neha Verma outside an ATM near L.I.G, under
suspicious circumstances. On receiving this information, the IO (PW-31) along with PW-4 Banno
Solanki and others, reached the spot. Neha Verma was searched. This yielded an ATM card, which
belonged to the deceased Ashlesha. Neha was taken for questioning; her disclosure statements led to
her subsequent arrest. Based on information she provided, the police recovered some robbed
articles from her house.

5. Upon disclosure statements of Neha the other accused i.e., Rahul @ Govind and Manoj were
arrested and from their possession the robbed jewellery, knife and a pistol was seized. Investigation
revealed that during the alleged incident Rahul @ Govind inadvertently shot his own foot and
recorded a false FIR in this regard at the Annapurna Police Station by dehatinalisi dated
19.06.20115 against unknown persons. Accordingly, an FIR6 was registered by PW-30 ASI R. S.
Makwana for offences punishable under Sections 294, 307 and 34 IPC. Manoj was also injured
during the incident and secured treatment from PW-8 Dr. Achutmal Tejwani. The clothes and shoes
worn by the accused were seized; and parts of the broken and disposed mobile phone and camera
were also recovered and seized pursuant to their disclosure statements. The appellants underwent
identification parade. Their fingerprints were examined, the seized articles were sent for chemical
and DNA test and permission for prosecution was taken.

2

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

6. After conclusion of investigation, the police filed a final report indicting the appellants for
commission of offence under Sections 302, 397 and 449 IPC and Section 25, 27 of Arms Act. The
trial court framed charges against the accused under Sections 397/34 in alternative 302/34 and 449
IPC, and besides 5 Ex. P103-C 6 Ex. P107 these charges Manoj was charged under section 25(1-B)
(B) of Arms Act, 1959 and Rahul @ Govind was charged under S. 25(1-B) (B) and 27 of Arms Act. All
the appellants abjured their guilt and claimed trial. The prosecution examined 36 witnesses and
produced certain documents (Ex. P1-P129) in support of their case. After recording the evidence of
prosecution, the appellants’ statements were recorded under Section 313 Criminal Procedure Code
(CrPC). The appellants examined a total of 6 defence witnesses and produced certain documents
(Ex. D1-D50) in support of their case.

Trial Court’s findings

7. As the entire case was based on circumstantial evidence, upon appreciation of the material
evidence adduced by the prosecution, the trial court concluded that the accused persons were
present at the scene of occurrence on 19.06.2011 at about 5:00-5:15 PM and that evidence of experts
who lifted the fingerprints of the accused (from the house) along with the testimonies of PW-1,
PW-2, PW-5, PW-9 and PW-31 proved that they had entered into the house. Upon recovery of the
knife and firearm which caused the death, it was established by way of chemical, DNA as well as
ballistic examination that those articles were used and that during the sequence of the incident,
blood of the deceased persons was found on the clothes of the accused persons. The trial court
further concluded that the footprints at the crime scene were similar to those of the shoes recovered
from the accused persons, and the gun shot injury caused by the bullet which hit the foot of Rahul @
Govind as well as the bullet which hit the body of the deceased, were fired from the same weapon,
which was recovered from his possession. It was held that this left no doubt in establishing the guilt
of Rahul and Manoj, and during the whole incident The evidence also proved Neha’s presence at
that time. The trial court held that this established her involvement in the crime along with the
accused persons; every hypothesis of the innocence of the accused was ruled out.

8. After considering the evidence on record, the trial court convicted the appellants of committing
the offences they were charged with. On the point of sentence, the trial court took the view that
given the magnitude and diabolic manner in which the offences were committed, the case on hand
fell under the category of rarest of the rare case and warranted death penalty.

High Court’s findings confirming the Trial Court’s order

9. The Division Bench of the High Court7 confirmed the sentences imposed on the appellants and
the reference made by the trial court was answered in the affirmative. The High Court concluded
that the forensic experts as well as the neighbours and the investigating officer had seen the
blood-stained floor, walls, and bedsheets, and that the evidence produced on record with respect to
them did not leave any major lacuna in the case of the prosecution; further, the presence of the
accused in the house, their intention of committing such a heinous crime, and the manner in which
the accused persons had caused the death, had been duly proved.

3

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

10. The High Court relied upon the statements of fingerprint expert PW-24 K.K. Dwivedi who
visited the site and lifted the chance fingerprints which matched with the appellants’ fingerprints, as
well as jewellery recovered from their possession -which was identified by PW-1 and PW-3 as
belonging to the deceased. The weapons (knife and country made pistol) used for the commission of
the offence were recovered from the accused and the same was proved. Also, the accused persons
were duly identified in open court by the witnesses pursuant to their depositions.

7 High Court of Madhya Pradesh, Bench at Indore vide order dt. 29.09.2014 in Criminal Appeal No.
3/2014, Criminal Reference No. 4/2013 and Criminal Appeal No. 266/2014.

11. The High Court further held that the accused, during their examination under Section 313 CrPC
failed to explain their conduct and even gave incorrect and false answers. It therefore affirmed the
trial court’s conclusions and findings.

12. Upon examination of whether this case would fall in the category of “rarest of rare case” to justify
the imposition of capital punishment on the appellants, the High Court was of the view that as the
incident shook the collective conscience of the community and the acts of murder committed by the
appellants were so gruesome, merciless and brutal, the aggravating circumstances far outweighed
the mitigating circumstances and hence, this case fell under the category of rarest of the rare case
which manifests society’s abhorrence of such crime.

Contentions on behalf of the Appellants

13. Ms. Anjana Prakash, learned senior counsel appearing pro bono for Rahul and Manoj, contended
that the evidence of witnesses, i.e., police witnesses and private witnesses in this case raise questions
as to whether Neha was arrested at the time and at the spot claimed by the prosecution, whether her
disclosure statements were genuine, whether the disclosures were made as claimed, and whether
subsequent arrests and recoveries were in the manner claimed by the prosecution.

14. It was urged that PW-4 lady constable Banno Solanki deposed to having gone to the ATM
machine, searched Neha, leading to recovery of Ashlesha’s ATM card. However, she contradicted the
IO and other witnesses about the place of her interrogation. PW-4 deposed that Neha was
interrogated at the Police Station where she said that some ornaments and ATM cards were in her
house. This was confirmed by PW-6 Triyambak @ Prafulla and PW-36 Mulayam Singh Yadav.
However, the prosecution did not explain why no arrest memo/ information memo was prepared at
the Police Station. It is argued that this is pertinent as there is a serious dispute about the arrests
and recoveries itself, as also the manner claimed by the prosecution. Also, PW-4 the female
constable escorting the female accused, did not corroborate the prosecution that any recoveries were
made from Neha’s house after her interrogation. She was silent about whether she was part of the
police team which went to the house of Neha in her examination-in-chief. In cross examination she
deposed to sitting in the same vehicle as Neha while going to her house. The presence of PW-4 is
only confirmed by witnesses of the search team (i.e., PW-3 Dr Deepak Hari Ranadey and PW-31 IO
Mohan Singh). PW-4 further did not support the prosecution that Neha had disclosed the names of
Rahul and Manoj or having accompanied Neha (which would be expected, the accused being a

4

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

woman) to the house of the two accused and the resulting subsequent recoveries. She deposed that
the police party returned to the police station from Neha’s house in the private vehicle. This suggests
that the arrest memo (Ex. P9) and Information Memo (Ex. P10) made at that time and place is false
and as a result, the subsequent story of Neha leading the police party to the houses of Rahul and
Manoj are also false.

15. It was further stated that PW-31 deposed that PW-28 Vijay Chauhan, informed PW-19 Y.R.
Gaikwad, about spotting a girl standing suspiciously near an ATM for which PW-19 made a Station
Diary entry and informed him via wireless. PW-31 therefore went to the police station, constituting a
team – comprising himself, PW-4, PW-19, PW-28 and PW-36 – which left for the ATM spot and
thereafter to Neha’s house (and those of Rahul and Manoj). It is submitted that neither was the
Station Diary produced, nor did PW-19 corroborate the deposition of PW-31 at all. Likewise, there
was variance between the statement of PW-28 and PW-31, on whether he was in the raiding party
that went to Neha’s house.

16. Counsel further argued that PW-31 deposed about various persons accompanying him, when he
learnt about Neha loitering suspiciously. However, he omitted to mention PW-19, who received
information and told him about Neha’s movement, at PW-28’s behest. This suggests that Neha was
in fact, interrogated at the Police Station. So, there was no reason for not preparing an arrest memo
or recording disclosure statement at that point in time, in the police station itself, even though the
ATM card had been recovered. PW-31 did not offer any explanation as to why the disclosure was
made on the way in the police vehicle. Counsel also referred to PW-4’s deposition, which was silent
on this aspect. Furthermore, counsel highlighted that though family members, particularly Neha’s
father were available, they were not intimated about her arrest, nor were their signatures taken on
the arrest memo. It was urged that all these in fact corroborate the defence submission that Neha’s
arrest did not take place as contended by the prosecution.

17. Moving on to the arrest of Rahul and Manoj, some discrepancies in the form of injuries found on
their person and the manner their occurrence was recorded before their disclosure statements (Ex.
P12-P13 in the case of Rahul and Ex. P15-P16 in the case of Manoj), were pointed out. How these
injuries occurred in fact was recorded before the disclosure statement. It was submitted that after
Neha’s arrest, recoveries were made from Rahul’s house (Ex. P14) at 09:10 AM. Here, Ex. P12 i.e.,
arrest memo dated 22.06.2011 of Rahul @ Govind made no mention of any injury on Rahul’s foot
despite mentioning an old firearm wound on the left elbow in column 9 of the arrest memo, which is
where the police noted the injuries. It was urged that this was an irreconcilable circumstance against
the prosecution’s case that Rahul had a bullet injury on his left leg.

18. It was submitted that Manoj’s arrest then took place at 10:05 AM from his house (Ex. P15). His
disclosure statement was recorded at 10:15 AM (Ex. P16) and seizures were made at 10:35 AM (Ex.
P17). The arrest memo of Manoj (Ex. P15), however, does not record the injury on the elbow even
while it notes signs of an injury on the nose in column 9 of the arrest memo which is where the
police is supposed to record injuries present on the body of the accused at the time of arrest. The
prosecution case is that on 22.06.2011 from 6:00 AM till 4:40 PM various seizures were made and
documents were prepared. However, there is evidence to show that a press conference was held in

5

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

the office of DW-3 Sanjay Rana, IG Indore between 12:30 PM to post 1:00 PM and even before the
press conference, PW-31 IO had informed him that the investigation was done and Neha was
arrested, and that he had conducted the seizure procedure from the accused. This falsifies the story
of the recovery of shoe at the instance of Rahul Ex. P21 [reliance is placed on DW-3 and DW-5].

19. Ms. Prakash contended that PW-31 IO deposed to interrogating Rahul on 23.06.2011 before two
witnesses - but did not name them. Rahul reportedly disclosed that he had kept his clothes and knife
in a bag in his motorcycle and Manoj had broken the stolen mobile and camera and thrown them
near a Maruti Showroom. He then prepared the information memo (Ex. P28) at 07:50 AM. He
interrogated Manoj in the presence of two witnesses (who he did not name) who allegedly confessed
that he had concealed the clothes and shoes worn by him in his father's almirah and had thrown a
broken mobile near the Maruti showroom at Rau. He then prepared information memo (Ex. P31),
recorded at 08:05 AM. PW-31 also interrogated Neha in the presence of two witnesses (who were
again, not named) who revealed that she had kept her clothes and sandals worn by her in the dicky
of her Scooty. He then prepared information memo (Ex. P34) at 08:15 AM. It was submitted that
since the accused had made their disclosures on the date of their arrest, it appears strange and
unnatural that truncated recovery statements would be given at different stages of investigation.
Counsel urged that there was no explanation as to why PW-31 IO does not reveal either the time of
recording of statements or the names of the witnesses.

20. Commenting on the recoveries made on 23.06.2011, it was submitted that no explanation was
furnished as to why truncated recoveries were made on different dates, as was claimed by the
prosecution. Further, the witness to these recoveries PW-7 Sandeep Narulkar, appears to be a stock
witness who stated that he reached the police station at 8:45 AM on 23.06.2011, i.e., after the
disclosure statements (Ex. P28, P31 and P34) were recorded. In the chief examination, this witness
deposed that Rahul disclosed before him that he could get the clothes, knife, lens of camera
recovered. Manoj disclosed keeping his clothes in his father's house and Neha about having kept her
clothes in her vehicle parked behind a hospital. Then police prepared memos Ex. P28, P31 and P34
respectively and recovered articles of which memos were prepared as Ex. P29, P31 & P34
respectively. It is pointed out that PW-7 does not say anything about a lady police officer in the team
which would have been required on account of involvement of female accused Neha. It was urged
that non- examination of the other witness (Prakash lchke) assumes great significance and without
any explanation for his non-examination it cannot be said that the recoveries are reliable.

21. Counsel cast serious doubts as to the recovery by police on 22.06.2011 and 23.06.2011. She
particularly pointed to the fact that a photograph of Rahul wearing a black beaded bracelet was
found from his house and seized as Ex. P14. This was not made pursuant to any disclosure and
apparently was seized during the process of seizing other items. During the cross-examination of
PW- 31 IO, a suggestion was made that this picture was clicked when the bracelet was forced to be
worn by the accused. The IO denied the suggestion. Likewise, a photograph of Manoj, wearing
sunglasses was seized from his house and exhibited as Ex. P17. This was in the course of his
disclosure statement leading to recovery of other articles. However, in Rahul’s case, there was no
disclosure statement. Neither of the seizure memos mentioned from where in the premises, these
articles were found. Further, the recoveries were not spoken about in the depositions of the recovery

6

witnesses.

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

22. It was next argued that neither PW-3 nor PW-6 said anything regarding the sealing of the seized
items Ex. P11, P14 and P17) in their presence on 22.06.2011 and 23.06.2011. Similarly, the witness
(for recoveries made on 23.06.2011) PW-7, did not mention who placed seals on the items Ex. P29,
P30, P32, P33 and P35. PW-6 could not recollect the sealing of the articles on 22.06.2011. Likewise
in Ex. P35 disclosure by Neha and recovery of items on 23.06.2011 do not mention the sealing of the
items. Counsel also compared the depositions of the panch witnesses with the evidence of PW-12
Tehsildar and PW-36 Mulayam Singh Yadav (head constable, MIG). It was submitted that these
witnesses nowhere mentioned the particulars of sealing, what kind of seals were placed or the
signatures of persons, who had witnessed the recovery and sealing of the articles. It is therefore
argued that the recoveries on 22.06.2011 are unreliable. Learned counsel submitted that in all
likelihood, the accused were in police custody for a longer period than what was projected, which
raises doubts over the veracity and voluntariness of the disclosure statements by them. She also
submitted that recoveries of next day i.e., 23.06.2011 are similarly unreliable as they were not
recorded in the presence of witnesses PW-7 and Prakash Ichke. PW-7 arrived at the police station
that day at 8:45 AM, the disclosure statements however were recorded earlier between 7:50 and 8:15
AM – evidenced by Ex. P28, P31 and P34. Signatures of the witnesses were taken on those
documents. It was submitted that the oral evidence completely undermines and falsifies preparation
of documents at the date and time mentioned. Therefore, recoveries are dubious inasmuch as they
purport to have been made pursuant to disclosure statements on the same day, which were recorded
before the witnesses even reached the police station. Another suspicious circumstance according to
counsel was that recoveries were made in the afternoon, starting from 02:45 PM after a gap of 6
hours. The timing of Ex. P29, P30, P32, P33 and P35, are shown in this regard. It is argued that
when the disclosure statements were recorded latest at 8:15 AM, the police did not offer any
explanation why the recoveries took place in the afternoon only after a lapse of six hours.

23. It was further submitted that recoveries are also suspect because the details were published in
newspapers, both on 22.06.2011 and 23.06.2011. Learned counsel relied on Ex. D4, published on
22.6.2011 which mentions the recovery of a pistol and knife from the accused. These recoveries were
made that day at 9:30 AM and 10:35 AM. Importantly, the learned counsel argued that the chain of
custody of the shoe allegedly belonging to Rahul which was seized from an open place within
jurisdiction of the Annapurna police station on 22.6.2011 as propounded by the prosecution, is
suspect as it was soon photographed in a newspaper published on 23.6.2011, while in the hands of
the police officer. Reliance is placed on Ex. D6 in this regard.

24. It was next pointed out that the accused were produced before a magistrate on 23.6.2011. The
record reveals that the arrests were made in the morning of 22.06.2011, and several articles were
seized pursuant to the disclosure statements of the accused and consequently, recoveries effected.
However, the magistrate was not shown these articles nor was any memo produced before the
magistrate at the time of the production of the accused on 23.6.2011. This procedural irregularity as
highlighted by the senior counsel is contrary to Section 102(3) CrPC which requires every police
officer to forthwith report seizure of any article to a magistrate having jurisdiction. Counsel relies on
Umesh Tukaram Padwal & Anr. v. State of Maharashtra8, to say that non- compliance is fatal to the

7

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

prosecution story.

8 (2019) 8 SCC 567

25. Ms. Prakash also contended that PW-10 Dilip Sen is a chance witness whose testimony is
unreliable because it contains contradictions and material improvements. It contains a material
contradiction regarding his reporting to the police about seeing all the three accused. In his
examination-in-chief, he stated that he read about the incident in the newspaper and therefore,
went and informed the police about the incident. In his cross examination, however, he said that he
did not read the newspaper and went to the police station without reading the newspaper. He also
mentions going to the police station for another reason (to get a gumasta license) and upon
overhearing discussions going on there about this case, he volunteered information. Further his
testimony is unbelievable as, given the description of the scene of crime, the clothes of the accused
should have also been smeared with blood. The recovery memos of the clothes of the accused (Ex.
P29, P32, and P35) shows that the clothes worn by the accused on the day of the incident were light
in colour on which blood would have been easily visible. Moreover, PW-10 explained his presence
near the place of occurrence since he wanted to check if House No. 23 was available for rental
purposes. However, the prosecution has not sufficiently established his presence near the place of
occurrence as the owner of House No. 23 was not examined and no other evidence was led to
confirm the presence of PW-10 at the place of occurrence. PW-10 further improved from his
statement under Section 161 CrPC (Ex. D7) with respect to Neha’s presence at the place. Likewise,
learned counsel submitted that PW-8 Achyutmal Tejwani (whose deposition was relied on by the
prosecution, to say that he treated Manoj), is an unreliable witness. His credentials as a medical
practitioner, was doubted:

counsel relied on the witnesses’ cross-examination and submitted that this witness
had migrated to India from Pakistan, and in all probability was beholden to the
police.

26. Learned counsel submitted that the delay of 25 days in conducting the test identification parade
(TIP) is unexplained. The delay assumes significance since unveiled photographs of the accused
were published across newspapers starting from 23.06.2011. In this regard, reliance is placed on Ex.
D6, D45 and D48 which are newspaper articles containing photographs. Furthermore, it was
submitted that the procedure of the TIP was questionable as Rahul and Manoj were made to stand
together in the TIP line-up. The identification memo does not record the appearances of the other
persons. Ms. Prakash submitted that Rahul and Manoj do not look similar - she relied on the arrest
memos Ex. P12 and P15 to support her argument. PW-10 in his cross examination stated that some
persons were tall, others were short; some were fair and others, dark. Therefore, the combined TIP
procedure was faulty and could not have been relied on. In this regard, counsel relied on Lal Singh
and others v. State of U.P9, Muthuswami v. State of Madras10 and Mohammed Abdul Hafeez v.
State of AP11 to say that in the absence of individual distinguishing features, a TIP of the accused
conducted after a relatively long time may not be relied upon by the courts.

8

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

27. Learned senior counsel submitted that there was serious doubt about the identity of Rahul, who
was referred to as “Govind” in all documents until the preparation of his arrest memo Ex. P12 on
22.06.2011. There was no reason why an alias for Rahul was associated with him in the arrest
memo. This raises doubt about the identity of the individual. All documents relating to the medical
treatment for the bullet injury as well as the case proceeding (Crime No. 377/2011 registered by
PW-29 crucially on the date of occurrence) refer to him as Govind. These were Ex. P103 -
dehatinalisi at 10:30 PM on 19.06.2011; Ex. P97 - letter of police to the District Hospital & report of
District Hospital Indore after examination of wounds and referring him to M.Y Hospital; Ex. P104 -
Crime details recorded at 11 PM on 19.06.2011; Ex. P105 - FIR of the shooting incident at 12:15 AM
on 20.06.2011; Ex. P101 - case closure report on 9 2003 (12) SCC 554 10 AIR 1954 SC 4 11 (1983) 1
SCC 143 29.06.2011; Ex. P113 at MY hospital signed by PW-32 Dr. Nilesh Guru on 20.06.2011.

28. Learned counsel submitted that the non-identification by the treating doctors (PW-26 and
PW-32) of Rahul, or even of PW-30 RS Makwana (of PS Annapurna) in TIP or in court, on the one
hand, and his identification by PW 29 Gourishankar Chadar (of PS Annapurna) in court as Govind
@ Rahul, assumes significance. Rahul was allegedly admitted in MY Hospital and there was ample
opportunity for the treating doctors, nurses, and other hospital staff to identify him. Their omission
to do so, raises serious doubts.

29. Ms. Prakash argued that material was suppressed regarding admission in hospital. In this
regard, it is pointed out that Ex. P113 only mentions the date of admission as 20.06.2011 and the
name of the patient is mentioned as Govind. There is no information on record regarding the
treatment given to him and the time of his discharge. This is more crucial as no one from the
hospital has deposed in order to prove the identity of the person being treated. Likewise, chain of
custody of the bullet extracted from Rahul was not proved. In this regard it was contended that
PW-32 Dr. Nilesh Guru extracted the bullet and deposited it in the medico-legal case section at MY
Hospital on 20.06.2011. He did not depose to sealing the bullet at all. A sealed bullet was collected
by PW- 30 from MY Hospital from an unknown doctor on 23.06.2011. The bullet was not sealed in
front of PW-30. Therefore, there is no evidence on record to prove who sealed the bullet and when.
It was urged that the magistrate's remand order dated 23.06.2011 omits mentioning of any injuries,
especially on Appellant 2 Rahul @ Govind which would have been visible since he had been
hospitalised. Furthermore, no MLCs of the accused persons were produced during the trial. It was
also contended that the prosecution version regarding reporting of a false case and seeking medical
treatment and informing PS Annapurna to alert them of the bullet by Rahul is unbelievable. Ex. P97
shows that it was prepared at PS Annapurna. From the document it appears that Govind was sent to
the District Hospital with a forwarding letter that curiously has a note seeking opinion on whether
the injury is self-inflicted. This directly contradicts the story of PW-29 that Rahul @ Govind had
shouted and alerted the police that he was going to the District Hospital.

30. In terms of Ex. P104 Rahul had signed the spot map prepared on 19.06.2011 at 11:00 PM.
However, it is also the case of the prosecution that Rahul was going to get his injured foot treated
and was admitted in hospital during that time. It appears that Constable Dinesh took Rahul to the
District Hospital and subsequently to MY Hospital. That constable has not been examined and no
reasons for non-examination were given. Learned counsel submitted that there is no material about

9

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

how Rahul went from District Hospital to the MY Hospital with a gunshot injury, or who took him
from the District Hospital to MY Hospital and who conducted his x-ray.

31. It was next argued that as far as seizure memo of the right shoe is concerned, the memo (Ex.
P75) was drawn at PS Annapurna at the behest of Abhay Tiwari, who too was not examined by the
prosecution. This makes the contents of the document inadmissible. PW-20 Harbhajan Singh did
not remember the logo on the shoe. He also did not depose as to which foot (left or right foot) did
the shoe fit, or its size. He did not say whether it was a sports or leather shoe and also does not
describe laces. PW-20 deposed that it was seized in his presence, however, he does not mention
whether the same was sealed in front of him. PW-29 merely described that Abhay Tiwari found the
shoe and it was contended that this was hearsay evidence. Importantly, there was no inquiry by the
prosecution to prove that the seized shoe was even the same size as Rahul @ Govind’s. His foot size
could have been measured under Sections 2(a) and 4 of the Identification of Prisoners Act, 1920
which was not done.

32. It was next urged that there were serious gaps in the TIP of the jewellery held on 09.07.2011 by
PW-12 Tehsildar. In this regard, it was pointed that PW-3 Deepak Ranade deposed those two
bangles were removed from Rohini’s hand and one kudi (earring) was removed from her body and
handed over to him. During jewellery identification proceedings, PW-1 identified Megha’s four (4)
bangles and Rohini’s two (2) bangles. It is unclear if bangles identified by PW-1 included those
handed over to PW-3. Further, if the bangles of deceased Rohini given to PW-3 were not the same as
those identified by PW-1, the two recovered bangles from the accused were not matched with those
given to PW-

3. It was also unclear if the jewellery was mixed with other items having similar designs, as required
by law. Similar pieces of broken mangalsutra should have been kept during the identification
proceedings as well. Further, the identification memo (Ex. P1) did not indicate how many similar
pieces of jewellery were mixed along with the jewellery identified. There is discrepancy in the
evidence of PW-1 and PW-3 as to what was said to have been stolen when questioned on 21.06.2011.
According to PW-3, on 21.06.2011 when he went along with PW-1 to the house of the deceased,
PW-1 only informed about the missing camera.

33. Challenging reliance on the DNA analysis report, counsel submitted that there was inordinate
delay in sending items to the forensic science laboratory (FSL). The items seized on 23.06.2011 were
sent for examination to the FSL on 13.07.2011 (after 20 days) as seen by Ex. P115. This delay was not
explained by the prosecution. Therefore, it was urged that records of the police malkhana and
conditions of safekeeping of items were important in this case. Also, statistical analysis was not
conducted which is an integral part of the scientific process. The lack of cross examination of the
DNA expert PW-35 Dr. Pankaj Shrivastava on this was argued to be immaterial since this goes to
admissibility of the DNA report as scientific evidence and this court should consider this serious gap
in the scientific process. Counsel submitted that blood reference samples of the deceased were not
collected and tested. The blood collected on cotton swabs found next to the dead bodies at the crime
scene were used as reference samples, which is unreliable. Lastly, counsel urged that no laboratory
records were submitted – PW-35 mentioned that in the observation sheet details of the samples

10

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

received and the testing were noted. This sheet was not submitted with the laboratory report. Also,
electropherograms were not submitted with the laboratory reports.

34. Turning next to the ballistic reports and the prosecution’s claim that the bullet extracted from
Rahul’s foot, and that recovered from Megha’s body were fired from the same weapon, it was
argued, that these circumstances were not proved, because of the unreliability with regard to the
manner of Rahul’s arrest, doubts about his identity, manner of seizure of the bullet from his foot, its
sealing, custody, and production in court. Counsel submitted that the articles were received by the
ballistic expert only on 14.07.2011; the ballistics report Ex. P120 is dated 30.07.2011.

35. Doubts were expressed about seals on the items seized from the crime scene, which included the
fired cartridges. According to the counsel their consequent matching with the test fire cartridge was
unreliable. It was urged that the presence of copper during the chemical analysis of the shoe is
unreliable since the shoe was seized at Annapurna PS and the witness Abhay Tiwari was not
examined. Further, the live cartridge’s primer cap (seized from the place of occurrence) had fallen
during examination by PW-16 Bheem Bahadur who was from the Arms Branch and had sealed the
cartridge. He, however, did not say that he had reloaded it. During the ballistics examination
however, it was found that Article A-6 contained a live 7.65 mm caliber pistol cartridge which was
marked LR1 (in Ex. P120). The description of LR1 states that it is a reloaded live cartridge. The seals
of the arms branch on the live bullet were intact when they were sent to the FSL on 13.07.2011 (Ex.
P115). These facts raised doubts about the chain of custody of Article A-6 (the live cartridge) given
the discrepancies in its condition. Further, it is unclear as to what was used for the test firing by the
FSL: if the live cartridge was used, it would not be possible since the primer cap had fallen off,
making it unusable. The Report (Ex. P120) did not mention the use of another test ammunition for
the firing test, whose description should have been provided as part of the report to ensure that the
same ammunition is being used. Counsel submitted that the fired cartridges found at the left side
and the legs of the deceased were not photographed - as evident from scene of crime report (Ex.
P77) and crime scene photos (Ex. P56). PW-9 did not see the bullet in his hand and said that it was
small in size. It is not explained how he recalls the caliber (KF 7.65) written on the bullet and fired
cartridge.

36. Learned senior counsel submitted that the circumstances relating to lifting of fingerprints, their
being forwarded for expert examination, and the report, were not proved beyond reasonable doubt.
It is urged that with regards to chance prints found at the place of occurrence, PW-5 Vishal Pandey
did not mention signing of the fingerprint slips. Elimination prints were not taken from anyone
present at the crime scene. To prove that fingerprints were of the accused, the identity of the
specimen prints were not proved since neither the signature of the accused nor their photographs
were affixed on Ex. P41, P42, or P43, contrary to what was stated by PW-13 Vijay Singh Chauhan
(constable) who mentioned that he took signatures of the accused persons. The specimen prints
were not taken before the magistrate on 23.06.2011, and rather on the next day (24.06.2011) at PS
MIG. Sending of fingerprints for examination: No witness (PW-13, PW-24, or PW-31) has deposed
anything suggesting that prints were sent to the fingerprint branch in a sealed condition. The rule of
prudence of taking prints before the magistrate under Section 5 of Identification of Prisoners Act,
1920 was breached. Further, specimen fingerprints of the accused were sent to the fingerprint

11

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

branch after an unexplained delay of 3 days, i.e., 27.06.2011 despite both departments being in
Indore. The fingerprint expert’s report (Ex. P84) is not credible because elimination of the
deceased’s prints was not explained by PW-24 KK Dwivedi (fingerprint expert) or in his report Ex.
P84. Only the final conclusion of elimination has been written about. There is no scientific evidence
that fingerprints are unique for all individuals and therefore, heavy reliance cannot be placed on it.
It is only corroborative in nature. Further, the counsel highlighted that the fingerprints were not
lifted from the knives, pistol and ornaments seized from the accused. Counsel relied on Mohd. Aman
& Anr. v. State of Rajasthan12 and Chandran @ Surendran & Anr. v. State of Kerala13, for arguing
that fingerprint proof cannot ipso facto lead to conviction.

37. Learned senior counsel then argued that the shoeprint report (Ex. P125) mentioned that the
chance shoeprints were incomplete and unclear, despite which the expert proceeded with the
examination and came to a finding of the prints being identical to F6 (right), G4 (right), and H3
(which does not specify which side, as per Ex. 125). Rahul’s foot impression was not taken as per
Section 4 read with Section 2(a) of Identification of Prisoners Act along with Rule 822(4) of MP
Police Regulations Rules. It was urged that this was important in proving that Rahul wore shoe size
44. PW-5 mentioned that there was a lot of blood on the floor. Elimination prints of shoes were not
collected from PW-5 or anyone else present at the scene of occurrence. At this point it is worth
noting that among others, five persons had entered the place of occurrence to act as witnesses to the
inquest proceedings. The scene of crime report (Ex. P77) mentioned that the shoeprints were
bloodied and partial in nature. All these cast doubts about authenticity and reliability of the
footprint expert’s report.

38. Mr. Shri Singh, learned counsel arguing pro bono on behalf of the appellant Neha,
supplemented the contentions of Ms. Anjana Prakash. He 12 (1997) 10 SCC 44 13 (1991) Supp (1)
SCC 39 questioned the prosecution version about Neha’s arrest. He submitted that officially Neha’s
arrest memo (Ex. P9) was prepared at Devendra Nagar. When Neha was arrested, a personal Seizure
Memo (Ex. P10) and a Disclosure Memo (Ex. P11) was prepared. No explanation as to why Neha’s
search outside the ATM (Ex. P22) did not yield the phone seized through Ex. P9, was given. PW- 31
IO admitted that this was not recorded in Neha’s arrest memo. Pertinently, the prosecution neither
conducted a technical investigation of the seized phone nor provided any explanation as to why
investigation was not conducted in this regard. Further, DW-1 SI Deepika Shinde admitted to
conducting an analysis of the CDRs14.The CDRs were not produced before the trial court.

39. It was urged that these omissions impel the court to draw an adverse inference, under Section
114 (g) of the Evidence Act 1872 against the police, casting grave doubt over Neha’s apprehension,
her arrest, and subsequent recoveries. Reliance is placed in this regard on Noor Aga v. State of
Punjab15 and Chunthuram v. State of Chhattisgarh16.

40. Learned counsel further argued that PW-4 Banno Solanki (lady constable) was cross-examined
on 30.09.2011 i.e., just three months after the incident. In cross-examination, the suggestion given
was that Neha was brought to the police station on the evening of 21.06.2011 by DW-1 SI Deepika
Shinde. PW-4 was silent regarding her role in searching Neha’s residence on 22.06.2011, though she
claimed she was present during Neha’s apprehension earlier. PW-28, during cross-examination

12

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

about DW-1’s role, deposed that he and DW-1 received an out-of-turn promotion. PW-6, too during
cross-examination, admitted that DW-1 was a part of the raiding team. These facts were effaced
from the record. This was consistently the line of defence during the trial. Both courts below
disregarded this aspect of Neha’s defence – though the involvement of DW-1, in the investigation of
this case was proved conclusively. 14 Call detail records, which list out the incoming and outgoing
calls received and made from the instrument. 15 (2008) 16 SCC 417 16 (2020) 10 SCC 733 Further,
despite several opportunities, the prosecution failed to explain the acts of DW-1 during the
investigation, or why her role was specifically erased. Reliance is placed in this regard on Reena
Hazarika v. State of Assam17. It was urged that this warrants adverse inference against the
prosecution, creating doubt over its reliability.

41. It was argued that the testimony of DW-1 Deepika Shinde in fact shows that technical evidence
was analysed on the date of the incident itself. This does not square with the complete absence of
telephonic evidence in the testimonies of the investigating team including PW-4, PW-28, PW-31.
Telephonic evidence about whether the accused spoke to each other, or knew each other, or whether
the deceased spoke to any of the accused, or the triangulation of location was not collected during
the investigation and has been kept out of the trial. It was urged that in its place, this court now had
to rely upon the ipse dixit of the investigation team, knowing that electronic evidence was not only
available, but was surreptitiously used to Neha’s detriment. It was pointed out that PW-31 IO made
no reference to the presence of officials of the Crime Branch on 19.06.2011, 20.06.2011, or
21.06.2011. However, PW-28, Vijay Singh Chauhan made reference to his Crime Branch posting,
and informing PW-19 YR Gaikwad, what he (i.e., PW-28) saw on 22.06.2011. However, PW-19 in his
testimony was silent on receiving any information from PW-28 on 22.06.2011. DW-1’s capacity for
conducting investigation was questioned on the ground that the CrPC does not permit
parallel/multiple investigations in the same case.

42. It was submitted that despite recovery of the “Oriflame” document from Neha, the prosecution
did not rely on the document as an exhibit. The prosecution did not examine any official from the
company to provide any context whatsoever as to the forms, catalogue or, perfume recovered from
Neha’s residence on 22.06.2011 (Ex. P11). There is no evidence to suggest that the form seized from
Neha was filled in by the deceased Megha; nor was the 17 (2019) 13 SCC 289 latter’s signature
identified or proved. Counsel stressed that the independent witnesses who deposed to such a form
do not indicate that there were any signatures on it. PW-3 merely stated that a paper/document (of
“Oriflame”) was recovered from Neha’s residence. He did not indicate whether the form was filled.
PW-6 stated that certain articles including the form were seized in his presence but did not indicate
their nature/details. While PW-3 identified the form in court, no question for the purpose of
identifying the handwriting on such form was put to him. The signatures of the independent
witnesses, as well as the police personnel at the time of such seizure were not found on the pullanda
containing the form. The only witness providing any details with reference to the “Oriflame” form is
PW-31 IO. It was urged that these “details” too were mere surmises of PW-31 untested during the
investigation or trial. It was also pointed out that all questions put to Neha, relating to the recovery
of the Oriflame form, were denied. While PW-1, in his examination-in-chief states that his wife was a
consultant at Oriflame, the form seized from Neha’s house was not shown to him. Evidence in this
regard may have been forthcoming from him. In fact, neither PW-1, nor any Oriflame employee

13

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

admitted the handwriting of Megha. The prosecution did not conduct any forensic examination of
the form to establish the alleged handwriting/signature of Megha. Further, PW-l was also involved
in a TIP for the seizures of articles seized, where certain jewellery, allegedly belonging to the
deceased, was purportedly identified by him. Inexplicably the "Oriflame" form was not put to him by
the prosecution in these proceedings. Therefore, it is evident that the "Oriflame" document does not
connect the deceased, Megha, or her relation of dealing with Neha as there was no investigation on
this document. Therefore, barring the ipse dixit of PW-31 IO, there is nothing suggesting that the
"Oriflame" form was filled for Megha, or filled or signed by her.

43. Mr. Shri Singh next urged that DW-1 Deepika Shinde had admitted to going to the spot on
19.06.2011, based on a request made by the control room. She also sought information from the
officials at PS MIG, and thereafter spoke to the deceased persons’ neighbours. However, DW-1 could
not provide any details in this regard during her examination-in-chief. Though DW-1 stated that she
examined the CDRs of the accused persons, she provided no specific details of such analysis in her
testimony. DW-1 also admitted interrogating Neha. DW-1 further confirmed that she was informed
by a source that Neha would leave her house wearing a pair of jeans and a maroon top. This
information was received by DW-1 prior to Neha’s arrest, and therefore presumably DW-1, by her
own admission, was involved in the investigation even beyond 22.06.2011. Further, DW-1 stated
that she shared the source information with her colleagues and subordinates. PW-28, while giving
patently false testimony in court also stated that when he saw Neha at LIG Tiraha, she was dressed
in "black jeans and a maroon top". PW-28’s deposition shows how he allegedly spotted Neha, which
is belied by DW-1's testimony. Despite such a deposition, the prosecution elected not to
cross-examine DW-1.

44. It was argued that DW-1 Deepika Shinde’s presence during the investigation was confirmed by
PW-7’s testimony. He is alleged to be an independent witness to the recoveries from Neha’s
residence on 22.06.2011. At paragraph 14 of his testimony and during cross-examination, he
admitted that DW-1 was a part of the raiding team - a fact that has been kept out of the record.
Counsel submitted that all these facts can be simply answered by Neha’s illegal custody before
22.06.2011. It was strongly urged that Neha’s personal search and the recoveries from her residence
were tainted and the records and seizures pertaining to these purported proceedings could not be
relied upon. The staccato manner in which the purported record of the prosecution reflected events
taking place on 22.06.2011 indicated that the police fabricated the record, resulting in Neha’s false
implication.

45. Mr. Singh next argued that the prosecution did not prove any prior relationship between the
accused. Neither was any material produced to suggest that the three accused knew each other or
had any prior plan, agreement or common intention to commit a robbery at the place of incident.
The prosecution admittedly had access to the CDRs of the accused persons and could have
demonstrated the fact whether there was a relationship, which there was none. Either way the CDR
evidence was crucial to the prosecution and the lack of explanation as to why it was not a part of the
investigation casts doubts on the investigation and its fairness. It was stated that while the official
investigation claimed that no CDRs were accessed (PW-31’s statement is relied on for this), the
unofficial investigation (or, that material kept away from court) conducted by DW-1 admitted

14

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

having access to and analysing the CDRs. This aspect lends credence to the defence that the present
investigation was improper and that it would be unsafe to rely upon it to render findings of the
accused’s guilt. Reliance is placed on Suresh Sakharam Nangare v. State of Maharashtra18 in this
regard.

46. It was further argued that while convicting Neha under Section 302 read with 34 IPC, the courts
below failed to appreciate that there is no material to suggest that she had any common intention
with the co-accused persons, much less a common intention to commit murder. Further, the nature
of Neha’s conviction highlights that no weapon was recovered from her; she did not suffer any injury
and none of her personal items of belonging were recovered from the crime scene.

47. Supplementing Ms. Prakash’s arguments regarding PW-10, it was argued that the testimony of
this chance witness was unreliable due to gaps and contradictions. PW-10’s cross-examination
revealed that his examination-in- chief was an improvement over his statement under Section 161
CrPC – the witness had embellished his version of the incident, such as the fact of the 18 (2012) 9
SCC 249 (para 21) injury of the accused persons, and more pertinently, Neha’s statement having
arrived on her Scooty and telling one of the boys to take the other injured boy to the hospital. PW-10
also contradicted himself regarding what brought him to the police station and regarding the TIP. In
his examination-in-chief, he stated that a woman constable was present at the TIP, whereas during
cross-examination, the witness stated that no woman constable was present at such proceedings.
Further, while PW-12 the tehsildar, PW-18 Pratap Kumar Agasia, and PW-11 Raju Sen, stated that
both PW-10 and PW-11 appeared for the TIP together, PW- 10 did not mention the presence of
PW-11 on such day. It was furthermore, urged that PW-10’s credibility was questionable as he
appeared to be a stock witness – he deposed during his cross-examination that he had previously
appeared as a witness for the prosecution in another case registered at PS Palasia.

48. Mr. Singh urged that the prosecution did not give any explanation about the delay in conducting
the TIP proceedings, given that PW-10 had informed about him sighting three persons on
20.06.2011, barely a day after the incident; whereas the TIP was conducted much later on
14.07.2011, by which date the photographs of the accused had been published in newspapers.
Reliance was placed on the judgments of this court which observed that a delay in a TIP must be
explained to place reliance on the testimony of a witness. Reference is made to this court’s
judgments in State of Andhra Pradesh v. Dr. M.V. Ramana Reddy & Ors.19 and Rajesh Govind
Jagesha v. State of Maharashtra20. It was submitted that apart from being delayed, and
procedurally questionable, the TIP conducted on 14.07.2011 did not yield any information that was
not already part of the public domain. Counsel relied on Matru @ Girish Chandra v. State of Uttar
Pradesh21 where this court observed that identification tests are not substantive 19 (1991) 4 SCC
536 (para 23) 20 (1999) 8 SCC 428 (para 4-5) 21 (1971) 2 SCC 75 (para 17) evidence and may only be
used for the purpose of helping the investigating agency with the progress of the investigation.

49. It was argued that the Shoeprint Report (Ex. P125) contains contradictory statements, making it
unreliable. Further, it did not provide any conclusive material regarding the shoeprints found at the
scene of crime and were found to be negative for matches. It was pointed out that for shoeprints
obtained by the police, no moulds were made from the available physical prints at the site and

15

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

instead colour photos of the footprints were obtained. The camera used for taking such photos did
not have the time/date, though such features were available. During analysis of colour photos, the
photographs were found insufficient to reach any conclusion regarding the footprints in Ex. P118. It
was argued that no individual shoe characteristics were found from the prints. The print or design of
the soles were missing in the photoprints, and it could not be ascertained if the sole print of the
sandal at H3 matched with any print found at the scene of crime. However, inexplicably the report
concludes that E8 and E9 are photos identical to H3. The shoeprint said to have been obtained from
Neha does not specify whether it is of the right or the left foot. It was submitted that this court in
Pritam Singh v. State of Punjab22 and Balbir Singh v. State of Punjab23 found that footprints are a
weak and rudimentary evidence. Counsel urged that the evidence led by the prosecution itself is
weak and admits that there was insufficient material to conduct the comparison, yet the comparison
was carried out as in terms of Ex. P125, the Examination Report, SFSL, Sagar. Further, the seizures
relating to the shoeprints were only sent to FSL, Sagar on 13.07.2011- as seen from Ex. P115 - after
an unexplained delay.

50. Mr. Singh next argued that the fingerprint report relating to chance prints was not reliable, and
at best can only be used as corroborative evidence. In this regard, it was argued that the fingerprints
obtained from the crime scene were 22 AIR 1956 SC 415 23 1996 (6) SCALE 72 from an open place,
accessible to the public, between the period when the door had been opened by PW-5 till the arrival
of the investigating agency. While collecting chance fingerprints, no fingerprints of the persons
present/ neighbours, or other members of the household, were taken in order to eliminate such
prints. PW-3, PW-5, and PW-24 were cross-examined on this account. They deposed that the
fingerprints of others to whom the place was accessible, were not taken. With regard to the report
(Ex. P84) prepared by the finger-print expert, PW 24 K. K. Dwivedi while conducting the analysis of
the fingerprints, some concerns were pointed out. Firstly, failure to describe the method/procedure
for lifting of the prints; secondly failure to obtain elimination prints of other persons, for which no
explanation has been provided by the police; thirdly, that the expert was unable to provide an
explanation about the fact that none of the fingerprints analysed matched those of any of the
deceased persons; and fourthly, the expert did not explain why the process under the Madhya
Pradesh Police Rules regarding dissection of fingerprint of corpses i.e., Rule 824, was not followed
while obtaining the prints of the deceased persons. It was further urged that the expert did not
provide a robust process for analysis. The analysis described by fingerprint expert PW-24 claims to
rely on an 8-point method. The method followed by PW-24 merely describes Level I of the ACE- V
Method (Analysis, Comparison, Evaluation and Verification Method), used by investigating agencies
across jurisdictions. Level 2 and 3 of the ACE-V method was not followed. The 8-point matching
system, followed for the analysis, was argued to be insufficient and not in compliance with such
method. Counsel relied on Hari Om v. State of Uttar Pradesh24 to argue that the question of
confirmation bias in this regard cannot be ruled out, given that the prints of the accused were not
anonymised while providing such information to the expert analysing the fingerprints.

24 (2021) 4 SCC 345 (para 25, 38-41, 43)

51. Counsel for the appellants urged that in the present case, crucial circumstances, such as Neha’s
arrest (which constituted the breakthrough in the investigation), the narration and deposition of the

16

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

chance witness PW-10, and the inconsistences relating to the recoveries, as well as the expert
reports, lead to grave doubts. It was submitted that in cases based on circumstantial evidence, the
five “golden principles” enunciated by this court in Sharad Birdichand Sarda v. State of
Maharashtra25 have to be fully established and that the court should be convinced that the accused
“must be” guilty and not “may be” guilty. Further, the facts so established should be consistent only
with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused, that is to say they should not be explainable on any
other hypothesis except that the accused is guilty. The circumstances should be of a conclusive
nature and tendency. The circumstances should exclude every possible hypothesis except the one to
be proved, and there must be a chain of evidence so complete as not to leave any reasonable ground
for the conclusion consistent with the innocence of the accused and must show that in all human
probability the act must have been done by the accused.

52. It was submitted that the complete “blackout” of the role of DW-1, in the face of her admission to
being involved with the investigation, her receiving an out-of-turn promotion for solving the case,
her deposition that she had analysed the CDRs which were never produced, or relied on, and her
involvement before Neha’s arrest, as well as her involvement during the arrest and subsequent
questioning, all pointed to grave doubts about the circumstances which actually led to Neha’s arrest.
It was strongly urged that this cast a doubt on her entire role. Likewise, the piecemeal recoveries
affected on two different dates, at the behest of the three accused, the improbability of the accused
retaining incriminating articles like weapons, even while allegedly getting rid of clothes, shoes, and
vehicles etc., cast doubts and suspicions about the genuineness of recovery of the articles. It was
argued that all this, coupled with the 25 (1984) 4 SCC 116 untrustworthiness of the chance witness
PW-10 – his contradictions in deposition, admission to being a stock police witness, and who by his
admission saw the accused for a very brief while, as well as the inexplicable delay in holding TIP –
together undermine the prosecution story about identification of the accused, and their alleged role
in the crime.

Submissions of the state

53. Ms. Swarupama Chaturvedi, learned Additional Advocate General (AAG) for the State of Madhya
Pradesh, argued that this court should not disturb the concurrent findings of the appellant’s guilt
recorded by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, and confirmed by the High Court in its
impugned judgment. She submitted that though the case is based on circumstantial evidence, the
prosecution was successful in proving beyond reasonable doubt, every circumstance, and also in
conclusively establishing the guilt of the accused/appellants, on a cumulative reading of all
circumstances. She emphasized that the conclusive nature of the evidence is such that any
hypothesis of the appellants’ innocence is ruled out and that the only conclusion that can be reached
is that they and none others, are guilty of the crime of triple murder, which they were charged with.

54. Heavy reliance was placed on the findings in the ballistic report, wherein each circumstance was
proved by the expert evidence. In this regard, counsel relied on Ex. P25, the map of the crime spot
prepared by PW-31 IO which found two fired cartridges (at Point 7) and one live bullet (at Point 6).
The bullets were seized and recorded at Ex. P27, the seizure memo. The post- mortem report Ex.
P44 indicated and forwarded a bullet, recovered from Megha’s body. The recovery of this bullet was

17

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

also deposed to by PW-15 Dr. P. S. Thakur. The bullet was seized under memo Ex. P127. Likewise,
PW-32 had extracted a bullet from Rahul’s foot, in the early hours of 20.06.2011 at MY Hospital.
The bullet was deposited under memo Ex. P113, in the hospital’s medico-legal cell. It was later
seized under memo Ex. P108 on 23.06.2011. The seizure of a knife and pistol from Rahul’s
possession was recorded at Ex. P14. This pistol was examined and test fired: a report, Ex. P120 was
given by the ballistic expert, confirming that the spent bullets (the cartridges of which were seized
from the crime scene), the live bullet (also seized from the crime scene), the bullet extracted from
Rahul’s foot, and the bullet extracted from Megha’s body, were all fired from the same pistol, which
was recovered and seized at the behest of Rahul (Ex. P14). Counsel also relied on Ex. P52 the report
of the armourer. It was argued further that the seizure, sealing and proper custody of these articles
was spoken to by PW-3, PW-5, and PW-19, besides PW-31 IO. There is neither any contradiction nor
any gap in their testimonies; further the ballistic report fully support the prosecution version that
the bullets recovered were fired from the weapon seized at the behest of Rahul, from his house.

55. The AAG argued that the ballistic report as well as medical opinion establishes the fact that
except one injury on deceased Megha’s forehead, all injuries which caused death of all three
deceased were due to the two knives recovered at the instance of accused Rahul and Manoj. Learned
counsel relied on the testimony of PW-15, the doctor who conducted the post-mortems on the
deceased, as well as his report (Ex. P44). It was argued that from the crime scene till report and
thereafter, seals were maintained and the chain of custody of articles were constantly intact, without
any break. Seizure witnesses supported these facts in their statements.

56. Regarding the shoeprints, counsel for the state relied on Ex. P31 and P32 (regarding seizure of
shoes at the behest of Manoj); Ex. P34 and P35 (regarding seizure of shoe at the behest of Neha); Ex.
P21 (seizure on 22.06.2011); Ex. P77 (inspection report of the crime scene by PW-21 Senior scientific
officer); Ex. P115 (forwarding of these samples for testing); Ex. P75 seizure memo of a shoe recorded
by PS Annapurna on 23-06-2011; deposition of PW-20, who witnessed seizure of shoe; shoe print
report (Ex. P125); and the deposition of the PW-31 IO. It was submitted that these witnesses did not
contradict themselves, and the prosecution had fully and satisfactorily established the presence of
the shoe print reports, as well as their matching, from the prints obtained from the crime scene.
These proved that the accused and no other were present in the premises, when the crime was
committed.

57. The AAG argued that the main motive behind the murders was robbery. This was established by
the recovery of the stolen articles pursuant to the disclosure statements proved by Ex. P10 and Ex.
P11 which were seized after Neha’s disclosure statement; the seizure of articles pursuant to
statement of Rahul (Ex. P13 and Ex. P14); and recovery pursuant to statement of Manoj (Ex. P16
and P17). During the TIP of the articles, PW-1 Niranjan Deshpande identified the looted articles
(such as jewellery items) as those belonging to the deceased, which was also corroborated by the
testimony of PW-12, the tehsildar. Furthermore, PW-4 Banno Solanki also supported the seizure of
the ATM card from Neha, when she was detained and later, arrested on 22.06.2011. PW-27, a bank
officer, deposed that the ATM card (Ex. P98) recovered pursuant to Neha’s disclosure statement,
was issued by his bank. It was urged that all these proved beyond reasonable doubt, the prosecution
allegations that the accused had conspired and entered the premises where the deceased lived, with

18

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

the motive of looting. The disclosure and recovery of the looted articles, as well as their recoveries
and later identification, from the premises of the accused, disclosed their direct link with the
murders, and established that they were the perpetrators.

58. It was submitted that the appellants have sought to discredit the prosecution by alleging that
Neha was arrested earlier, and for that purpose, exaggerated the role played by DW-1 Deepika
Shinde. The appellants sought to insinuate that that officer played a prominent role in the
investigation, and was taken off it, and that her role in solving the crime, earned her an out of turn
promotion. The AAG urged that the appellants relied upon the statement of DW- 1 Deepika Shinde,
who had never claimed that she had made any arrest in the present case. As an officer of the crime
branch she was involved initially in assisting or helping ascertain the basic details, as the victims
were women. DW- 1 was posted with a unit called "We care for you", which focusses upon women’s
protection. Soon after Neha’s arrest, the IO felt that DW-1 was not needed to do anything further.
Her promotion was based upon her contribution and role in many cases and this being just one for
her initial response cannot be considered that significant. It was submitted that her hidden role,
alleged by the appellants, is a bogey. While she admitted to analysing call details, it is forthcoming
from the trial proceedings, that the call details had no role – much less any significance, in the
investigation, or pinning the accused, their arrest, or recovery of articles at their behest. Therefore,
the theory of the appellants’ counsels that Neha was not actually arrested as projected by the
prosecution, or as found, is without any basis, but merely argumentative.

59. The AAG submitted that chance witness PW-10 witnessed the immediate aftermath of the crime,
as he saw the three accused leaving after committing the crime. He described, at the earliest
opportunity- on 20.06.2011, that two boys (one injured at the ankle, and the other at the elbow, and
both bleeding as a result of the injuries) were sitting on a bike, when a girl in a Scooty appeared, and
asked them to go to a doctor for examination. The so-called discrepancies highlighted by the
appellants, are neither material, nor of such importance to discredit the entire version given by him,
in the course of his deposition in court. It was urged that nothing worthwhile was elicited in PW-10’s
cross- examination. He clearly identified the three individuals, at the earliest opportunity, i.e. after
knowing about the occurrence of the crime and also unhesitatingly identified them in court, in the
presence of PW-18, the Naib Tehsildar. The latter witness corroborated the testimony of PW-10 as
regards identification.

60. The IO also proved seizure of Suzuki service book and clothes, at Neha’s behest on 23.06.2011
which linked with the recovery of the scooty (again, at her behest) later on that day, from a place
where it had been hidden. The seizures were also corroborated by the testimony of PW-7, who
further identified the articles (Ex. Z-1, Z-2 and Z-3) in court.

61. Ms. Chaturvedi submitted that the fingerprint expert’s evidence unerringly pointed to all
appellants’ complicity and guilt. It was highlighted that four sets of fingerprints were lifted, by
PW-24 (i.e., Ex P80) on 19.06.2011. The fingerprints of the deceased (Ex. P81, Ex. P82 and Ex. P83)
were lifted on 20.06.2011, by Constable Dinesh. The fingerprints of the three accused/appellants
were obtained on 24.06.2011 (Ex. P41, Ex. P42 and Ex. P43) by PW-13 constable Vijay Singh. His
deposition was sought to be discredited by the appellants, by pointing out that while the fingerprint

19

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

samples were obtained, according to him, the accused had signed on the forms (but which were not
actually found); and further, that the forms did not contain the photographs of the accused. The
learned AAG pointed out that the form used, is the one as required in the Madhya Pradesh Police
manual, and there is no requirement of a witness, at the time of obtaining fingerprint samples.
Furthermore, the cross examination of this witness was not worthwhile as nothing significant was
elicited from them.

62. The AAG emphasized that the report of the fingerprint expert (Ex. P84) dated 11.07.2011 by
PW-24 K.K. Trivedi, fully supported the prosecution. It established that four fingerprints could be
developed and compared with chance fingerprints found at the crime scene. The report clearly
stated that two fingerprints lifted from the site (A and B) matched with the sample fingerprint of
Rahul; fingerprint D matched with the fingerprint of Manoj and fingerprint E matched with the
fingerprint of Neha. PW-17 Satyanarayan Patel had photographed the crime scene, including the
spots where prints were collected, which corroborated beyond any doubt, that the appellants were
present at the crime scene.

63. It was argued that a crucial circumstance that has to be considered is that appellants Rahul @
Govind and Manoj were also injured. PW-30 R.S. Makwana, ASI who was posted at Annapurna PS
stated that the appellant No. 2 Rahul @ Govind’s leg was wounded. This was also informed to T.I.
Gaurishankar Chadar, who wrote dehatinalisi (Ex. P103); Crime no. 377/11 under Sections 294, 307,
34 IPC was registered. PW-26 Mukesh Bhachawat deposed that on 19.06.2011 Constable Dinesh of
Annapurana PS brought accused Rahul; he found an injury on his right toe, which had a charring
firearm wound. The statement of the IO was that on the basis of information received from Rahul, a
shoe (size 44) for the left leg was recovered in the presence of witnesses from the nearby RTO Office.
Both the shoes which were seized were brown coloured with three holes and seized within the
jurisdiction of PS Annapurna. One shoe had a gunshot mark and the other shoe belonged to Rahul.
From the statement of the medical officer, the right toe of right leg of Rahul @ Govind had a gunshot
injury and the recovered right shoe had a gunshot hole. Rahul’s medical report supported the fact
that he had sustained one gunshot injury on the toe of his right leg.

64. It is argued that the DNA reports established that the blood stains found on shoes and clothes of
accused, matched the body fluid of the deceased. The DNA report, coupled with deposition of PW-35
established that body fluid of deceased Megha was found on Rahul’s articles (Ex. F4, F5); body fluid
of deceased Ashlesha was found on Manoj’s articles (Ex. G1, G3); and Neha’s sandal (Ex. H2) had
traces of deceased Megha’s body fluids.

65. The learned counsel argued that the facts of the case were proved by the prosecution beyond
reasonable doubt to indicate that the accused and none else, were the three persons who had
committed the crime for which both courts below had convicted them. It was argued that no
prosecution can prove facts perfectly and that some lapses or inconsistencies are bound to occur,
given the tricks memories play because of which witnesses may not recollect events perfectly or in
chronological order. To make her point, the AAG relied on the observations cited by this court in
Moosa Patel v. State of Gujarat26.

20

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

66. It was lastly argued that the appellants offered no explanation when the incriminating
circumstances were put to them, under Section 313 CrPC. It was stressed that this court in many
decisions has in fact held that examination of accused under Section 313 CrPC manifests the
principles of natural justice- audi alteram partem, by curtailing all interferences at that stage from
counsel, prosecutors, witnesses, third parties, etc. The accused may be asked to furnish some
explanation as regards the incriminating circumstances associated with him, and the court must
take note of such explanation. Therefore, by essentially establishing a dialogue between the accused
and trial court, the examination of accused under Section 313 CrPC is not a mere formality and the
answers given by the accused have a practical utility. It was submitted that the complete lack of any
explanation, much less a reasonable explanation, only meant that the accused could not justify their
conduct; they had no argument to offer.

67. In view of these submissions, the AAG concluded that this court should not interfere, under its
special leave appellate jurisdiction with the concurrent findings of guilt, recorded by the courts
below, based on a full and fair appreciation of all the evidence and material on the record.

Analysis and Findings
26 (2011) 2 SCC 198 (para 22)

I.    Neha’s arrest

68. PW-28 (Vijay Singh Chauhan) deposed that he saw Neha loitering suspiciously at 6.00 AM on
23.06.2011, near an ATM. He relayed this to P.S. MIG, where the information was received by
PW-19 Gaikwad. The IO (PW-31), formed a team consisting of PW-13 (Vijay Singh), PW-36
(Mulayam Singh), Constable Devendra and PW-4 (Banno Solanki, the woman constable). This party
went to the site, and confronted Neha; her body search was conducted by PW-4 which yielded
Ashlesha’s ATM Card. The search memo (in which time recorded is 06.40 AM) was produced as Ex.
P22. Neha was taken in for questioning and later arrested.

69. PW-28’s testimony is supported by PW-4, PW-31 and PW-36. However, deposition of PW-19
(Y.R. Gaikwad) is silent about the reporting of Neha’s suspicious activity – and what was deposed by
PW-28, as corroborated by others. Constable Devendra was not examined. This omission is per se,
insignificant because while proving certain facts and events if by and large, witnesses are consistent,
any omission can be overlooked.

70. Nevertheless, a few aspects urged by the appellants with respect to the events proximate to, and
surrounding Neha’s arrest bear scrutiny. DW-1 Deepika Shinde (who was promoted as inspector
when she deposed) – admitted to analysing call detail records and importantly, to receiving
information -from an undisclosed ‘source’- that Neha would be at the spot – from where she was
ultimately arrested on 22.06.2011, and that she would be in jeans and a maroon- coloured top. DW-1

21

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

deposed that she had received this tip off prior to Neha’s arrest, i.e., before 6:30 AM, and she shared
this this information with the police. PW-28, however, denied the involvement of DW-1. During the
trial, the defence had relied on certain documents – notably Ex. D-32 and Ex. D-46, to say that
DW-1 received an out of turn promotion for her role in solving the crime. That out of turn
promotion was given to DW-1 and PW-28, was admitted by both of them. It is evident, therefore,
that DW-1 received prior information regarding Neha’s likely whereabouts and further details even
to the extent of a description of her attire. The prosecution’s studied silence with respect to her role
is not just mystifying but is a matter of concern.

71. The prosecution sought to establish through the testimonies of the IO as well as PW-3 (Deepak
Ranade) and PW-6 (Triyambak @ Prafulla), that Neha was taken to the police station and
questioned. They then proceeded to Neha’s house. As per the IO’s testimony, the raiding party
included PW-19 and PW-4. The further prosecution case in the statements of PW-31, PW-3 and
PW-6 was that Neha was interrogated on the way to her house and later arrested, after which her
disclosure statement was recorded leading to the recovery of the stolen articles at her behest. At this
instance also there was not even a slight whisper by any prosecution witness about DW-1 Deepika
Shinde’s role.

72. During her deposition, DW-1 affirmed that she had gone to the crime scene on 19.06.2011 itself.
She also admitted that “I had analysed call records in the instant case. Today, I cannot tell as to
which call and as to how it was analysed by me. I had not investigated the instant matter. I recall
that I had interrogated one accused in this matter later. I might have interrogated lady accused
(Neha Verma) present in the Court is the same person whom I had interrogated.” Later, DW-1 was
unable to state the precise time in terms of number of hours after the incident when she had
interrogated Neha. However, she was clear that she did so after Neha’s arrest by PS MIG. She
further clarified that she had “interrogated Neha Verma in MIG Police Station itself.” PW-7 Sandeep
Narulkar who concededly joined the investigation as a panch witness on 23.06.2011, admitted in the
cross-examination that DW-1 “Police Sub- Inspector was not with us, she was in other vehicle”. This
witness was cross- examined on 02.03.2012 but he failed to identify her on that day. He, however,
admitted that he could not remember how many lady officers were present during the investigation
on 23.06.2011 i.e., the day on which he was asked to present as a witness.

73. As observed earlier, an interesting feature is the fact that close on the heels of the arrest of the
present appellants and recovery of incriminating articles, the police department promoted some of
its officers and employees including DW-1 and DW-28. Both these personnel did not belong to the
MIG Police Station but were positioned in the Crime Branch. Ex. D30 (proved by DW-4 Pawan
Srivastava, Inspector General of Police who had issued it) which was placed on record during the
cross-examination of PW-1, is the order issued by the office of the Senior Superintendent of Police,
District-Indore on 26.06.2011 bearing S.No.SSP/Indore/PA/Reward/11/2005A. Its inter alia
pertinently reads as follows: -

“In the afternoon on 19.06.2011, gruesome murder of Bank Officer Niranjan
Deshpande’s wife Megha Deshpande, daughter-Ashlesha Despande and mother-
in-law Rohini Fadke residing in the first floor of House No. 24, Shrinagar Main

22

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

Colony in posh area of the city was committed by stabbing with knife. Total 22 stab
wounds were found the person of Ashlesha.

On coming to know about this triple murder, within no time resident near to the
place of incidents gathered, the crowd was so big which created law and order
problem. The murders committed in the broad daylight, raised many questions on
the functioning of Indore Police and pubic started questioning that when women are
not safe in posh colony situated in the center of the city then how the women residing
in other part or the city will feel themselves to be safe. All the police officers rushed to
the place of incident and started taking control of law and order. Electronic Media
and Newspapers widely aired the said incident which resulted fear in the mind of
public also their trust in the police administration weakened. Keeping in mind
priority and gravity of the said incident, Senior Officers Constituted a police team of
able officers & officials in which Sub- Inspector Deepika Shinde (In-charge We Care
for You) and R. 2906 Vijay Singh were specially included in the team and at the same
time the declaration of reward to the police officer solving the incident, was made.
Immediately after the incident, at about 20.00 hours in the night on 19.06.2011,
through Police control Room, directions were issued to Sub- Inspector Deepika
Shinde to reach at the place of incident i.e. 24 Shrinagar Main immediately. After
reaching the place of incident, she discussed with the family members and
neighbours about the people Visited at the time of incident whereupon it revealed
that before the incident a friend (female) of deceased Ashlesha was seen leaving her
house and secret information about her other activities were gathered.

U n d e r   t h e   s u p e r v i s i o n   o f   M a n o j   R a i ,   A d d i t i o n a l   D i s t r i c t   C r i m e   B r a n c h
Superintendent of Police, District Crime Branch and Jitendra Singh, Dy. S.P,. District
Crime Branch, call details of mobile numbers 9981147765, 9669191385 and
9826635615 of deceased Ashlesha Deshpande and Megha Deshpande respectively
were obtained. Sub-Inspector Deepika Shinde was deputed to analyse and gather
detailed information about college mates of deceased Ashlesha and deceased Megha
Deshpande’s colleagues working in Oriflame company who using her professional
skill and technique, noticed a mobile No.8103807143 regularly talking to deceased
Megha on the date of the incident and prior thereto stated location of the said
suspected mobile phone to be at the place of incident. Later Sub-Inspector Deepika
Shinde established through call details location and IMEI search, the said suspected
mobile was being used by Neha's father Anil Verma r/o Indore and at present mobile
Nos. 9009090142 & 9826065288 stated to be used in the said mobile.

On 22.06.2011, through analysis of call details of the Suspected mobile number,
Sub-Inspector Deepika Shinde, established Neha Verma r/o H.N.10 Devendra Nagar
Indore to be Connected with the said incident. In addition, Sub-Inspector Deepika
Shinde using her information system and intelligent inputs, gather this information
that today on 22 (illegible) Neha Verma wearing black jeans pant and maroon colour
top has left home and on analysing the call details of suspected Neha Verma, present

23

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

location of suspected Neha Verma to be near LIG Tiraha Indore to R. 2906 Vijay
Singh.

After the incident, not finding any clue or the incident despite all out efforts for three
days by the Indore Police, crisis of law and order has been created due to pressure
and protest from public, media and other social organisations. In such
circumstances, Sub-inspector Deepika Shinde by her all-out efforts and devotion for
continuous 72 hours, established a lead in the form of Neha Verma for identification
& arrest of the killers and working on the same this triple murder case was solved and
succeeded in arrest of Neha Verma and other Rahul @ Govind Maratha and Manoj
Balai involved in the case.

While interrogating female accused Neha Verma extensively by applying
psychological method, S.I. Deepika Shinde extracted information about accomplices
and also extensively interrogating other two accused, collected information about the
incident which led to solving in the case. Sub-inspector Deepika Shinde showing her
proficiency in analysis showing her proficiency in analysing call details and
professional skill with her hard work and devotion gathered and made available
information of identification, appearance, name and address of the first suspect Neha
Verma and her involvement incident on the basis of which only a direction for search
for accused of the incident be fixed.

XXXXXXX XXXXXXX XXXXXXX Sub-Inspector Deepika Shinde establishing
identity of the accused of the unknown accused in the said triple murder has played a
significant role in solving the case which shows her professional excellence,
perseverance and devotion for duty. Had she not established identity of Neha Verma,
accused in the said triple murder case, arrest of the accused in the said was
impossible and by her ability, she has established identity of the accused persons and
solving the said case, a good message went in the public and their confidence was
re-stored in police. In the past as well, service of the Sub-Inspector has been
excellent. In view of the said brave and commendable work by Sub-Inspector Deepika
Shinde, under Para No. 70 (a) of Police Regulation, she is recommended for out of
turn promotion to the post of Inspector keep her morale high and in future, while
discharging her police duties with diligence and perseverance, she brings laurels to
the department.”

74. Similarly, in reply to an R.T.I. query by DW-6 Anil Verma (Neha’s father), the
P.I.O., Police Headquarters at Bhopal sent a response (dated 22.05.2012),
No.PH/10/Record/RTI/70/12/506/12. The material part of this document, produced
as Ex. D-46, is extracted below:

“Subject: Information under Section 6 (1) Right to Information Act, 2005.

24

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

Reference: Your application dated 29.02.12,16.03. 2012, 23.03.12 and 26.03. 12.
Kindly peruse above referred applications information received sought on two points
by you, is as under:

1. Photocopy of Committee Report dated 24.12.2011 regarding out of turn promotion
to Sub-Inspector Deepika Shinde, is enclosed.

2. On 19.06.2011, Smt. Deepika Shinde, Sub-Inspector on searching arrested Neha
Verma, Rahul @ Govind and Manoj Balai, the main accused of triple murder case of
Bank Officer Nilanjay Despande’s wife Megha Deshpande, daughter-Ashlesha
Deshpande and mother-in-law Rohini Phadke residing in House No. 24, Shrinagar
Main Colony, under PS-MIG, Indore City.”

75. The admissions by DW-1 on three aspects i.e., (a) analysing call details in respect
of certain mobile numbers; (b) obtaining source information from an informer which
was passed on to MIG Police Station; (c) interrogation of Neha after her arrest, in the
MIG police station, thus stand proved. PW-7’s deposition also suggests that DW-1
was with the investigation team even on 23.06.2011 and hence, provides independent
corroboration in supporting the appellants’ arguments in this regard.

76. DW-1’s role in the pre-arrest, intelligence-information gathering, the arrest,
interrogation of Neha, which the prosecution tried to studiously keep away from the
court thus, leads one to conclude that its version with respect to apprehension and
arrest of Neha are not believable. It is also a matter of record that DW-3, the then
Inspector General of Police Sanjay Rana admitted that the police department had
issued Ex. D32 on 04.10.2011 containing a list including at S. No. 26 - an unnamed
informant -of persons given awards for their contribution. In the present case, all
these materials i.e., evidence of DW-1 and DW-7 as well as the documents issued by
the police departments/state governments itself, clearly points towards the
involvement of DW-1, not merely at a peripheral stage, but on a pervasive basis, even
after, in regard to the enquiry in the immediate aftermath of the crime, gathering
intelligence information with respect to the probable accused; analysing call details,
participating in the arrest, interrogation of the accused and even an involvement with
further investigating steps leading to recovery of articles.

77. DW-6 Anil Verma (Neha’s father) in his statement had deposed that Neha was
taken away for questioning much earlier, on 19.6.2011 itself. He deposed that on
21.06.2011 one Kishan Panwar from Crime Branch went to him and said that Neha
was using a stolen mobile phone for which an inquiry was being conducted. At his
behest, DW-6 asked Neha to reach home immediately. Once she reached, DW-6
contacted Kishan Panwar and informed him about her return from the office. He
reached DW-6’s house 15-20 minutes later with DW-1. They checked Neha’s mobile
phone and then left the place stating that Neha would be taken for about an hour and
a half for inquiry. DW-1 did not disclose where she would be taken but allowed the

25

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

witness DW-6 to accompany them at a distance.

According to DW-6, Neha was taken to SP’s Office at Regal Crossing and taken upstairs. The witness
was not allowed to go there, and instead was asked to leave, at which point he went home along with
his son. He stated further that on 23.06.2011 at 07:30 AM or so he was asked telephonically to keep
Neha’s clothes outside, as the police was coming to collect them. The police reached DW-6’s house
in the evening at which point they took a maroon top and one pair of jeans. The witness was
cross-examined by prosecution to suggest that his deposition was false; he denied it.

78. What is evident from an overall reading of the prosecution version as compared to the
testimonies of DW-1, DW-3 and DW-4 as well as the documentary evidence is that the
“breakthrough”, claimed by the prosecution resulting from Neha’s arrest on 22.06.2011 is not
correct. The police had knowledge about the sim cards of deceased Aslesha and Megha. Apparently,
the call details of these were analysed by DW-1. However, the prosecution kept these details away
from the trial. Likewise, although PW-28 and PW-31 both elaborately described how Neha was
arrested (especially role played by PW-4, PW-19 who relayed the information and the participation
of PW-3, PW-6 as well as PW-36), all of them were conspicuously silent about DW-1. Whereas DW-1
admitted, in no uncertain terms, at two different places, to having participated in the interrogation
of Neha and also having given information regarding her likely whereabouts- including the clothes
that she would wear, leading to her arrest. The cat was out of the bag, so to say when PW-7 admitted
that DW-1 participated in the recovery of articles on 23.06.2011, a day after the arrest of all the
appellants.

79. Having regard to all these circumstances, the prosecution version with respect to Neha’s arrest
and interrogation cannot be believed. The suppression of these facts, from the court, attracts an
adverse inference that the prosecution’s version with respect to manner of Neha’s arrest, and the
role of DW-1, is unreliable.

80. The question which then arises is: what is the impact of the rejection of the manner of Neha’s
arrest in the prosecution’s case? The appellant urged that, the entire story – i.e., disclosure
statements and the recoveries effected on 22.06.2011 and 23.06.2011, has to be rejected. This court
is of the opinion that such a drastic approach is uncalled for. Concededly the present case is entirely
based on circumstantial evidence. The rejection of the prosecution version with respect to Neha’s
arrest would mean that only that circumstance is held not to be proved. It is not that Neha’s arrest
provided sole foundation of the prosecution case. In some ways, it is an entry point; its rejection
would mean that the court should proceed cautiously with other evidence, objectively determine
whether all other circumstances were proved beyond reasonable doubt, and whether in the end the
guilt of the accused and not others, has been so proved.

II. Circumstances relating to arrest of the other appellants

81. If the circumstances leading to Neha’s arrest on 22.06.2011 be disbelieved, what remains as a
matter of the record is that she was interrogated in the presence of PW-3 and PW-6 that day. It is
necessary to analyse the depositions of these witnesses. PW-3 is a relative of the deceased, as well as

26

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

Niranjan Deshpande (PW-1). He was present on 19.06.2011 and witnessed the seizure and sealing of
blood samples, fingerprints and the articles found at the crime scene. He was also a witness to the
inquest proceedings. He deposed that the IO (PW-31) asked him, in the morning of 22.06.2011 to
reach the Police Station, with some other person. PW-31, however, did not support PW-3 about
asking him to bring another person. Nevertheless, PW-3 and PW-6 reached the police station at
around 7:30 AM. Neha’s arrest is shown at 08:10 AM; the disclosure statement and recovery of two
golden bangles, a broken mangalsutra, 3 guriyas, gold pendant, an ATM card belonging to deceased
Megha, an Oriflame perfume bottle and an Oriflame form (apparently with Megha’s signature) were
witnessed by PW-3. He also deposed with respect to the arrest of Rahul (at 9:00 AM), disclosure
statement by him and recovery of various articles i.e., a pistol, a knife, two golden bangles, part of a
broken mangalsutra containing a “guriya” and chain (weighing approximately 9 grams), a black
guriya, and Rahul’s photograph (wearing a black beaded bracelet on his right hand). He further
testified to the arrest of Manoj at 10:05 AM, on 22.06.2011, his disclosure and pointing to articles,
leading to their recovery (Ex. P16 & Ex. P17). The recovered articles included two golden bangles,
portion of a broken mangalsutra, a knife and a photograph with Manoj in sunglasses. PW-6
corroborated those facts.

82. PW-3’s testimony was impeached pointing to the discrepancy in time. He reached the police
station after 7:30 AM. Further, in cross-examination, the witness was not able to depose about
particulars of the houses the police party went to, who were there, etc. Likewise, a question mark
was raised about PW-6. It was urged that the IO never asked another witness to accompany PW-3. It
was urged these witnesses are interested persons, as they are related to the deceased and PW-1.
Another argument regarding the recoveries on 22.06.2011 were that it is unbelievable that Rahul
and Manoj would have kept the looted articles and the weapons used to assault and kill the
deceased, given that they tried to dispose of other articles such as shoes, camera, clothes, etc. and
hide the bike and scooty, etc. In the opinion of the court, the manner of arrest of these individuals,
has been spoken to by and large consistently by the two witnesses PW-3 and PW-6 who have
corroborated the IO’s deposition. However, in respect of Neha, what is not explained is why PW-4
(Banno Solanki) did not participate in her arrest and search of her premises. After having called
PW-4, to ensure compliance with the law that a woman police constable should apprehend, search
and arrest a female accused, the prosecution has offered no explanation as to why PW-4 was not
involved in the further proceedings. PW-4 admitted that she was sitting in the car when the team
proceeded to Neha’s house. Her presence in the team is confirmed by PW-3 as well as the IO. PW-4
herself does not corroborate the prosecution version about recoveries made from Neha’s house.

83. As observed earlier, the seizure memos detailing the articles seized at the behest of the accused:
Ex. P11 (Neha) included an ATM Card which belonged to Megha, the deceased; Ex. P14 (Rahul)
included looted jewellery (golden bangles, part of broken mangalsutra), a country made pistol, a
knife measuring 35.5 cm, and a photograph of him wearing a black diamond-like beaded bracelet on
his right hand; Ex. P17 (Manoj) included looted jewellery (two gold bangles, part of a broken
mangalsutra), an iron knife of overall length of 34.5 cm and a photograph of him wearing brown
coloured sunglasses. As per the prosecution, these articles are related to their crime.

27

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

84. PW-3 and PW-6, both depose that after the seizure of the article each of them remained with the
police till 5:00 PM on 22.06.2011. The prosecution version is that the arrest of all three accused
persons were completed by 10:05 AM, their disclosure statements recorded, and all the articles
seized by 10.35 AM (as per Ex. P17). There is no explanation as to why further investigation was not
taken up. All that seems to have occurred on 22.06.2011 thereafter, i.e,. after 10:35 AM, was the
nails of the accused were cut and seizure memos prepared (as deposed to by PW-3 and PW-6). The
seizure memos in this regard are Ex. P18, P19 and P20. These were drawn in the early afternoon: Ex.
P18 (13:05 hrs); Ex. P19 (13:15 hrs) and Ex. P20 (13:25 hrs). The prosecution alleged that later at
Rahul’s behest the left shoe worn by him during the incident was seized at 16:40 hrs from an open
area near his house (Ex. P21).

85. The prosecution did not explain why there were breaks in the investigation, given that the
disclosure statements of all accused, and consequent recoveries took place in the morning of
22.06.2011. It is also a matter of record that though the accused were arrested that day they were
only produced before the magistrate on the next day. In other words, there was no impediment for
the police to have proceeded further or taken immediate steps to secure all evidence. This aspect is,
in this Court’s opinion, important because even if the manner in which Neha was arrested was to be
discounted (as discussed earlier) the fact that they were arrested in the presence of PW-3 and PW-6,
further proceedings and investigative steps including the seizure of articles at the behest of the
accused and pursuant to their statements, stand proved. These are reasons why the events of
22.06.2011 (after the arrest of the accused, and recoveries were made at their behest) have to be
segregated and seen differently from the events and circumstances relied upon by the prosecution
on other dates.

86. The credibility of PW-3 and PW-6, in this Court’s opinion, cannot be doubted. PW-3 was present
on 19.06.2011, after discovery of the murderous attack and PW-1 Niranjan Deshpande stayed with
him after reaching Indore. He (PW-3) was the deceased Rohini’s nephew and even performed the
funeral rites of the deceased. Likewise, PW-6 lived in Village Barlai which is about 45 minutes by
bus, from Jaora (where PW-3 resided). He knew PW-3 and had known Rohini for about 10-15 years.
He reached PW-3’s house when the latter asked him to Rccompanyy him to the police station, since
Neha had been caught and her search had yielded an ATM card which belonged to Ashlesha. Of
these two witnesses, PW-3 is related to the deceased; however, PW-6 was not. Both witnesses
corroborated each other’s testimony and prove the prosecution story about Neha’s questioning, her
arrest, disclosure statement, recoveries made pursuant to her statement, as well as the arrest,
disclosure statements and recoveries made from Rahul and Manoj. Furthermore, there is no
discrepancy between their testimonies and that of the IO (PW-31). Another piece of evidence is that
PW-27, an officer of Bank of India, Ujjain deposed that he issued a letter (Ex. P98) to the SHO
containing the ATM card numbers. Megha’s ATM card, recovered pursuant to Neha’s disclosure
statement, was issued by his bank; this was among the articles seized on 22.06.2011.

87. An overall analysis of the testimonies of PW-3 and PW-6 shows that despite some
inconsistencies, which can be put down to imperfect or faulty recollection of sequence of events, or
about the people present etc., their testimonies are credible. The effect of their depositions is that
they witnessed the disclosure statements of Neha, Rahul and Manoj, and also witnessed the recovery

28

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

of articles and their seizure by the police, which were recorded in seizure memos (Ex. P11, P14 and
P17).

III. Recoveries of 23.06.2011

88. PW-7 Sandeep Narulkar is an independent witness, who testified to the disclosure statements of
the accused Rahul and Manoj on 23.06.2011 and the recoveries made pursuant to it. He deposed to
witnessing Rahul telling the police about the incident of 19.06.2011 and that in that incident, a
camera and two mobile sets were looted. Rahul gave information about the camera, motorcycle,
clothes worn, and knife used at the time of incident; he said that he could get the articles recovered.
Then police prepared a disclosure memo (Ex. P28) witnessed and signed by PW-7. He said that on
Rahul’s direction, the police recovered the motorcycle in question from beneath a small bridge over
Pithampur road, one dark brown coloured trouser, a full sleeved grey coloured shirt, and a
blood-stained iron knife with metal handle (Ex. P29). Further, the police also seized a lens of a
broken camera (Ex. P30). Both seizure memos (Ex. P29, P30) contained PW-7’s signature. When
shown in Court, he also identified the articles (brown colour full pant, knife, one lens of broken
camera). He further stated that police interrogated Manoj before him and Manoj gave information
about robbery and murder, and about the clothes and shoes worn at the time of incident and told
that he could get them recovered. The police then prepared memorandum Ex. P31 containing the
witnesses’ signature. As per Manoj’s direction, the police seized a “firoji” coloured t-shirt, a black
coloured blood-stained full pant, a blue underwear and a pair of micro-leather black coloured shoes
from his father’s house; the seizure memo for these articles (Ex. P32) also contained his signature.
He identified the articles - clothes, shoes and a broken Samsung mobile phone, recovered by police
from a vacant plot near Maruti showroom under seizure panchnama (Ex. P33) with the witnesses’
signature. He mentioned that the mobile phone’s IMEI number was 352450/03/115949/9.

89. PW-7 also witnessed Neha’s interrogation where she provided information about committing
robbery and murder; and told the police that she had hidden and could point out clothes and
sandals worn at the time of incident, and Suzuki Access vehicle (Ex. P34). At her pointing out, the
police seized the Suzuki Access Scooty in question, from behind the old OPD of M.Y. Hospital, from
which: one service book, one blood-stained pink full sleeve shirt with white lining, a light blue
coloured jeans with three buttons on the back pocket, a pair of ladies black coloured high heeled
sandals with brown strip attached at the front and in the back of which, above the heels a chain was
attached containing blood stains. These were seized by police (Ex. P35) containing the witnesses’
signature. PW-7 identified these articles in court.

90. An overall reading of the depositions of PW-7 and PW-13 shows that disclosure statements were
made by all the accused in the morning of 23.06.2011. However, the recovery of articles pursuant to
the disclosure statements were in the afternoon: Ex. P29 (which relates to Rahul and evidenced the
seizure of the motorcycle, a knife and his clothing) was at 15:30 hrs; Ex. P30 (which too at the
behest of Rahul leading to seizure of a broken camera) at 16:40 hrs; Ex. P32 (pair of shoes, a t-shirt,
a trouser and an underwear seized at the behest of Manoj) at 14:45 hrs; Ex. P33 (the other seizure at
Manoj’s behest, of broken mobile phone) at 16:00 hrs; and Ex. P35 (seizure of clothing items,
blood-stained black sandals and Suzuki Scooty, at Neha’s behest) at 17.30 hrs. The prosecution

29

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

made no attempt to show why piecemeal recoveries were made when according to its witnesses, on
the very first day i.e., on 22.06.2011, all the three accused had disclosed their roles in the crime and
their willingness to cooperate as well as the recovery of the articles related to the crime - including
those belonging to them or hidden by them.

91. The second unexplained feature is why two sets of witnesses were joined in the proceedings, on
two consecutive dates. PW-3 and PW-6, witnessed the arrest of the three accused, their disclosure
statements and recoveries made on the first day i.e., on 22.06.2011. An entirely different set of
witnesses were called on the next day i.e., 23.06.2011 (PW-7 and Prakash Ichke). Furthermore, one
of the recovery witnesses for 23.06.2011 (Prakash Ichke) was not examined. As noted previously, the
recovery witnesses received phone call at around 7-8 AM and were asked to report to the Police
Station which they did at around 8- 8.30 AM on 23-06-2011; the disclosure statements made by the
accused on that day were recorded at different points of time but before 10.00 AM. However, the
prosecution does not explain the absence of any activity between around 10 AM and 1.30 PM when
the first recovery was made that day. PW-7 on his own admission stated that he was acquainted with
the deceased family; apparently, his cell phone numbers was known to them. As noted earlier, he
also admitted that DW-1 Dipika Shinde had participated in the investigation proceedings that day.

92. All these factors, in the opinion of this court cast doubt on the prosecution version as to what
occurred on the next day i.e., 23.06.2011. Given that the accused were detained and arrested in the
early morning of 22.06.2011, that they made disclosure statements, and there were recoveries that
day at their behest, which were completed that morning itself, the instalment or episodic procedure
adopted by the investigation, throws doubts about its veracity. Nothing prevented the prosecution
from acting on the statements made by the accused and collecting all the evidence – which by its
admission was readily available and easily accessible (given the knowledge of the accused which
they were willing to share) on the day of their arrest on 22.06.2011. Even if there were some
impediments, in terms of, lack of time or otherwise, the involvement of an entirely different set of
panch witnesses, without explaining why the other witnesses who had evidenced recoveries on
22.06.2011 could not be asked to participate, underlines that doubt. The doubt gets further
heightened by the fact that PW-7 knew the deceased family - and also claimed that his mobile
number was available with them. The IO (PW-31) does not in his statement say anything about this.
He was silent as to why PW-7 instead of the other three was involved in the proceedings in
23.06.2011, and regarding the non-examination of Prakash Ichke, the other witness to the
recoveries. Since all the recoveries were made from open areas with no special features to highlight
whether they were from certain hidden spaces, such recoveries of articles cannot be equated with
the kind of recoveries made on 22.06.2011. This aspect is important because clothes seized by the
police (which according to the prosecution were lying in open area, and thus exposed to elements)
were articles from which samples for DNA were collected to ascertain if there were any matches with
the DNA markers found on samples collected from the deceased and the crime scene.

IV. Testimony of PW-10, the eyewitness

93. The prosecution relied heavily upon the testimony of PW-10. This witness claimed that in the
evening of 19.06.2011, he saw two boys trying to start a motorcycle one of them was bleeding from

30

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

the ankle, and the other, at the forearm. He added that a girl arrived on a Scooty and advised them
that it would be better to go to the hospital. The witness alleged that he had informed the police on
the day after the incident i.e., 20.06.2011. He stated in cross- examination that after learning about
the murder he claimed that he went to the police station. Later, he said that he went there to obtain
a “gumasta” license. He admitted that he did not read newspapers but added that when he went to
the police station, there was some discussion going on about the murder, upon which he volunteered
to provide information and got his statement recorded. The witness said that he owned a tea shop
and worked as a property broker; he later admitted that he did not have any registration as property
broker. He also admitted to having previously deposed as a witness on behalf of the police in some
other case. PW-10’s presence near the scene of crime, or rather after it, is explained by him,
somewhat unconvincingly, as his effort to ascertain if some property was vacant. He is what one can
call as a chance witness.

94. A chance witness is one, who appears on the scene suddenly. This species of witness was
described in Puran v. State of Punjab27 in the following terms:

“Such witnesses have the habit of appearing suddenly on the scene when something
is happening and then of disappearing after noticing the occurrence about which they
are called later on to give evidence.” This court has sounded a note of caution about
dealing with the testimony of chance witnesses. In Darya Singh v. State of Punjab28
it was observed that:

“…where the witness is a close relation of the victim and is shown to share the
victim’s hostility to his assailant, that naturally makes it necessary for the criminal
courts examine the evidence given by such witness very carefully and scrutinise all
the infirmities in that evidence before deciding to act upon it. In dealing with such
evidence, Courts naturally begin with the enquiry as to whether the said witnesses
were chance witnesses or whether they were really present on the scene of the
offence.…..If the criminal Court is satisfied that the witness who is related to the
victim was not a chance-witness, then his evidence has to be examined from the point
of view of probabilities and the account given by him as to the assault has to be
carefully scrutinised.” In Jarnail Singh v. State of Punjab29 again, this court held
that:

“22. The evidence of a chance witness requires a very cautious and close scrutiny and
a chance witness must adequately explain his presence at the place of occurrence
(Satbir v. Surat Singh30, Harjinder Singh v. State of Gujarat, Acharaparambath
Pradeepan and Anr. v. State of Kerala31 and Sarvesh Narain Shukla v. Daroga
Singh32). Deposition of a chance witness whose presence at the place of incident
remains doubtful should be discarded (vide Shankarlal v. State of Rajasthan33).”

95. In the opinion of this court the deposition of this witness (PW-10) cannot be taken at face value.
PW-10 improved upon his statement made to the police and was confronted in this regard. His
initial statement to the police did not mention the presence of the girl (whom he identified as Neha

31

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

in court). 27 AIR 1953 SC 459 28 1964 (7) SCR 397 29 (2009) 9 SCC 719 30 (1997) 4 SCC 192 31
(2006) 13 SCC 643 32 (2007) 13 SCC 360 33 (2004) 10 SCC 632 Likewise, he improves upon his
statement, by deposing in court that the girl had asked two boys to one injured seriously to the
hospital. In addition, his contradictions as to what led him to the police station on 20.0.2011 –
obtaining a gumasta license, or to report the crime; and his presence at the scene of the crime – as a
property broker checking vacancy of a property, who admittedly had no license for this business, are
material. These contradictions are serious inasmuch as they strike at the root of the witness’s
credibility. His prevarications and improvements especially about the presence of a girl are too
serious and fundamental to overlook. Very crucially this witness appears to be a stock witness. For
all the aforesaid reasons the depositions of PW-10 cannot be accepted.

V. Identification of Manoj by PW-8

96. The prosecution relied on the testimony of PW-8 Achyutmal Tejwani to say that Manoj had
obtained treatment from him. The witness, during his deposition stated that he had studied from a
Science College in Pakistan. He admitted to not being licensed to practise medicine, by the Medical
Council of India; he also admitted that he did not hold any permission to practise as a doctor, but
ran Kavita clinic. He identified Manoj in court, and said that on 19.06.2011, Manoj had secured
treatment for an injury on his elbow, and another boy (who spoke in Sindhi) accompanied him. He
proved Ex. P37, the slip issued by him, containing the prescription for Manoj, which was seized on
25.06.2011 (Ex. P36) by the IO (PW-31), who deposed to it.

97. This court is of the opinion that PW-8 is not a reliable witness. Apart from the fact that he is
admittedly an unqualified professional, and an unlicensed one - at best a quack, counsel for the
appellants quite correctly point out that his previous links with the police cannot be ruled out, for
the reason that he migrated, later than during Partition, from Pakistan. The probability of him
practising his profession under the shadow of police patronage, for some kind of quid pro quo, i.e.,
being a convenient witness, leaves a lurking suspicion. The police did not involve him during the test
identification parade; admittedly, Manoj was in fact taken to him during the investigation. In these
circumstances, the testimony of this witness is not credible. This circumstance is therefore, held not
to be proved.

VI. Test Identification Parade of the accused

98. The prosecution relied upon the testimonies of PW-10 and PW-18 (Pratap Kumar Agasiya, Naib
Tehsildar). Both deposed that PW-10 had correctly identified Manoj and Rahul by specifically
tapping their heads. According to PW-18, both the accused were made to stand with 10 other
persons resembling them. The result of this identification memo i.e., the test identification parade
(“TIP”) proceedings were recorded as Ex. P38, where Manoj and Rahul were identified by PW-10,
and Ex. P40 where only Manoj was identified by PW-11 Raju Sen. Likewise, PW-18 deposed that in a
separate proceeding recorded as Ex. P39, PW-10 had identified Neha from amongst five other girls
who had similar physical features.

32

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

99. The main argument against the TIP proceedings was that it was held after an inordinate delay.
The appellants were arrested on 22.06.2011 and remained in custody till 30.06.2011. It was urged
that no attempt was made to involve a magistrate, to have their TIPs either at that time, or
thereafter and that the TIP was held only on 14.07.2011. Ex. P38, the TIP relating to Rahul and
Manoj, records the names of 10 other men who the accused were made to stand with, anywhere as
per their choice. Each person was covered with a blanket, upto their neck. It records that no police
personnel were present when the proceedings took place, and the witness correctly identified the
accused.

100. A popular and widely used method of accused identification, by witness, in criminal trials, is
the identification parade. TIP procedures are used, where witnesses who claim to have seen the
accused at, or about the time of occurrence to identify such accused from the midst of other
individuals, who bear physical attributes similar to them, without any aid or other source. TIPs are
meant to test witness veracity and their capability to identify unknown persons. TIPs should
normally be conducted at the earliest possible time to eliminate the chance of accused being shown
to witnesses before the identification parade, which might otherwise affect such witnesses’ memory.
TIPs are conducted during investigation; however, there is no provision of law enabling an accused
to claim it as a matter of right, as held in Malkhan Singh v. State of MP.34 In Ramanathan v. State of
Tamil Nadu35 this court outlined the utility and weight of a TIP. There is no hard and fast rule that
delay or failure in holding the TIP ipso facto renders the evidence inadmissible or unacceptable; it
however, affects the credibility and weight attached to such identification, as held in Shyamlal
Ghosh v. State of West Bengal36.

101. This court has discussed earlier, with respect to credibility PW-10’s testimony and why it cannot
be taken at face value. Even otherwise, the fact remains that he omitted to mention basic details
about the distance from between where he was, and where he saw the accused. Further, his account
suggests that he apparently saw the accused, fleetingly. No attempt was made by the prosecution to
draw a sketch or to show the approximate distance from where this witness (who is vital to its case)
observed the accused. Given these facts, and the delay (unexplained by the prosecution, which had
by its account, wrapped up the case by end of June 2011) to conduct the TIP after the accused’s
arrest, renders the TIP suspect. It cannot be said that the TIPs conducted and the subsequent dock
identification, by PW-10 of the accused, are among the circumstances proved beyond reasonable
doubt.

VII. Recovery of articles and their Test Identification 34 (2003) 5 SCC 746 (para 7).

35 (1978) 3 SCC 86 (para 18).

36 (2012) 7 SCC 646

102. On the day of their arrest (22.06.2011), the accused made disclosure statements and pointed
out to the police the places where the articles looted, or those relatable to the crime, were kept or
hidden. These articles were seized on the same morning. In terms of Ex. P11, the articles recovered
at Neha’s behest inter alia were, two bent golden bangles approximately worth (cid:128) 50,000/-, a golden

33

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

pendant, three guriya, and part of a mangalsutra with chain and guriya approximately worth
(cid:128)22,000, Megha’s ATM card issued by Bank of India. Similarly, Ex. P14 (recoveries made at Rahul’s
behest) evidences two bent golden bangles having aeronuma design approximately worth (cid:128)
50,000/-, a guriya, part of a mangalsutra with chain approximately worth (cid:128) 20,000/-. Lastly, Ex.
P17 (recoveries made at Manoj’s behest) included inter alia, two bent golden bangles having round
design approximately worth (cid:128) 50,000/-, a guriya, part of a mangalsutra with chain approximately
worth (cid:128)20,000/-.

103. On the previous day (21.06.2011), PW-1 Niranjan Deshpande had reported that some articles -
2 ATM cards (Megha and Ashlesha), Megha’s mobile, Ashlesha’s camera and specific jewellery items
(belonging to Megha and Rohini), were missing from the premises.

104. On 09.07.2011, a TIP of the articles was conducted, under the supervision of PW-12 Zamil
Khan, who was informed that the procedure was to be conducted. He deposed that the TIP was
carried out at the Bharatiya Sangeet Kala Academy, Sector G, MIG colony, where a policeman from
MIG police Station reached with a sealed packet. One Anil Soni also reached there with a similar
packet. He said that two packets were opened and their contents were mixed together. Thereafter
PW-1 reached the place; he observed the articles and identified them. PW-12 deposed as follows:

“In the identification, identifier Niranjay Deshpande had identified two gold bangles
crumbled, one gold pendal (sic pendent), one broken Mangalsutra of a chain and stud
with Guriya, two gold Arrow like bangles, one broken gold Mangalsutra, two gold
designed bangles, one broken gold Mangalsutra of chain and one Guriya.”

105. The witness also deposed that after the identification was completed, the jewellery was
re-sealed and the jewellery items brought by Anil Soni were taken away. He also identified the
jewellery (which had been identified by PW-1 before him) in court. PW-1 deposed among similar
lines. The only difference between the two depositions is that PW-1 stated that PW-7 was present (as
a matter of fact, he was not, as is evident from the testimony of PW-7). Apart from urging this to be
an inconsistency, counsel for appellants also cast suspicion on the TIP of the jewellery, urging that
neither Anil Soni nor the police constable who took the sealed items to the venue of the TIP was
examined. In this court’s opinion, these omissions are minor, and do not shake the essential
credibility of the proper identification of the jewellery. In fact, during cross examination, PW-12
clearly deposed that besides him no one was present during the TIP of the articles and that after
PW-1 completed the identification, he drew the memo (Ex. P1) and kept the jewellery separately; the
rest were taken away by Anil Soni.

106. In this court’s opinion, a joint reading of the testimonies of PW-1 and PW-12, on the one hand,
and the TIP proceedings on the other (Ex. P1, dated 09.07.2011) establishes that the prosecution
proved that the identification of the looted articles, were correctly identified by PW-1. The accused’s
counsel had sought to urge that the articles were common pieces of jewellery, without any
distinctive features and that PW-1 could hardly know these- particularly, jewellery of his
mother-in-law. If one keeps in mind that PW-1 had reported the loss of the articles, and listed them
specifically, in his statement which was given to the police on 21.06.2011, their subsequent recovery,

34

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

at the behest and pointing out of the accused, and their correct identification by PW-1 before PW-
12, there cannot be doubts on its credibility. During cross examination, PW-1 was not questioned
about how he could identify jewellery articles of his wife, daughter and mother-in-law. There can be
various reasons, why someone may be able to recollect or remember jewellery or other valuables.
There cannot be any general assumption that a husband would not be able to remember or recollect
the personal articles of his wife, or that a wife cannot be expected to recollect and identify the
personal effects of her husband. It all depends on the personality and individual traits of human
being, which uniquely differ from each other. It is possible that PW-1 had an eye for detail; it is
equally possible that he was present when the valuables were bought; or yet, it is further possible
that they were part of a set, presented to the deceased individuals. The recollection, reporting and
identification of the mangalsutra, is more specific. PW-1 could reasonably be assumed to be aware of
that article, belonging to Megha, his wife. In these circumstances, the evidence relating to the
recovery of items belonging to the deceased, recovered from the accused’s premises at their behest,
and their correct identification by PW-1 during TIP were proved beyond reasonable doubt, by the
prosecution.

VIII. The circumstances relating to expert evidence regarding the appellants’ fingerprints

107. PW-21 Dr. Sudhir Sharma, Senior Scientific Officer in Scene of Crime Mobile Unit, deposed
that when he reached the crime scene on 19.06.2011 at 6:35 PM, the main door of the flat was open
and not sealed. In his deposition he mentioned the shoe marks and other physical evidence which
existed, and also was cross examined about whether they were tampered with. Additionally, he
stated that a computer was in the flat, which could have been seized, but he was unaware as to
whether it was seized or not.

108. PW-24 KK Dwivedi (the fingerprint expert) searched the crime scene for possibility of lifting
impressions of fingerprints. A set of five fingerprints (i.e., Ex. P80, “chance fingerprints”) were lifted
by him, and signed by two witnesses (PW-5 and PW-9) as well as himself. He claimed that PW-17
Satyanarayan Patel (photographer of crime scene) had taken photographs of the spots, from where
the prints were collected. However, this is neither corroborated by the testimony of PW-17, nor in
the exhibits on record.

109. Prints A and B were lifted from the inner back portion of door of bedroom adjoining the
bathroom on the first floor; Prints C and D were lifted from the outer portion of door of bedroom
adjoining the kitchen; and Print E was lifted from the inner portion of the same door. Upon
examination, A, B, D, and E were found suitable for comparison.

110. The fingerprints of the deceased [Ex. P81 (Megha), Ex. P82 (Rohini) and Ex. P83 (Ashlesha)]
were lifted by constable Dinesh on 20.06.2011. Constable Dinesh, however, was not examined by the
prosecution in the course of trial. The fingerprints of the three appellants [Ex. P41 (Rahul), Ex. P42
(Manoj), and Ex. P43 (Neha)] were obtained by PW-13 constable Vijay Singh on 24.06.2011 who
deposed in chief examination that he took the signatures of the three accused persons (who were
present in court and identified by him), on their respective fingerprint slips, and later sent them to
the SSP Office. In cross- examination he deposed to being trained by the fingerprint department and

35

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

that he was competent to take prints. He observed an injury/cut caused by a knife, on the ring finger
of Rahul’s right hand, and no other injuries on the fingers of the three accused. It also mentioned
that he did not obtain any written consent from the accused.

111. The report of the fingerprint expert (Ex. P84) dated 11.07.2011 by PW-24 K.K. Trivedi, coupled
with his testimony, forms the crux of the prosecution case regarding fingerprints. On 27.06.2011,
fingerprints of the accused were received and compared with the chance fingerprints by PW-24, who
used the 8-point method and found that prints A and B matched with the index and middle finger
respectively of Rahul’s right hand; fingerprint D matched with the middle finger of Manoj’s right
hand, and Print E matched with Neha’s right thumb. The fingerprint report was sent to the Director,
Finger Print Bureau Bhopal by PW-

24 on 06.07.2011 which was verified by the former vide letter dated 11.07.2011. The prosecution
relied on these findings to corroborate the presence of the appellants at the crime scene.

112. Interestingly, PW-24 KK Dwivedi in his chief examination has stated that letter no. AC
Branch/E/80/11 dated 20.06.2011 was sent by Finger Print Branch Indore to MIG Police Station for
comparison of chance fingerprints with the fingerprints of family members/suspects. However, his
cross-examination reveals no such letter was on the record. The cross-examination also shows that
he did not obtain fingerprints of any other person (including family members of the deceased) or
article that was present at the place of the incident, for the purpose of comparison - a point which
has been urged by the counsels on behalf of the appellants, laboriously. He also deposed that there
was neither a mark of the whole palm on the door, nor bloody fingerprints on the door; and the
other fingerprints available on the door were unfit for lifting.

113. The appellants’ counsel questioned the circumstances relating to the fingerprint evidence, on
grounds such as (i) absence of any elimination print;

(ii) irregularity in obtaining the appellant’s fingerprints; (iii) non-examination of constable Dinesh
(who collected the fingerprints of the deceased for the process of elimination) by the prosecution;
(iv) the absence of covering letter, along with the fingerprint expert’s report, when produced in
court; and (v) the fingerprints of the appellants were not procured in accordance with law, as there
was no compliance with Identification of Prisoners Act, 1920.

114. This court would take up the last argument, at the outset. In Sonvir v. State (NCT) of Delhi37, it
was held that the provisions of the Identification of Prisoners Act, 1920, were not mandatory, but
rather directory, and that they only affirm the bona fides of the sample-taking (of the fingerprints of
an accused) and eliminate the possibility of evidence fabrication. This court however, made 37
(2018) 8 SCC 24 it clear that not following or complying with the provisions of the Act, would not
per se vitiate the evidence, in a given case. This was again affirmed in Ashish Jain & Ors. v. Makrand
Singh38.

115. In the present case, PW-24’s deposition corroborates the lifting of the fingerprints by constable
Dinesh in his presence. Therefore, the non- examination of constable Dinesh is not fatal to the

36

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

prosecution’s case regarding fingerprints. As far as the integrity of the crime scene is concerned,
PW-21 deposed that though the door to the flat was open, when he reached there, the police were
standing outside and it was not possible that the crime scene was contaminated. The IO (PW-31)
admitted that the crime scene was not sealed when the investigation took place on the evening of
19.06.2011; however, he clarified that the forensic department personnel who reached the site
before him had secured the place. Given this consistent evidence, this court is of opinion that the
possibility of members of the public or unauthorized persons, contaminating the crime scene, so
soon after the incident was reported, is remote.

116. Fingerprints collected at a crime scene from all personnel who were at the scene and who might
have inadvertently touched physical evidence, are known as ‘elimination prints’. In the present case,
elimination prints of the deceased were obtained on 20.06.2021; they were part of the record. The
record would show that PW-3, PW-5, PW-9 were present at the crime scene, but admittedly their
fingerprints were not obtained. It appears from the testimony of PW-9 that initially, the witnesses
were asked to be outside, but later, asked to join the proceedings, to witness the seizures made. All
the three witnesses, consistently deposed regarding fingerprint experts’ visit to the site, the use of
powder on the surfaces and lifting of fingerprints. PW-5, in cross examination said that his
fingerprint was not obtained. During hearing, counsel for the appellants had repeatedly emphasized
that elimination prints were not taken from others 38 (2019) 3 SCC 770 present at the crime scene;
they also highlighted that fingerprint were not lifted from the knives, pistol and ornaments seized
from the accused. In the opinion of this court, nothing material turns on this aspect. In a recent
judgment - which the appellants relied on-, i.e. Hari Om @ Hero v State of UP 39 this court
acquitted the accused, on the ground that the fingerprint expert’s opinion, even if accepted, would
could not have been the sole basis of conviction. What is important is whether the crime scene was
secured, and whether the lifting of prints was witnessed. On both counts, the prosecution evidence is
credible and worthy of acceptance. These are also corroborated by the testimony of PW-21, the
Senior Scientific Officer, and the crime scene report dated 20.06.2021 (Ex. P77) tendered by him.

117. The other aspect, relating to fingerprint evidence is that the fingerprint report (Ex. P84) was
prepared on 11.07.2011. Ex. P85 to Ex. P92 are photographs of the fingerprints lifted (these were
annexed to the fingerprint report Ex. P84). The fingerprint report was enclosed with a letter (Ex.
P93). Given that the expert deposed to lifting the prints, which were corroborated by the three
witnesses (PW-3, PW-5 and PW-9) apart from the IO, the credibility of this circumstance, i.e., the
lifting of the prints from the crime scene, their match with the sample prints of the accused, and the
expert’s testimony stand proved. The appellant’s arguments questioning the credibility of this part,
on the ground of delay in the report, the prints being chance prints, lack of elimination prints, or the
crime scene not being shown to have been secured, etc, are insubstantial and are rejected.

IX. Circumstances relating to injuries on the deceased

118. The post-mortem report (Ex. P44) indicates the extent of injuries on the bodies of the deceased.
Megha (aged 46) had a firearm injury on the forehead and 4 deep stab wounds (abdomen, shoulder
and chest). Rohini (aged 76) had 39 (2021) 4 SCC 345 stab wounds across her body - ranging from
her fingers and hands, arms, and numerous injuries on her abdomen and chest which had pierced

37

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

her vital organs. Similarly, Ashlesha (aged 22) received numerous stab injuries across her body –
including, her fingers, hands and forearms, hip, neck, abdomen and chest which pierced her vital
organs, back, and many superficial stab wounds on her thighs.

119. The expert opinion of PW-15 Dr. Thakur (the doctor who conducted the post-mortem) was that
the cause of death of Megha, was shock caused by firearm injuries and haemorrhage. Rohini and
Ashlesha’s death was due to shock and haemorrhage from their numerous stab injuries. All three
deaths were homicidal in nature. This witness confirmed- both in his opinion and his testimony that
all injuries on the three deceased, except the gunshot injury (No. 1- on the body of Megha) could
have been caused by the two knives, seized from the possession of Rahul and Manoj, respectively
(Articles A and B, forwarded to him for opinion under query Ex. P47).

X. The Ballistic report A. The recovery of bullets from the crime scene and the deceased Megha

120. Three cartridges (one live, and two shells) were seized by the IO (PW-31) on 19.06.2011 from
the crime scene. He prepared the site map (Ex. P25 and Ex. P-26) and recovery memo (Ex. P27)
witnessed by PW-5 (landlord Vishal Pandey) and PW-9 (one Mahesh Parmar, neighbour of
informant Vishal Pandey). The IO deposed to preparing the site map witnessed by PW-5 and to
seizing one empty, spent cartridge (lying on the floor near the body of Ashlesha), one empty, spent
cartridge from near bed, and one unused, live cartridge from near the body (head) of Rohini. He also
deposed that all the cartridges had the inscription ‘K.F. 7.65’ on them. PW-5 deposed that the spot
map was prepared in front of him and similarly deposed as to the location of two cartridges – found
under the bed and near Rohini’s body. However, the appellants did not cross-examine PW-5 about
the number of bullets seized, i.e., on the third bullet. PW-9 also deposed on similar lines.

121. PW-15 (doctor conducting the post-mortem examination) deposed that on 20.06.2011, PW-33
S.S Kujur brought the dead body of Megha Deshpande with a cover letter at 11:00 AM; and the
post-mortem began at around 11:45 AM. Post-mortem was conducted along with Dr. Prashant
Rajput and Dr. N. Fadse (both were not examined). On post-mortem of deceased Megha’s body, a
bullet was recovered. The extraction of bullet is described as wound no. 1 and the bullet was
recovered from anterior of cranium. PW-15 deposed that all the articles were sealed, labelled and
handed over to PW-33. The post-mortem report (Ex. P44) was prepared and taken from MY
hospital to the police station by PW-33, and a seizure memo (Ex. P127) was prepared by PW-34
Mahesh Prasad Yadav. The seizure report was witnessed by Head Constable Shambhunath and
Constable Ramjan, both of whom were not examined. PW- 33’s deposition corroborated the facts
relating to him and his involvement.

122. Further, PW-15 in his cross-examination stated that the weapon was shot in contact with the
body and that he could not state which weapon caused injuries to Megha. In cross-examination,
PW-33 admitted that no specimen seal was obtained by him from the doctor and no receipt was
given to the doctor upon receiving the said articles. Further, he stated that on 19.06.2011 he took the
bodies to the hospital by police vehicle after 6:00 PM. He deposed to going home after locking the
mortuary (as it was night time) and leaving the keys in the hospital. PW-34 Mahesh Prasad Yadav
deposed about preparing of seizure memo (Ex. P127) on 20.06.2011 upon presentation of the

38

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

articles by PW-33; and in cross-examination he admitted to not sending a copy of seizure memo to
the hospital, not filling column no. 10 regarding description of the seized items, the sample seal not
being marked, and that he did not mark the number of articles on the items mentioned in the
seizure memo. He further deposed that he did not open the packets to see what was inside and also
did not receive the post-mortem report himself, but only made a roznamcha entry regarding seizure
of items. The joint reading of the testimonies of PW-15, PW-33 and PW-34 establishes that a bullet
was extracted by the doctor (PW-15), and a seizure memo was prepared in connection; the articles
seized were then sealed (although no mark was placed on the seal).

B. Recovery of bullet from Rahul and facts relating to it

123. Parallel to the recovery of the cartridges from the crime scene, the prosecution story was that
the accused Rahul suffered a bullet injury during the incident. The prosecution alleged that Rahul
went to Annapurna police station and reported a false case of shooting. As to this, PW-30 R.S.
Makwana, (A.S.I Annapurna PS) deposed that on 19.06.2011 he saw Rahul @ Govind coming to the
police station in an autorickshaw alleging that someone shot him in the foot and that he was going
to the District Hospital for treatment. He gave the information to PW-29 Gauri Shankar Chadar.
PW-30 along with Constable Dinesh (who was not examined) went to the District Hospital. A
dehatinalsi was prepared (Ex. P103). Later PW-30 went back to the police station to register the FIR
(Ex. P107). PW-26 Dr Mukesh Bachawat (Medical Officer in the Dist. Hospital) examined Rahul at
around 22:40 hrs, and prepared medical report (Ex. P97), before referring Rahul to MY Hospital.
Constable Dinesh accompanied Rahul to MY Hospital for his treatment. During the early hours of
20.06.2011, PW-32 Dr Nilesh Guru examined Rahul and removed the bullet from his right foot. It
was deposited in the MLC Section of the hospital (Ex. P113). PW-30 stated that he took the sealed
packet from MY Hospital on 23.06.2011 which contained the bullet extracted from Rahul @
Govind’s foot. Shivraj Singh Raghuwanshi (not examined) prepared the seizure memo which was
exhibited as Ex. P108 (Article Z-7) and PW-22 witnessed it. In the cross examination, PW-30 was
questioned about the condition of the bullet, whether it had traces of blood, etc.

124. The appellants argued that the prosecution failed to establish that the bullet in fact was
extracted from Rahul’s right foot and it was the one sent to the ballistic expert. The case made out
was that the boy examined by PW-26 and PW-32 was not Rahul at all. However, on that score, there
cannot be any doubt because PW-29 G.S. Chadar, who recorded the dehatinalsi identified Rahul in
the court as Govind, who had reported that he was shot on the foot by an unknown person and
reported the matter to PS Annapurna. Furthermore, the signatures of the complainant on the
dehatinalsi (Ex-P103) are identical to the signatures of the appellant Rahul in his statement under
Section 313 CrPC. The doubt sought to be raised with respect to the manner of seizure of bullet in
this Court’s opinion, is not merited. The identification of Rahul by PW-29, the deposition of PW-30
and PW-31 (IO) show that the doctor who extracted the bullet initially kept it in safe custody with
the hospital itself in the MLC Section, which was later retrieved by PW-30 on 23.06.2011 and the
seizure made on the same day in the MIG Police Station. PW-22 Bharat Singh Thakur was in fact a
witness to the seizure memo (Ex. P78, seized as Ex. P108 by PS MIG Police Station). Thus, an
overall reading of the testimonies and articles seized, in the opinion of the Court, lends credence to
the fact that Rahul suffered a bullet injury on 19.06.2011, and proves the circumstances surrounding

39

it, as presented by the prosecution.

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

125. The Ballistics Report (Ex. P52) was prepared by PW-16 Bheem Bahadur, Head Constable at
DRP Line, Indore. It described the nature of the firearm seized, and cartridges recovered. The
Examination Report prepared by the State Forensic Science Laboratory (Ex. 120) stated that on
chemical examination of blood found on a piece of bandage (swab of gunshot wound of deceased), it
was not found positive for nitrate, copper or lead. However, the report stated that two bullets were
compatible to the certified bulled of 7.65 mm calibre cartridge, and Bullet TB-A1 were found similar.
Three pieces of skin, found copper positive. Importantly, according to the report, two bullets (EB2
and EB1) recovered from the body of Megha, the deceased, and Rahul’s right foot respectively, were
fired from pistol Ex. A1. The report also stated that the bullet fired at the right shoe (seized on
22.06.2011 under seizure memo Ex. P-75, which was proved by PW-20) was caused by a copper
jacketed bullet. Ex. P120, which was exhibited by the IO (PW-31), also listed inter alia, several
articles such as Article A-5 (containing two fired empty shells of 7.65 mm calibre cartridge which
were marked as EC-l & EC-2); Article A-6 (containing live 7.65 mm calibre pistol cartridge which
was marked as LR-l); Article A-10 (containing blood-stained Vicks bottle); Article B-5 (containing
three small pieces of skin jointly marked SK-l); Article B-6 (containing one piece of bandage cloth
with substance thereon); Article F-1 (a country made pistol A-1); Article F-6, (containing one right
leg shoe) and Article F-7 (a bullet marked as EB-1). The Ballistics Report, dated 14.07.2011, stated
that PW-16 Bhim Bahadur, ballistics expert test fired from the pistol received from the MIG Police
in a sealed packet. The ballistic report stated inter alia, that “These are empty shells of used
cartridge of 7.65 mm caliber pistol and on whose head stamp ''KF'' is marked. They have mark of
firing pin/ breach face. On comparison through microscope both are found alike as well as like test
fire cartridge TC-Al. The photo-micrograph has been taken for alike situation of Ex. ECl &TC-Al
wherein the points of similarity have been marked.” PW-16 who prepared the report, stated in his
deposition that he:

“..had checked operating firing pin, magazine catch and these were found in
serviceable condition. fire opened by, this country-made pistol could cause loss of life
for the people.”

126. The IO deposed that all seized articles were sent for chemical and ballistic examination on
13.07.2011 by letter Ex. P115, to which the acknowledgement receipt was Ex. P116 to P118. The
ballistic expert PW-16 was not cross examined. There is nothing on record that discredits the
ballistics examination or conclusions drawn by the expert PW-16, and this circumstance is therefore,
proved.

XI. DNA Evidence and the DNA expert’s report

127. A sample of blood found on the floor of the incident where the body of deceased Megha was
lying, was collected on a cotton swab, marked as A-1 and put in a paper envelope. Similarly, a
sample of blood found near deceased Rohini, was marked as A-2 and sample of blood near deceased
Ashlesha, was marked as A-3. A sample of plain cotton was also placed in a paper envelope and
marked as A-4, as per seizure memo (Ex. P27) prepared by the IO at the crime scene. The seizure of

40

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

these samples/articles (among others) from the crime scene is corroborated by the testimony of
PW-5 and PW-9 who are also witnesses to Ex. P27. PW-17 Satyanarayan Patel (crime scene
photographer) had photographed the crime scene (Ex. P61 to Ex. P65). These photos show blood
stains as well as the position, and direction of the bodies. The clothes (B1, C1, D1), vaginal swabs
(B2, C2, D2) and pubic hairs (B3, C3, D3) were also taken from each of the deceased - Megha,
Rohini and Ashlesha, respectively.

128. The clothes from which DNA material was obtained from the accused, were recovered pursuant
to disclosure statements (Ex. P28, Ex. P31, and Ex. P34) made on 23.06.2011. Seizures of the
relevant clothing articles (Ex. P29, Ex. P32, and Ex. P35) were drawn in the presence of PW-7
Sandeep Narulkar and Prakash Ichke (who was not examined by the prosecution), which as
discussed at length earlier - throws some doubt on the recoveries made on 23.06.2011. In addition
to their clothes, the prosecution submitted that DNA material was also extracted from the knife
seized from Manoj on 22.06.2011 (Ex. P14), and the iron knife from Rahul on 23.06.2011 (Ex. P29).

129. The deposition of PW-35 Dr. Pankaj Srivastava, Scientific Officer, DNA fingerprint unit FSL
Sagar, read with the DNA Report dated 10.08.2011 (Ex. P122) prepared by him, provide details of
the DNA analysis. This witness stated that the department received 19 exhibits concerning this case
on 14.07.2011, in a sealed condition, which as per his cross, he examined on 18.07.2011. The expert’s
report reveals that DNA was extracted through the Automated DNA Extraction System 12 GC and
Organic extraction. 16 desired genetic markers were taken from DNA to be tested by Amplification
Multiple PCR Technique. Thus, genotyping profile was obtained along with Automated DNA
sequencer of amplified DNA, AmfF/STR Identifier kit, AmpF/STR Y Filer kit. The analysis of the
results was done by gene mapping software v3.5. PW-35 clarified that ‘physical substance’
mentioned in the report is meant to be blood.

130. All of the articles obtained in connection to Megha (cotton swab of blood near her body A1,
clothes B1, vaginal smear slide B2, bullet seized from her body B4) were compared and uniform
female DNA profile was found. Similarly, a uniform female DNA profile was found in the case of
articles in connection to Rohini (A2, C1, C2) and Ashlesha (A3, D1, D3). These DNA profiles were
then compared with the DNA material extracted from the clothes of the three accused, and the two
knives recovered from Rahul and Manoj, which form a part of the DNA report. The conclusions of
the DNA matches and consequent opinion of PW-35 in the report, are summarised in the below
table:

Victim                      Articles of accused

Megha        A1, B1, B2 Clothes (Ex. F4) and knife (Ex. F5) recovered from Rahul
and B4
Clothes (Ex. H2) belonging to Neha

Bullet (Ex. B4) recovered from body of deceased

Ashlesha     A3, D1, D2     Clothes (Ex. G3) and knife (Ex. G1) recovered from Manoj

41

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

131. DNA material found on the bloodstained bedsheet seized from the scene of the crime (Ex. A9)
indicated presence of mixed DNA profile of the deceased, i.e. DNA material of more than one
individual. There is no mention of DNA material on the articles matching Rohini’s DNA profile. As
is evident from the above table, the DNA material which the prosecution relies on, is that of the
victims which according to the prosecution, was found on articles recovered from the possession of
the accused. It is not a case of having found DNA material of the accused, at the crime scene or on
the bodies of the deceased. Hence, the fingernail clippings (Ex. P18, P19 and P20) taken from the
accused at the time of arrest, seem to have not been considered/used.

132. During cross-examination what was put to PW-35, was whether: (a) the time period between
seizure/incident and examination would have any bearing on the DNA analysis, (b) there was a cut
mark in Manoj’s clothes (G3), (c) the articles were in sealed condition, (d) the clothes had to be kept
in a particular condition, and if blood could mix when clothes kept together - the answers to which
are satisfactory. However, the typographical error of mentioning ID 3074 as ID 3078 raises concern
and was pressed upon by counsel for the appellants.

133. Before this court, the appellants have raised concerns regarding the unexplained delay in
sending the articles seized on 23.06.2011 only 20 days later on 13.07.2011 (Ex. P115) and the
condition in which they were preserved, the lack of statistical analysis, and that the observation
sheet on which PW-35 deposed to have made notings on, was not placed on the record. Serologist
Reports prepared by Dr. M.P. Singh (Ex. P123 and P124) are also on the record which reveal that
blood was present on one bullet (B4), but blood quantity was not enough to run tests. This naturally
raises a question on whether it was possible to extract DNA, at all. The other articles mentioned in
the serologist’s report were A10 (Vicks bottle), F2 (Rahul’s left shoe), F3 (Rahul’s nails), F6 (Rahul’s
right shoe), F7 (bullet recovered from Rahul’s right foot), G2 (Manoj’s nails), G4 (Manoj’s shoes), H1
(Neha’s nails) and H3 (Neha’s sandals). However, the blood stains were too disintegrated or the
quantity of blood on the articles, was not sufficient to run classification tests.

134. During the hearing, an article published by the Central Forensic Science Laboratory, Kolkata40
was relied upon. The relevant extracts of the article are reproduced below:

“Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA} is genetic material present in the nuclei of cells of
living organisms. An average human body is composed of about 100 trillion of cells.
DNA is present in the nucleus of cell as double helix, supercoiled to form
chromosomes along with Intercalated proteins. Twenty- three pairs of chromosomes
present In each nucleated cells and an individual Inherits 23 chromosomes from
mother and 23 from father transmitted through the ova and sperm respectively. At
the time of each cell division, chromosomes replicate and one set goes to each
daughter cell. All Information about Internal organisation, physical characteristics,
and physiological functions of the body is encoded in DNA molecules in a language
(sequence) of alphabets of four nucleotides or bases: Adenine (A), Guanine (G},
Thymine (T} and Cytosine (C) along with sugar- phosphate backbone. A human

42

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

haploid cell contains 3 billion bases approx. All cells of the body have exactly same
DNA but it varies from individual to Individual in the sequence of nucleotides.
Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA} found in large number of copies in the mitochondria is
circular, double stranded, 16,569 base pair in length and shows maternal inheritance.
It is particularly useful in the study of people related through the maternal line. Also
being in large number of copies than nuclear DNA, it can be used in the analysis of
degraded samples. Similarly, the Y chromosome shows paternal inheritance and is
employed to trace the male lineage and resolve DNA from males in sexual assault
mixtures. Only 0.1 % of DNA (about 3 million bases} differs from one person to
another. Forensic DNA Scientists analyse only few variable regions to generate a
DNA profile of an individual to compare with biological clue materials or control
samples.

………………………………………… DNA Profiling Methodology DNA profile is generated
from the body fluids, stains, and other biological specimen recovered from evidence
and the results are compared with the results obtained from reference samples. Thus,
a link among victim(s) and/or suspect(s) with one another or with crime scene can be
established. DNA Profiling Is a complex process of analyses of some highly variable
regions of DNA. The variable areas of DNA are termed Genetic Markers. The current
genetic markers of choice for forensic purposes are Short Tandem Repeats (STRs).
Analysis of a set of 15 STRs employing Automated DNA Sequencer gives a DNA
Profile unique to an Individual (except monozygotic twin). Similarly, STRs present on
Y chromosome (Y- STR) can also be used in sexual assault cases or determining
paternal lineage. In cases of sexual assaults, Y-STRs are helpful in detection of male
profile even in the presence of high level of female portion or in case of azoo11permic
or vasectomized" male. Cases In which DNA had undergone 40 DNA profiling in
Justice Delivery System, Central Forensic Science Laboratory, Directorate of Forensic
Science, Kolkata (2007).

environmental stress and biochemical degradation, min lSTRs can be used for over routine STR
because of shorter amplicon size.

DNA Profiling is a complicated process and each sequential step involved in generating a profile can
vary depending on the facilities available In the laboratory. The analysis principles, however, remain
similar, which include:

1. isolation, purification & quantitation of DNA

2. amplification of selected genetic markers

3. visualising the fragments and genotyping

4. statistical analysis & interpretation.

43

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

In mtDNA analysis, variations in Hypervariable Region I & II (HVR I & II) are detected by
sequencing and comparing results with control samples:….

Statistical Analysis Atypical DNA case involves comparison of evidence samples, such as semen
from a rape, and known or reference samples, such as a blood sample from a suspect. Generally,
there are three possible outcomes of profile comparison:

1) Match: If the DNA profiles obtained from the two samples are indistinguishable,
they are said to have matched.

2) Exclusion: If the comparison of profiles shows differences, it can only be explained
by the two samples originating from different sources.

3) Inconclusive: The data does not support a conclusion Of the three possible
outcomes, only the "match" between samples needs to be supported by statistical
calculation. Statistics attempt to provide meaning to the match. The match statistics
are usually provided as an estimate of the Random Match Probability (RMP) or in
other words, the frequency of the particular DNA profile in a population.

In case of paternity/maternity testing, exclusion at more than two loci is considered exclusion. An
allowance of 1 or 2 loci possible mutations should be taken Into consideration while reporting a
match. Paternity of Maternity Indices and Likelihood Ratios are calculated further to support the
match.

Collection and Preservation of Evidence If DNA evidence is not properly documented, collected,
packaged, and preserved, It will not meet the legal and scientific requirements for admissibility in. a
court of law. Because extremely small samples of DNA can be used as evidence, greater attention to
contamination issues is necessary while locating, collecting, and preserving DNA evidence can be
contaminated when DNA from another source gets mixed with DNA relevant to the case. This can
happen when someone sneezes or coughs over the evidence or touches his/her mouth, nose, or other
part of the face and then touches area that may contain the DNA to be tested. The exhibits having
biological specimen, which can establish link among victim(s), suspect(s), scene of crime for solving
the case should be Identified, preserved, packed and sent for DNA Profiling.”

135. In an earlier judgment, R v Dohoney & Adams41 the UK Court of Appeal laid down the
following guidelines concerning the procedure for introducing DNA evidence in trials: (1) the
scientist should adduce the evidence of the DNA 41 1997 (1) Crl App Rep 369 comparisons together
with his calculations of the random occurrence ratio; (2) whenever such evidence is to be adduced,
the Crown (prosecution) should serve upon the defence details as to how the calculations have been
carried out, which are sufficient for the defence to scrutinise the basis of the calculations; (3) the
Forensic Science Service should make available to a defence expert, if requested, the databases upon
which the calculations have been based.

136. The Law Commission of India in its report42, observed as follows:

44

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

“DNA evidence involves comparison between genetic material thought to come from
the person whose identity is in issue and a sample of genetic material from a known
person. If the samples do not 'match', then this will prove a lack of identity between
the known person and the person from whom the unknown sample originated. If the
samples match, that does not mean the identity is conclusively proved. Rather, an
expert will be able to derive from a database of DNA samples, an approximate
number reflecting how often a similar DNA "profile" or "fingerprint" is found. It may
be, for example, that the relevant profile is found in 1 person in every 100,000: This
is described as the 'random occurrence ratio' (Phipson 1999).

Thus, DNA may be more useful for purposes of investigation but not for raising any presumption of
identity in a court of law.”

137. In Dharam Deo Yadav v. State of UP43 this court discussed the reliability of DNA evidence in a
criminal trial, and held as follows:

“The DNA stands for deoxyribonucleic acid, which is the biological blueprint of every
life. DNA is made-up of a double standard structure consisting of a deoxyribose sugar
and phosphate backbone, cross-linked with two types of nucleic acids referred to as
adenine and guanine, purines and thymine and cytosine pyrimidines…..DNA usually
can be obtained from any biological material such as blood, semen, saliva, hair, skin,
bones, etc. The question as to whether DNA tests are virtually infallible may be a
moot question, but the fact remains that such test has come to stay and is being used
extensively in the investigation of crimes and the Court often accepts the views of the
experts, especially when cases rest on circumstantial evidence. More than half a
century, samples of human DNA began to be used in the criminal justice system. Of
course, debate lingers over the safeguards that should be required in testing samples
and in presenting the evidence in Court. DNA profile, however, is consistently held to
be valid and reliable, but of course, it depends on the quality control and quality
assurance procedures in the laboratory.” 42 185th Report, on Review of the Indian
Evidence Act, 2003 43 (2015) 5 SCC 509

138. The US Supreme Court, in District Attorney's Office for the Third Judicial District v.
Osborne,44 dealt with a post-conviction claim to access evidence, at the behest of the convict, who
wished to prove his innocence, through new DNA techniques. It was observed, in the context of the
facts, that “Modern DNA testing can provide powerful new evidence unlike anything known before.
Since its first use in criminal investigations in the mid-1980s, there have been several major
advances in DNA technology, culminating in STR technology. It is now often possible to determine
whether a biological tissue matches a suspect with near certainty. While of course many criminal
trials proceed without any forensic and scientific testing at all, there is no technology comparable to
DNA testing for matching tissues when such evidence is at issue. DNA testing has exonerated
wrongly convicted people, and has confirmed the convictions of many others.”

45

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

139. Several decisions of this court - Pantangi Balarama Venkata Ganesh v. State of Andhra
Pradesh45, Santosh Kumar Singh v. State Through CBI 46, Inspector of Police, Tamil Nadu v. John
David 47, Krishan Kumar Malik v. State of Haryana48, Surendra Koli v. State of Uttar Pradesh &
Ors 49, and Sandeep v. State of Uttar Pradesh50, Rajkumar v. State of Madhya Pradesh51 and
Mukesh & Ors. v. State for NCT of Delhi & Ors. 52 have dealt with the increasing importance of DNA
evidence. This court has also emphasized the need for assuring quality control, about the samples,
as well as the technique for testing- in Anil v. State of Maharashtra53 “7. Deoxyribonucleic acid, or
DNA, is a molecule that encodes the genetic information in all living organisms. DNA genotype can
be obtained from any biological material such as bone, blood, semen, saliva, hair, skin, etc. Now, for
several years, DNA profile has also shown a tremendous impact on forensic investigation. Generally,
when DNA profile of a sample found at the scene of crime matches with DNA profile of the suspect,
it can generally be concluded that both samples have the same biological origin. DNA profile is valid
and reliable, 44 557 U.S. 52 (2009) 45 (2009) 14 SCC 607 46 (2010) 9 SCC 747 47 (2011) 5 SCC 509
48 (2011) 7 SCC 130 49 (2011) 4 SCC 80 50 (2012) 6 SCC 107 51 (2014) 5 SCC 353 52 (2017) 6 SCC 1
53 (2014) 4 SCC 69 but variance in a particular result depends on the quality control and quality
procedure in the laboratory.”

140. This court, in one of its recent decisions - Pattu Rajan v. The State of Tamil Nadu54, considered
the value and weight to be attached to a DNA report:

“33. Like all other opinion evidence, the probative value accorded to DNA evidence
also varies from case to case, depending on facts and circumstances and the weight
accorded to other evidence on record, whether contrary or corroborative. This is all
the more important to remember, given that even though the accuracy of DNA
evidence may be increasing with the advancement of science and technology with
every passing day, thereby making it more and more reliable, we have not yet reached
a juncture where it may be said to be infallible. Thus, it cannot be said that the
absence of DNA evidence would lead to an adverse inference against a party,
especially in the presence of other cogent and reliable evidence on record in favour of
such party.”

141. This court, therefore, has relied on DNA reports, in the past, where the guilt of an accused was
sought to be established. Notably, the reliance, was to corroborate. This court highlighted the need
to ensure quality in the testing and eliminate the possibility of contamination of evidence; it also
held that being an opinion, the probative value of such evidence has to vary from case to case.

142. In the present case, what is apparent, is that PW-35 has virtually echoed the DNA analysis in
his chief examination, and not chosen to elaborate on the random occurrence ratio, i.e., the
probability of the accused’s samples matching with those allegedly found at the crime scene. This
court has already discussed whether the recoveries of 23.06.2011 pursuant to disclosures made that
day can be accepted and held that they are suspect and need to be discarded. This leaves the report,
to the extent it says that samples lifted from recoveries made at the crime scene matched what was
seized on 22.06.2011 (knives, and other articles), to be inconclusive.

46

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

143. It is noteworthy that seizure Memo Ex-27, in terms of which Article A-9 (ID 3063) is said to
have been seized, does not record that as a matter of fact, a bed-sheet was seized. If one keeps in
mind that source H2 (ID 3078) in relation 54 (2019) 4 SCC 771 to Neha was seized on 23.04.2011,
and from an open area, the likelihood of its contamination- even if arguendo the genuineness of its
recovery might have been accepted- carried some degree of probability. For these reasons, it is held
that the DNA report in the present case cannot have a clinching, or high degree of probative value.

XII. Evidence relating to footprints

144. The Inspection Report (Ex. P77) prepared by PW-21 Dr. Sudhir Sharma described the scene of
the crime. It mentioned that three types of blooded partial shoe prints were found in the following
areas: (a) near the table at the crime scene; (b) in the pool of blood near the body of Ashlesha; and
(c) on the floor near the almirahs.

145. PW-21 did not, in his cross-examination remember the number of partial shoe prints found at
the incident (which he later says were at 2-3 places), but states that there were three kinds of prints.
He also mentioned that no dust was present, and therefore barefoot prints were not possible. In his
chief examination, PW-21 mentioned that at his instruction, PW-17 (crime scene photographer) took
scaled photographs of the blood-smeared partial shoe prints found at the place of the incident
(which are Ex. P66 to Ex. P74). This is not mentioned in the chief examination of PW-17; who only
later in his cross, states that he had taken 8x12 scaled photos of the footprints and locations with
blood stains, which were Ex. P66 to Ex. P74.

146. As already elaborated earlier, Manoj’s shoes were seized at his behest (Ex. P31, Ex. P32) and
sandals from Neha based on her disclosure (Ex. P34, Ex. P35) on 23.06.2011. Rahul’s right shoe was
seized by Annapurna PS on 22.06.2011 which is corroborated by the testimony of PW-20 Harbhajan
Singh (independent witness), who stated that Abhay Tiwari (not examined) had spotted the
blood-stained shoe in his garden and reported it to the police, and that both of them were witnesses
to the seizure memo (Ex. P75). The left shoe was seized (Ex. P21) pursuant to disclosure made by
Rahul to the IO.

147. In furtherance of Ex. P115 letter dated 13.07.2011 sent by the IO to the State Forensic
Laboratory, Examination Report of shoe prints dated 13.09.2011 was prepared. This report stated
that, the exhibits were received by the Ballistics Branch on 02.08.2011 in sealed condition. For
comparative examination, sample prints of soles of shoes of Ex. F2, F6, and G4 and sandals of Ex.
H3 were made (photographs 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14). The shoeprints found were merely mentioned
together – it is unclear as to which photograph (#10, 11, etc.) is the sample of which shoe (F2, F5,
etc.).

148. This court is of the opinion that much weight cannot be attached to the footprint evidence in
this case. The report explicitly notes that shoeprints are incomplete and unclear, and that specific
and clear opinion could not be given. Yet, the expert proceeded to give his opinion about the
matching of the prints. In State of Bihar v Kapil Singh 55 this Court had held that evidence of an
expert relating to presence of a footprint, at the best is of a weak nature. This view was also shared

47

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

by Mohd. Aman v. State of Rajasthan56 and Balbir Singh v State of Punjab57. The prosecution, in
the opinion of this court, has not proved this circumstance.

Principles applicable to appreciation of evidence in cases involving circumstantial evidence

149. In one of its earlier decisions this court had in Hanumant v. The State of Madhya Pradesh58
indicated that the correct approach of courts trying criminal cases involving circumstantial evidence
should be that the circumstances alleged, be fully established; all the facts so established should be
consistent only with hypothesis of the guilt of the accused; circumstances should be 55 1968 (3) SCR
310 56 (1997) 10 SCC 44 57 1996 (6) SCALE 72 58 AIR 1953 SC 343 conclusive and of such tendency
that they should be such as to exclude every hypothesis but the one proposed to be proved. This view
was followed later in Tufail v. State of Uttar Pradesh59 and Ram Gopal v. State of Maharashtra60.
All these and other decisions were revisited in the three-judge bench decision in Sharad Birdi Chand
Sarda v. State of Maharashtra61 and the court enunciated a set of principles that every court trying
criminal cases entirely based on circumstantial evidence had to follow.

150. The conclusions recorded by this court in Sarda were listed in Para 152 (which were
characterised in Para 153 as “five golden principles”). They are extracted below:

“(1) the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should be
fully established. It may be noted here that this Court indicated that the
circumstances concerned 'must or should' and not 'may be' established. There is not
only a grammatical but a legal distinction between 'may be proved' and 'must be or
should be proved' as was held by this Court in Shivaji Sahabrao Bobade & Anr v State
of Maharashtra where the following observations were made:

"Certainly, it is a primary principle that the accused must be and not merely may be
guilty before a court can convict and the mental distance between 'may be' and 'must
be' is long and divides vague conjectures from sure conclusions."

(2) The facts so established should be consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused,
that is to say. they should not be explainable on any other hypothesis except that the accused is
guilty, (3) the circumstances should be of a conclusive nature and tendency. (4) they should exclude
every possible hypothesis except the one to be proved, and (5) there must be a chain of evidence so
complete as not to leave any reasonable ground for the conclusion consistent with the innocence of
the accused and must show that in all human probability the act must have been done by the
accused.

These five golden principles, if we may say so, constitute the panchsheel of the proof of a case based
on circumstantial evidence.”

151. These principles have stood the test of time, and the evidence in all criminal cases, have been
evaluated in their light, throughout the country. In 59 (1969) 3 SCC 198 60 AIR 1972 SC 656 61
(1984) 4 SCC 116 light of these binding principles this court would now examine whether the

48

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

circumstances supported by evidence, i.e., those accepted by this court in the previous part of the
judgement, was of such conclusion as to stand the test of the five golden principles enunciated in
Sarda (supra).

Summation of proof of circumstances

152. The prosecution relied upon several circumstances which were accepted concurrently by the
Courts below. These were the depositions of PW-10 the chance witness who claimed to have
witnessed all three accused fleeing the spot around 5:45 or 6:00 PM on the day of the incident; the
recovery of articles from the crime scene (fired cartridge, live bullet, sunglasses, black beads, etc.)
and lifting of the fingerprints (testified by PW-24 and corroborated by witnesses PW-5 and PW-9);
and seizure of stolen articles pursuant to disclosure by the accused. PW-1 who recorded his
statement a day after the incident (on 21.06.2011), specifically reported the loss of jewellery items
such as four pairs of bangles, mangalsutra, ATM cards, etc. These were later recovered at the
direction of the accused, which the prosecution claimed to be a breakthrough.

153. It was found by the courts below that Neha was arrested in the morning of 22.06.2011 after she
was found suspiciously loitering by PW-28. The arrest occurred after she was searched and later
questioned. The arrest was witnessed PW-3 and PW-6 who also deposed to witnessing the police
recording Neha’s disclosure statement. Recoveries of valuables and articles, such as two pairs of
golden bangles, part of a broken mangalsutra, other valuables and an ATM card, which belong to
Megha were from her house. Neha’s disclosure statement about the involvement of other accused
(Rahul and Manoj) led to their arrest and disclosure statements on the same day – all of which was
witnessed by PW-3 and PW-6. Again, gold jewellery items were recovered from Rahul’s premises as
also a country-made pistol, and subsequently, a knife. In addition, a photograph with him wearing
sunglasses was seized from his house. Manoj was likewise arrested and his disclosure statement led
to the recovery of a knife, a pair of golden bangles, part of a broken mangalsutra, etc. Later during
the same day on 22.06.2011, a right shoe was recovered by another police station (Annapurna PS). It
was seized; which was witnessed by PW-20. At that time, its connection with the murders was
unknown. The prosecution also relied on a disclosure statement said to have been recorded on
23.06.2011 leading to the recovery of clothes at the behest of Neha, Rahul and Manoj from various
open sites. Further, at Neha’s behest a Scooty with a service book was recovered and seized, and at
Manoj’s behest, a motorcycle reportedly stolen was found. These recoveries were witnessed by PW-7
an independent witness. The prosecution relied upon two sets of TIP proceedings, which sought to
identify on the one hand, Manoj and Rahul, and on the other, Neha. It also relied upon the TIP
proceedings in which PW-1 identified the stolen articles which he had reported loss of, on
21.06.2011 itself. The prosecution had relied upon other evidence such as the match of fingerprints,
in terms of the expert’s report (Ex. P84, by PW-24) upon the reports of the ballistic expert (PW-16),
and of the DNA expert (PW-35). It also sought to rely upon the report of another expert who spoke
about the probability of shoe print match.

154. In the preceding discussion of the evidence in the earlier part of this judgement, this court has
held that though the prosecution version of how Neha was arrested had to be disbelieved, it did not
taint her subsequent disclosure, which led to the seizure and recovery of stolen articles from her

49

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

premises - four stolen pieces of jewellery, and an ATM card which belonged to Megha, the deceased
(proved by PW-27, bank official). The previous discussion of the evidence relating to the other
accused led this court to infer that the prosecution was able to prove the recovery of articles seized
on 22.06.2011 from the premises of Rahul and Manoj i.e., golden bangles, parts of a broken
mangalsutra, each from the houses of the accused, a country made pistol and a knife, from Rahul’s
house at his behest. This court also concluded that the TIP proceedings conducted in respect of the
stolen articles was validly proved by the prosecution. The report of the ballistic expert PW-16, has
been held to have established that the seized bullets (from the crime scene), matched with the test
fired bullet from the pistol seized from Rahul's house at his behest. The recovery of a right shoe with
a bullet hole on 22.06.2011, likewise was proved by the prosecution. The other circumstance which
the prosecution relied upon in this context, pointing to Rahul's involvement was his treatment by
PW-32. Rahul had late in the evening of 19.06.2011, reported to PS Annapurna, that he was shot on
the right foot, by some unknown assailants which was recorded by PW-29, who also identified him
in the court. PW-29 further deposed that Rahul first went to a District hospital and was treated by
PW-26, who then referred him to MY hospital. Later in the early hours of 20.06.2011 Rahul was
operated upon by PW-32 who extracted the bullet, sealed it and kept it with the MLC cell. This bullet
was seized by the police and sent to the ballistic expert (PW-24) who in his report supported the
prosecution's version that the bullet was fired from the same weapon which had discharged the
bullet that was extracted from the deceased Megha’s body.

155. This court has disbelieved the prosecution allegation with respect to the circumstances
surrounding Neha's arrest, principally because of the evidence of DW-1. It is quite clear that DW-1
Deepika Shinde was involved to an extent during the initial stages of the investigation and according
to the police records, was responsible for the breakthrough which led among others, to her
out-of-turn promotion, swiftly. This court has also disbelieved the story of the prosecution with
respect to the recoveries alleged to have been made on 23.06.2011, mainly on the ground that when
according to the official version the accused were nabbed and had made the disclosure statements
the previous day, nothing prevented the police from recording the entirety of it and proceeding to
recover articles which were supposedly hidden in open spaces. Further, the court has not accepted
the prosecution's story with respect to the chance witnesses, PW-10 and his identification of the
accused in TIP proceedings.

156. During the hearing, the appellants’ counsel had urged that the findings of the trial court are
unsustainable, because they overlooked several lacunae which cumulatively tended to undermine
the prosecution’s case. The omission to examine certain witnesses (such as PW-1’s driver,
Nandakumar; Abhay Tiwari, who along with PW-20 found the right shoe with a bullet hole; Amit
Soni, who went to the TIP of articles, with some jewellery items; Prakash Ichke, who witnessed the
recoveries and seizures on 23.06.2011, Constable Dinesh, who accompanied Rahul to MY hospital,
etc.). It was also emphasized that the silence of certain witnesses (such as PW-4, in regard to
whether she witnessed the arrest, and search of Neha; of PW-19, who was silent about receiving a
report from PW-28 regarding Neha’s suspicious activities in the morning of 22- 06-2011; silence by
prosecution witnesses about DW-1’s role), too, cast grave doubts about the prosecution version.
Furthermore, it was contended that the seizure, sealing, transmission of articles found at the crime
scene and recovered from the accused’s premises, as well as open areas, as well as their chain of

50

custody was not proved.

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

157. This court has previously discussed the probative value of the evidence relied on by the
prosecution, and rejected the way in which Neha was apprehended, the recoveries made on
23.06.2011, the TIP of the accused, the deposition of PW-10 and of PW-8, and the DNA and
shoeprint analysis. The first question is whether having regard to the rejection of some of the
prosecution evidence, the case against the accused, as a whole, stands disproved. This aspect has
been considered in earlier decisions of this court where defects in investigation, or lapses in the
recollection during testimonies of witnesses, were involved. In State of U.P. v. Anil Singh62, this
court observed as follows:

62 (1988) Supp SCC 686 “17. It is also our experience that invariably the witnesses
add embroidery to prosecution story, perhaps for the fear of being disbelieved. But
that is no ground to throw the case overboard, if true, in the main. If there is a ring of
truth in the main, the case should not be rejected. It is the duty of the court to cull out
the nuggets of truth from the evidence unless there is reason to believe that the
inconsistencies or falsehood are so glaring as utterly to destroy confidence in the
witnesses. It is necessary to remember that a Judge does not preside over a criminal
trial merely to see that no innocent man is punished. A Judge also presides to see that
a guilty man does not escape. One is as important as the other. Both are public duties
which the Judge has to perform.” In C. Muniappan v. State of Tamil Nadu63 it was
held that:

“The defect in the investigation by itself cannot be a ground for acquittal. If primacy
is given to such designed or negligent investigations or to the omissions or lapses by
perfunctory investigation, the faith and confidence of the people in the criminal
justice administration would be eroded. Where there has been negligence on the part
of the investigating agency or omissions, etc. which resulted in defective
investigation, there is a legal obligation on the part of the court to examine the
prosecution evidence dehors such lapses, carefully, to find out whether the said
evidence is reliable or not and to what extent it is reliable and as to whether such
lapses affected the object of finding out the truth.

A similar approach was adopted in Surajit Sarkar v. State of West Bengal and
Shanker & Ors. v. State of Madhya Pradesh 65. In Harijana Thirupala and Ors. v.
Public Prosecutor, High Court of A.P., Hyderabad66 this court said that:

“…The case of the prosecution must be judged as a whole having regard to the totality
of the evidence.

In appreciating the evidence, the approach of the court must be integrated not
truncated or isolated. In other words, the impact of evidence in totality on the
prosecution case or innocence of Accused has to be kept in mind in coming the
conclusion as to the guilt or otherwise of the accused. In reaching a conclusion about

51

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

the guilt of the accused, the court has to appreciate, analyse and assess the evidence
placed before it by the yardstick of probabilities, its intrinsic value and the animus of
witnesses.”

158. This court has further emphasized that if discrepancies in the depositions are minor, or that
witness contradict themselves during their testimonies (as opposed to their previous police
statements) what is important is the nature of contradictions. In Rammi @ Rameshwar v. State of
Madhya Pradesh 67, this Court held that:

63 (2010) 9 SCC 567 64 (2013) 2 SCC 146 65 (2018) 15 SCC 725 66 (2002) 6 SCC 470
67 (1999 ) 8 SCC 649 “24….Courts should bear in mind that it is only when
discrepancies in the evidence of a witness are so incompatible with the credibility of
his version that the Court is justified in jettisoning his evidence. But too serious a
view to be adopted on mere variations falling in the narration of an incident (either as
between the evidence of two witnesses or as between two statements of the same
witness) is an unrealistic approach for judicial scrutiny.” In Appabhai and Anr. v.
State of Gujarat 68, it was ruled that “The Court while appreciating the evidence must
not attach undue importance to minor discrepancies. The discrepancies which do not
shake the basic version of the prosecution case may be discarded”. In a similar vein, it
was observed, in Vinod Kumar v. State of Haryana69 that “Only when discrepancies
in the evidence of a witness are so incompatible with the credibility of his version that
it would be justified in jettisoning his evidence.”

159. The omission of some of the prosecution witnesses to mention a particular fact, or corroborate
something, which is deposed to by other witnesses, therefore, does not ipso facto favour an accused.
What is important, however, is whether the omission to depose about a fact is so fundamental that
the prosecution version becomes shaky and incredulous. In the present case, the omission to depose
about certain facts, by PW-4, or PW-19, or any other witness cannot inure to the accused’s benefit.
Each of the facts they omitted, was supported by one or more witnesses. Likewise, the failure to
examine certain persons, like Anil Soni, Prakash Ichke, Abhay Tiwari, or Nandakumar, cannot inure
to the accused’s benefit. Anil Soni was present during the TIP of seized articles, when other similar
articles brought by him, for comparison and identification by PW-1. The latter witness was able to
identify the articles which had been seized from the accused; this was deposed to by PW-12, whose
testimony cannot be doubted. The failure to examine Anil Soni therefore, was a lapse, but not a fatal
one, as far as the TIP itself went. Likewise, the failure to examine Prakash Ichke is of no
consequence, because the recoveries made on 68 1988 Supp (1) SCC 241 69 (2015) 3 SCC 138
23.06.2011 have not been accepted. The omission to examine Nandakumar is also inconsequential,
given the sequence of reporting of the crime, and the rapidity of the events which developed after it.
No doubt, Abhay Tiwari noticed the right shoe with a bullet hole, first; however, PW-20 was also
with him; he deposed to the fact of its discovery and seizure. Similarly, the failure to examine
constable Dinesh is also not fatal, given the testimony of PW-29 and PW-30.

160. In Shivaji Sahebrao Bobade v. State of Maharashtra70 , this court held that even where a case
hangs on the evidence of one eye witness, it may be enough to sustain the conviction given sterling

52

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

testimony of a competent, honest man although as a rule of prudence courts call for corroboration;
it was observed that "It is a platitude to say that witnesses have to be weighed and not counted since
quality matters more than quantity in human affairs."

Kartike Malhar v. State of Bihar71 referred to previous decisions, and stated:

"On a conspectus of these decisions, it clearly comes out that there has been no
departure from the principles laid down in Vadivelu Thevar case and, therefore,
conviction can be recorded on the basis of the statement of a single eye witness
provided his credibility is not shaken by any adverse circumstance appearing on the
record against him and the court, at the same time, is convinced that he is a truthful
witness. "

161. Therefore, unless it is shown that the omission to examine a witness, who had previously
participated during the investigation and whose statement was recorded by the police, undermines
the prosecution case, or impacts on it significantly, the foundation of the fact or facts which are
sought to be proved, remains unshaken as long as that fact is deposed to or spoken about by other
witnesses, whose testimonies are to be seen in their own terms. Therefore, the omission to examine
the individuals left out, but who the prosecution claimed, had participated during the investigation,
did not affect its case, as far as the circumstances held to have been established by it, are concerned.
Having dealt with contentions of the accused, and also discussed circumstances that could be 70
(1973) 2 SCC 793 71 (1996) 1 SCC 614 established (and what was not established) this court proceeds
to summarize its findings.

162. As against Neha, this court has held that the circumstances proved are, firstly, recovery of
articles including two golden bangles, a broken mangalsutra, 3 guriyas, a gold pendant, an ATM
Card which belonged to Megha on 22.06.2011. The loss of these articles was reported by PW-1, on
21.06.2011, i.e. one day before Neha’s arrest. The second circumstance proved by the prosecution is
the TIP of these articles by PW-1 who was able to correctly identify them (as also corroborated by
PW-12 during the trial). Linked with this circumstance is the deposition of PW-27, a Bank of India,
Ujjain official who deposed to issuing a letter to the SHO, (Ex. P98), containing the ATM card
numbers. The ATM card (5264959108034023) which belonged to Megha, recovered on 22.06.2011
pursuant to Neha’s disclosure statement, from her house, was issued by that bank. The third
circumstance proved by the prosecution against Neha is her fingerprint. PW-24 KK Dwivedi, the
fingerprint expert, deposed to searching the crime scene for possibility of lifting impressions of
fingerprints. A set of five fingerprints (i.e. Ex P80 chance fingerprints) were lifted by him which was
witnessed by two witnesses (PW-5 and PW-9) who corroborated the fact. This court has held,
previously that the possibility of others’ presence at the crime scene, and its contamination could be
ruled out, because of the deposition of these two witnesses, as well as other depositions. PW-17
obtained the fingerprint samples of Neha (Ex. P43), which he deposed to during the trial. The
deficiencies alleged by the appellants, in the opinion of this court, about the procedural lapses in the
collection of such evidence, are not convincing. The evidence of PW-24, as well as his report (Ex.
P84) prove that a chance fingerprint (sample E, collected from the crime scene) matched with the
sample obtained from her, by PW-17 during the investigation. The fourth circumstance, against

53

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

Neha, which was established during the trial - and a vital one, is her knowledge of the crime. Her
disclosure statement, led to arrests of Rahul and Manoj, and recovery of stolen and other articles
from their possession. The circumstances surrounding the manner of Neha’s apprehension have
been disbelieved by this court, as well as the testimony of PW-10 and the TIP proceedings, during
which he identified her.

163. As against Rahul, this court has held that firstly, the circumstances relating to his arrest
(witnessed by PW-3 and PW-6), on 22.06.2011 was proved by the prosecution. The second
circumstance proved is that his disclosure statement led to recovery and seizure of stolen articles
and other articles connected with the crime (Ex. P14), including two bent golden bangles, part of
broken mangalsutra, a country made pistol, a knife measuring 35.5 cm, and a photograph showing
Rahul wearing black diamond-like beaded bracelet. The third circumstance is that, like with Neha,
PW-1 identified the gold jewellery recovered from Rahul’s possession, during the TIP (further
corroborated by PW-

12). The fourth circumstance proved is that PW-24 the fingerprint expert, deposed that he found
that prints A and B lifted from the crime scene (as corroborated by PW-5 and PW-9) matched with
the index and middle finger prints respectively of Rahul’s right hand, in the sample (Ex. P41)
collected from him by PW-17. The fifth circumstance proved during the trial is that Rahul had
reported late in the evening of 19.06.2011, that he was shot on the right foot, by unknown persons.
This was recorded in the form of a dehatinalisi against unknown persons; later an FIR (Ex. P107)
was registered by PW-30 for offences punishable under Sections 294, 307 and 34, IPC. Rahul was
initially taken to the District hospital (proved by the treatment card Ex. P97 dated 19.06.2011).
Rahul was however, referred to MY hospital, and examined by PW-32, who operated upon him. Ex.
P113 is the discharge card of MY hospital signed by PW-32 (who also deposed about it) on
20.06.2011. PW-29 who recorded the initial report dehatinalisi, also identified Rahul as the boy who
had reported the incident. The bullet extracted from his foot was deposited (under memo Ex. P113)
in the medico legal cell of the hospital, and later seized (under memo Ex.

P108) on 23.06.2011. The FIR relating to this case was later closed. The other fact proved is the
seizure of a right shoe (Ex. P75) under jurisdiction of Annapurna PS (proved by PW-20), which the
trial court observed had a bullet hole at the top. The sixth circumstance proved against Rahul, which
is material, is the ballistic report which stated that the two bullets (found at the crime scene) were
compatible to the certified bullet of 7.65 mm calibre cartridge; Bullet TB- A1 was found similar.
Three pieces of skin were found copper positive. Importantly, according to the report, two bullets,
EB2 and EB1 (recovered from the body of Megha, the deceased, and Rahul’s right foot respectively)
were fired from pistol Ex-A1, seized from Rahul’s house. The report also stated that the gun-shot
fired at the seized right shoe (mentioned above) was caused by a copper jacketed bullet. All this was
proved by the ballistics report (Ex. P120) that had analysed each of these items. The report also
revealed that the ballistics expert (PW-16) had test fired from the pistol sent to FSL, and had found
that the pistol had signs that the two spent cartridges, were fired from it.

164. As against Manoj, this court has held several circumstances to have been proved. The first
circumstance proved against him, is his arrest and subsequent disclosure statement, at 10:05 AM on

54

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

22.06.2011 (proved by PW-3 and PW-6). The second circumstance is the recovery and seizure of
articles, at Manoj’s behest, and from his possession, including - two golden bangles, portion of a
broken mangalsutra, a knife and a photograph with Manoj in sunglasses (Ex. P17, also proved by
same witnesses). The third circumstance proved against Manoj is that PW-1 identified the golden
jewellery recovered from his possession, during the TIP (corroborated by PW-12).

165. This court is of the opinion that all the circumstances and the link connecting them, was
sufficiently established by the prosecution and proved beyond reasonable doubt. Similarly, every
hypothesis suggesting the innocence of the appellants is ruled out by such evidence, and the
irresistible inference which follows, is their guilt.

166. In the opinion of this court, the proof of the circumstances against the appellants clearly points
to their guilt, and involvement in the crime. It appears that the appellants had informed themselves
about the deceased and their movement. Perhaps they kept a watch over the area. Their common
intention clearly was to rob the deceased, who had newly shifted to Indore and into the locality, on
19.06.2011. Though the exact time of occurrence is unknown, the post-mortem report reflected the
duration of death within 12 to 36 hours from the time procedure started, which was after 11 AM on
20.06.2011. It is reasonable to infer, therefore, that death occurred sometime during the day, on
19.06.2011. Though the evidence of PW-10 has been disbelieved, the evidence of PW-5, PW-9 and
PW-2, shows that the crime was noticed in the evening of 19.06.2011 when the bodies were
discovered, and the police reached the scene.

167. The nature and description of the injuries on the deceased show that they had apparently put
up a fight- which perhaps the appellants had not expected. The intention to rob the deceased, and
coerce them into handing over their valuables, soon turned violent, due to the unexpected fight put
up against the accused. There are several sharp-edged injuries, and one bullet injury which fatally
wounded Megha. As a result, it is evident that to subdue the three deceased women, the accused
resorted to frenzied knife attacks. The persistent resistance given by the deceased, coupled with the
nature of injuries with sharp weapons (the two knives) were fatal to both Rohini and Ashlesha. The
fact that the accused had to repeatedly stab them, reveals that the said appellants were not familiar
with wielding such a weapon. Weapons (2 knives and 1 pistol) have specifically been recovered from
the possession of Manoj and Rahul, and in these circumstances, their conviction for the offences
with which they were charged, is justified.

168. Information as to how these attacks occurred within the house of the deceased and the distinct
roles played by the accused, are in the special knowledge of only the accused; but no such
information was forthcoming through the course of the trial or appellate stage. This court 72 has
held that common intention requires prior meeting of mind, which can also be developed in the spur
of the moment, provided there is premeditated concert. The circumstances reflect that there was a
clear common intention among the three accused, to rob the house, and upon facing resistance - to
complete the job and leave undetected, by all means necessary. While no weapon has been recovered
from Neha, it is clear that she was involved in the offences, and was present at the scene of the
crime. This is evidenced by firstly, the fingerprint expert’s testimony and report, which clearly
reflects that her fingerprint was lifted from the crime scene; secondly, the recovery of stolen articles

55

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

(gold jewellery, Megha’s ATM card, etc.) from her possession; and thirdly, the fact that Manoj and
Rahul are only arrested pursuant to her disclosure of their participation - all of which, cumulatively,
clearly establish her involvement. The lack of an overt or specific act of violence attributable to Neha
does not exonerate her, given that the prosecution has been able to prove her presence at the crime
scene and participation in the commission of the offences, and that there was common object.

169. For the above reasons, all three accused are held guilty of the offences under Section 397/34,
449/34 and 302/34 IPC. Additionally, Manoj and Rahul’s conviction under Section 25(1-B)(B) of
the Arms Act, and Rahul’s conviction under Section 27 of the Arms Act, is upheld.

170. Before proceeding to consideration of the question of sentence, this court finds it necessary to
briefly highlight the role of the public prosecutor and trial court in a criminal trial, so as to safeguard
the rights of the accused. The concealment of DW-1’s role in this case’s investigation (her analyzing
of call 72 Ramashish Yadav v. State of Bihar (1999) 8 SCC 555 detail records of the deceased and in
connection to Neha – which was not produced in trial; tip-off allegedly received regarding Neha’s
whereabouts and what she would be wearing; participating in Neha’s arrest, and subsequent
involvement on 23.06.2011 in recoveries of articles) points to concerning gaps in the manner of
investigation carried out initially, or at the very least, an untruthful recollection and presentation of
it, for the purposes of trial. As elaborated earlier, these facts prompted this court to draw adverse
inferences against the prosecution’s version of Neha’s arrest. Other circumstances have been proved
sufficiently to conclude their guilt and result in conviction. However, it is appropriate to also point
out that concealment of DW-1’s role and failure to include the call detail records, could have severely
prejudiced the accused, had these other circumstances not been made out. Therefore, at this
juncture, it is pertinent to note and reiterate the role of the public prosecutor, and trial court, in
arriving at the truth by way of fair disclosure and scrutiny by inquiry, respectively.

171. A public prosecutor (appointed under Section 24 CrPC) occupies a statutory office of high
regard. Rather than a part of the investigating agency, they are instead, an independent statutory
authority73 who serve as officers to the court74. The role of the public prosecutor is intrinsically
dedicated to conducting a fair trial, and not for a “thirst to reach the case in conviction”. This court
in Shiv Kumar v. Hukam Chand75 further held that “….if an accused is entitled to any legitimate
benefit during trial the Public Prosecutor should not scuttle/conceal it. On the contrary, it is the
duty of the Public Prosecutor to winch it to the force and make it available to the accused…”.

In Siddharth Vasisht @ Manu Sharma v. State of NCT Delhi76 (hereafter ‘Manu Sharma’) it was
concluded that 73 Hitendra Vishnu Thakur v. State of Maharashtra (1994) 4 SCC 602 74 Deepak
Aggarwal v. Keshav Kaushik, (2013) 5 SCC 277 75 (1999) 7 SCC 467 76 (2010) 6 SCC 1 “187.
Therefore, a Public Prosecutor has wider set of duties than to merely ensure that the accused is
punished, the duties of ensuring fair play in the proceedings, all relevant facts are brought before the
court in order for the determination of truth and justice for all the parties including the victims. It
must be noted that these duties do not allow the Prosecutor to be lax in any of his duties as against
the accused.”

56

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

172. In Manu Sharma, the appellants in question had argued that the right to fair trial included a
wide duty of disclosure on the public prosecutor, such that non-disclosure of any evidence –
whether or not relied upon by the prosecution – must be made available to the defence. This court
considered Section 207 and 208 CrPC, Rule 1677 of the Bar Council of India Rules (which is limited
to evidence on which prosecutor proposes to rely on), and English law. The common law position
culled out was that subject to exceptions like sensitive information and public interest immunity, the
prosecution should disclose any material which might be exculpatory to the defense. Such a
position, however, was not accepted by this court, in its totality. It was held that such obligations are
on a different footing in India, given the fundamental canons of our criminal jurisprudence founded
on Articles 20 and 21 of the Constitution, which require not just the investigating agency, but also
courts in their own independent field, to ensure that investigation is fair and does not hamper the
individual’s freedom, except in accordance with law, i.e., ensure adherence to the rule of law.
Relevant extracts that merit repetition:

“199. It is not only the responsibility of the investigating agency but as well as that of
the courts to ensure that investigation is fair and does not in any way hamper the
freedom of an individual except in accordance with law. Equally enforceable canon of
the criminal law is that the high responsibility lies upon the investigating agency not
to conduct an investigation in tainted and unfair manner. The investigation should
not prima facie be indicative of a biased mind and every effort should be made to
bring the guilty to law as nobody stands above law dehors his position and influence
in the society.

**** 77 Rule 16 of the Chapter II, Part VI of the Bar Council of India Rules under the
Advocates Act, 1961: “16. An advocate appearing for the prosecution in a criminal
trial shall so conduct the prosecution that it does not lead to conviction of the
innocent. The suppression of material capable of establishing the innocence of the
accused shall be scrupulously avoided.”

201. Historically but consistently the view of this Court has been that an investigation
must be fair and effective, must proceed in proper direction in consonance with the
ingredients of the offence and not in haphazard manner. In some cases besides
investigation being effective the accused may have to prove miscarriage of justice but
once it is shown the accused would be entitled to definite benefit in accordance with
law. The investigation should be conducted in a manner so as to draw a just balance
between citizen's right under Articles 19 and 21 and expansive power of the police to
make investigation. These well-

established principles have been stated by this Court in Sasi Thomas v. State [(2006) 12 SCC 421 :
(2007) 2 SCC (Cri) 72] , State (Inspector of Police) v. Surya Sankaram Karri [(2006) 7 SCC 172 :
(2006) 3 SCC (Cri) 225] and T.T. Antony v. State of Kerala [(2001) 6 SCC 181 : 2001 SCC (Cri) 1048]
.

57

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

202. In Nirmal Singh Kahlon v. State of Punjab [(2009) 1 SCC 441 : (2009) 1 SCC (Cri) 523] this
Court specifically stated that a concept of fair investigation and fair trial are concomitant to
preservation of the fundamental right of the accused under Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
We have referred to this concept of judicious and fair investigation as the right of the accused to fair
defence emerges from this concept itself. The accused is not subjected to harassment, his right to
defence is not unduly hampered and what he is entitled to receive in accordance with law is not
denied to him contrary to law.”

173. The scheme of the CrPC under Chapter XII (information to police and powers to investigate) is
clear – the police have the power to investigate freely and fairly; in the course of which, it is
mandatory to maintain a diary where the day-to-day proceedings are to be recorded with specific
mention of time of events, places visited, departure and reporting back, statements recorded, etc.
While the criminal court is empowered to summon these diaries under Section 172(2) for the
purpose of inquiry or trial (and not as evidence), Section 173(3) makes it clear that the accused
cannot claim any right to peruse them, unless the police themselves, rely on it (to refresh their
memory) or if the court uses it for contradicting the testimony of the police officers.78

174. In Manu Sharma, in the context of policy diaries, this court noted that “the purpose and the
object seems to be quite clear that there should be fairness in investigation, transparency and a
record should be maintained to ensure a proper investigation”. This object is rendered entirely
meaningless if the police fail to maintain the police diary accurately. Failure to meticulously note
down the steps taken during investigation, and the resulting lack of transparency, 78 Mukund Lal v.
Union of India 1989 Supp (1) SCC 622, Malkiat Singh v. State of Punjab (1991) 4 SCC 341.

undermines the accused’s right to fair investigation; it is up to the trial court that must take an
active role in scrutinizing the record extensively, rather than accept the prosecution side willingly, so
as to bare such hidden or concealed actions taken during the course of investigation.79

175. In the present case, the trial court ought to have inquired more deeply into the role of DW-1,
given that by her own deposition she had admitted to analyzing call detail records and involvement
in Neha’s arrest – all of which had been suppressed by the prosecution side, for reasons best known
to them. In this context, a reading of Section 91 and 243 CrPC as done in Manu Sharma, is
important to refer to:

“217. ..Section 91 empowers the court to summon production of any document or
thing which the court considers necessary or desirable for the purposes of any
investigation, inquiry, trial or another proceeding under the provisions of the Code.
Where Section 91 read with Section 243 says that if the accused is called upon to
enter his defence and produce his evidence there he has also been given the right to
apply to the court for issuance of process for compelling the attendance of any
witness for the purpose of examination, cross-examination or the production of any
document or other thing for which the court has to pass a reasoned order.”

58

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

176. The court went on to elaborate on the due process protection afforded to the accused, and its
effect on fair disclosure responsibilities of the public prosecutor, as follows:

“218. The liberty of an accused cannot be interfered with except under due process of
law. The expression “due process of law” shall deem to include fairness in trial. The
court (sic Code) gives a right to the accused to receive all documents and statements
as well as to move an application for production of any record or witness in support
of his case. This constitutional mandate and statutory rights given to the accused
place an implied obligation upon the prosecution (prosecution and the Prosecutor) to
make fair disclosure. The concept of fair disclosure would take in its ambit furnishing
of a document which the prosecution relies upon whether filed in court or not. That
document should essentially be furnished to the accused and even in the cases where
during investigation a document is bona fide obtained by the investigating agency
and in the opinion of the Prosecutor is relevant and would help in arriving at the
truth, that document should also be disclosed to the accused.

79 Role of the courts in a criminal trial has been discussed in Zahira Habibulla
H.Shiek v. State of Gujarat (2004) 4 SCC 158.

219. The role and obligation of the Prosecutor particularly in relation to disclosure cannot be
equated under our law to that prevalent under the English system as aforereferred to. But at the
same time, the demand for a fair trial cannot be ignored. It may be of different consequences where
a document which has been obtained suspiciously, fraudulently or by causing undue advantage to
the accused during investigation such document could be denied in the discretion of the Prosecutor
to the accused whether the prosecution relies or not upon such documents, however in other cases
the obligation to disclose would be more certain. As already noticed the provisions of Section 207
have a material bearing on this subject and make an interesting reading. This provision not only
require or mandate that the court without delay and free of cost should furnish to the accused copies
of the police report, first information report, statements, confessional statements of the persons
recorded under Section 161 whom the prosecution wishes to examine as witnesses, of course,
excluding any part of a statement or document as contemplated under Section 173(6) of the Code,
any other document or relevant extract thereof which has been submitted to the Magistrate by the
police under sub-section (5) of Section 173. In contradistinction to the provisions of Section 173,
where the legislature has used the expression “documents on which the prosecution relies” are not
used under Section 207 of the Code. Therefore, the provisions of Section 207 of the Code will have to
be given liberal and relevant meaning so as to achieve its object. Not only this, the documents
submitted to the Magistrate along with the report under Section 173(5) would deem to include the
documents which have to be sent to the Magistrate during the course of investigation as per the
requirement of Section 170(2) of the Code.

220. The right of the accused with regard to disclosure of documents is a limited right but is codified
and is the very foundation of a fair investigation and trial. On such matters, the accused cannot
claim an indefeasible legal right to claim every document of the police file or even the portions
which are permitted to be excluded from the documents annexed to the report under Section 173(2)

59

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

as per orders of the court. But certain rights of the accused flow both from the codified law as well as
from equitable concepts of the constitutional jurisdiction, as substantial variation to such procedure
would frustrate the very basis of a fair trial. To claim documents within the purview of scope of
Sections 207, 243 read with the provisions of Section 173 in its entirety and power of the court under
Section 91 of the Code to summon documents signifies and provides precepts which will govern the
right of the accused to claim copies of the statement and documents which the prosecution has
collected during investigation and upon which they rely.

221. It will be difficult for the Court to say that the accused has no right to claim copies of the
documents or request the Court for production of a document which is part of the general diary
subject to satisfying the basic ingredients of law stated therein. A document which has been
obtained bona fide and has bearing on the case of the prosecution and in the opinion of the Public
Prosecutor, the same should be disclosed to the accused in the interest of justice and fair
investigation and trial should be furnished to the accused. Then that document should be disclosed
to the accused giving him chance of fair defence, particularly when non-production or disclosure of
such a document would affect administration of criminal justice and the defence of the accused
prejudicially.

222. The concept of disclosure and duties of the Prosecutor under the English system cannot, in our
opinion, be made applicable to the Indian criminal jurisprudence stricto sensu at this stage.
However, we are of the considered view that the doctrine of disclosure would have to be given
somewhat expanded application. As far as the present case is concerned, we have already noticed
that no prejudice had been caused to the right of the accused to fair trial and non- furnishing of the
copy of one of the ballistic reports had not hampered the ends of justice. Some shadow of doubt
upon veracity of the document had also been created by the prosecution and the prosecution opted
not to rely upon this document. In these circumstances, the right of the accused to disclosure has
not received any setback in the facts and circumstances of the case. The accused even did not raise
this issue seriously before the trial court.

(emphasis supplied)

177. In this manner, the public prosecutor, and then the trial court’s scrutiny, both play an essential
role in safeguarding the accused’s right to fair investigation, when faced with the might of the state’s
police machinery.

178. This view was endorsed in a recent three judge decision of this court in Criminal trials
guidelines regarding Inadequacies and Deficiencies, in re v. State of Andhra Pradesh80. This court
has highlighted the inadequacy mentioned above, which would impede a fair trial, and inter alia,
required the framing of rules by all states and High Courts, in this regard, compelling disclosure of a
list containing mention of all materials seized and taken in, during investigation- to the accused. The
relevant draft guideline, approved by this court, for adoption by all states is as follows:

“4. SUPPLY OF DOCUMENTS UNDER SECTIONS 173, 207 AND 208 CR.PC Every
Accused shall be supplied with statements of witness recorded under Sections 161

60

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

and 164 Cr.PC and a list of documents, material objects and exhibits seized during
investigation and relied upon by the Investigating Officer (I.O) in accordance with
Sections 207 and 208, Cr. PC.

Explanation: The list of statements, documents, material objects and exhibits shall
specify statements, documents, material objects and exhibits that are not relied upon
by the Investigating Officer.”

179. In view of the above discussion, this court holds that the prosecution, in the interests of
fairness, should as a matter of rule, in all criminal trials, comply 80 (2021) 10 SCC 598 with the
above rule, and furnish the list of statements, documents, material objects and exhibits which are
not relied upon by the investigating officer. The presiding officers of courts in criminal trials shall
ensure compliance with such rules.

On Sentence

180. The hearing of this case was adjourned for sentencing on a subsequent date, before which the
learned counsels submitted material regarding the lives of the accused – both before the incident
and post-conviction by the trial court, jail reports and other material called for by this court were
received from the State, and written submissions were filed by both sides.

181. In the course of arguments, the learned AAG maintained that there were no mitigating
circumstances and the cruelty evident from the nature of the crime, warrants nothing less than the
capital punishment, which according to it was correctly imposed, concurrently. It was submitted
that it is in cases like the present one, where the “rarest of rare” doctrine needs to be invoked as a
deterrent.

182. On the other hand the counsels for the accused laid emphasis on the fact that neither of the
courts below had even considered the possibility of reform of the accused who were all of young age
and barring Manoj (who had been involved in a petty offence in the past) the others did not have any
criminal antecedents. Counsel also argued that an overall look at the circumstances, at best, could
lead the court to conclude that the extensive injuries inflicted upon the deceased were in all
probability on account of the plans of the accused going awry, upon their encountering the victims’
resistance. It was submitted besides that the potential of each convict to be reformed – both having
regard to their previous backgrounds, as well as conduct in jail during pendency of trial and
confirmation, was not considered. This amounted to an infraction of the rule in Bachan Singh v.
State of Punjab81. Counsels relied on numerous judgments relating to the importance of
considering mitigating circumstances, the state’s role in demonstrating the accused is beyond
reformation, mitigating circumstances such as age and socio-economic background, pre-sentence
hearing – its scope and the court’s obligation, etc.

183. Capital punishment is prescribed in numerous IPC offences, including murder, kidnapping for
ransom, rape and injury causing death or leaving a woman in a vegetative state, rape or gang rape of
a child below 12 years old, dacoity with murder, among other offences. In Bachan Singh v. State of

61

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

Punjab82 (hereafter, ‘Bachan Singh’), this court had upheld the imposition of death penalty as an
alternate punishment under Section 302 IPC on the strength of the 35th Report of the Law
Commission of India (1967), the judgment in Jagmohan Singh v. State of Uttar Pradesh83 (which
had also noted that the 35th Report advocated for retention) and in several subsequent cases
decided by this court, in which the death penalty was recognised to be a deterrent. It laid emphasis
on the then recently added S. 253(2) and 354(3) CrPC which provide for bifurcated pre-sentence
hearing and sentencing procedure on conviction of capital offences, to conclude that this form of
punishment continued to have legislative backing and thereby, represented the will of the people.

184. It is undeniable that there have been shifts in how punishment in capital offences are dealt
with. This is apparent when developments are looked at holistically, or at a macro level: the
amendments to the CrPC by Parliament, the 35th and 262nd Law Commission Reports which stand
over 30 years apart, and the precedents of this court, across the decades. Initially, the law imposed a
requirement of written reasons for not imposing death penalty, which was removed in 1955. In 1973,
through further amendment to the CrPC and insertion of Section 354(3) - life imprisonment became
the norm and imposition 81 (1980) 2 SCC 684 82 (1980) 2 SCC 684 83 (1973) 1 SCC 20 of death
penalty required ‘special reasons’; and through Section 253(2) – sentencing required separate
consideration from the question of conviction. In both phases, i.e., post-1955 and post-1973, capital
punishment was upheld to be constitutional by 5-judge benches of this court in Jagmohan Singh
and Bachan Singh, respectively.

185. The 262nd Law Commission Report on Death Penalty (2015) (hereafter, ‘262nd Report’), is a
result of this court’s references in primarily two cases. Firstly, in Santosh Kumar Satishbhushan
Bariyar v. State of Maharashtra 84 (hereafter ‘Santosh Bariyar’) where, after taking note of the UN
General Assembly Resolution 62/14985 it was pointed out that credible research was required to
shape an informed discussion and debate, on the contentious issue of death sentence. Secondly, the
judgment in Shankar Kisanrao Khade v. State of Maharashtra86 tasked the Law Commission to
resolve the issue of whether death penalty is a deterrent punishment, is retributive justice, or serves
an incapacitative goal; and to study the difference in approach adopted by the judiciary (rarest of
rare) and the executive (what was termed as unknown) while granting commutation. In attempting
to fulfil this mandate, the Commission discerned an urgent need for re-examination of its own
earlier recommendations on the death penalty (in its 35th Report, 1967), given the drastic change in
social, economic, and cultural contexts of the country since the 35th Report, and arbitrariness which
has remained a major concern in the adjudication of death penalty cases since Bachan Singh laid
down the foundational principle of ‘rarest of rare’.

186. Reflective of changed circumstances and evolving discourse, the report marks a shift in the
approach towards the death penalty in India, going so far as to recommend abolition in all offences,
except those relating to terrorism. A large part of the report focusses on courts’ discretion and
judicial reasoning 84 (2009) 6 SCC 498 (para 112).

85 Adopted on 18.12.2007.

86 (2013) 5 SCC 546 (para 148-149).

62

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

when it comes to sentencing. It concludes that death penalty sentencing in India has been based on
an arbitrary application of the Bachan Singh principle, and has become judge-centric, based on the
personal predilection of judges – a concern which was alluded to even by this court in Swamy
Shraddananda (2) @ Mural Manohar Mishra v. State of Karnataka 87 and analysed extensively
again in Santosh Bariyar, followed by Sangeet & Anr. v. State of Haryana88, Mohd. Farooq Abdul
Gafur & Anr. v. State of Maharashtra 89, and more recently in Chhannu Lal Verma v. State of
Chattisgarh90 (hereafter ‘Chhannu Lal Verma’).

The death penalty framework and how to apply it for ‘principled sentencing’

187. This court in Bachan Singh while upholding the constitutionality of capital punishment,
categorically ruled that the new CrPC of 1973 marked a shift as it bifurcated the criminal trial to
include a pre-sentence hearing (under S. 235(2)), and further mandated the sentencing court to
outline the “special reasons” (under S. 354(3)) or absence of them, by considering circumstances
both of the crime and the criminal. The court also noted that while broad guidelines or indicators
may be given, they cannot be put into water-tight compartments that curb discretion of any judge to
do justice in a given individual case:

“163. ….Now, Section 235(2) provides for a bifurcated trial and specifically gives the
accused person a right of pre-sentence hearing, at which stage, he can bring on
record material or evidence, which may not be strictly relevant to or connected with
the particular crime under inquiry, but nevertheless, have, consistently with the
policy underlined in Section 354(3), a bearing on the choice of sentence. The present
legislative policy discernible from Section 235(2) read with Section 354(3) is that in
fixing the degree of punishment or making the choice of sentence for various
offences, including one under Section 302 of the Penal Code, the court should not
confine its consideration “principally” or merely to the circumstances connected with
the particular crime, but also give due consideration to the circumstances of the
criminal.

*** 87 (2008) 13 SCC 767 88 (2013) 2 SCC 452 89 (2010) 14 SCC 641 90 (2019) 12
SCC 438

201. …As we read Sections 354(3) and 235(2) and other related provisions of the
Code of 1973, it is quite clear to us that for making the choice of punishment or for
ascertaining the existence or absence of “special reasons” in that context, the court
must pay due regard both to the crime and the criminal. What is the relative weight
to be given to the aggravating and mitigating factors, depends on the facts and
circumstances of the particular case. More often than not, these two aspects are so
intertwined that it is difficult to give a separate treatment to each of them. This is so
because “style is the man”. In many cases, the extremely cruel or beastly manner of
the commission of murder is itself a demonstrated index of the depraved character of
the perpetrator. That is why, it is not desirable to consider the circumstances of the
crime and the circumstances of the criminal in two separate watertight

63

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

compartments. In a sense, to kill is to be cruel and therefore all murders are cruel.
But such cruelty may vary in its degree of culpability. And it is only when the
culpability assumes the proportion of extreme depravity that “special reasons” can
legitimately be said to exist.” The court also accepted a list of helpful factors of
aggravating and mitigating circumstances.91 However, cautioning the court from
treating them to be exhaustive, the court further clarified that they were merely
indicative and that the mitigating circumstances had to be read in a “liberal and
expansive” manner, accounting for the dignity of human life:

“209. There are numerous other circumstances justifying the passing of the lighter
sentence; as there are countervailing circumstances of aggravation. “We cannot
obviously feed into a judicial computer all such situations since they are astrological
imponderables in an imperfect and undulating society.” Nonetheless, it cannot be
over-emphasised that the scope and concept of mitigating factors in the area of death
penalty must receive a liberal and expansive construction by the courts in accord with
the sentencing policy writ large in Section 354(3). Judges should never be
bloodthirsty. Hanging of murderers has never been too good for them. Facts and
Figures, albeit incomplete, furnished by the Union of India, show that in the past,
courts have inflicted the extreme penalty with extreme infrequency — a fact which
attests to the caution and compassion which they have always brought to bear on the
exercise of their sentencing discretion in so grave a matter. It is, therefore, imperative
to voice the concern that courts, aided by the broad illustrative guide-lines indicated
by us, will discharge the onerous function with evermore scrupulous care and
humane concern, directed along the highroad of legislative policy outlined in Section
354(3) viz. that for persons convicted of murder, life imprisonment is the rule and
death sentence an exception. A real and abiding concern for the dignity of human life
postulates resistance to taking a life through law's instrumentality. That ought not to
be done save in the rarest of rare cases when the alternative option is unquestionably
foreclosed.”

188. In Macchi Singh, this court extrapolated the principles from Bachhan Singh, and merit
repetition:

91 Bachan Singh (para 202 and 206).

“38. In this background the guidelines indicated in Bachan Singh case [(1980) 2 SCC 684 : 1980 SCC
(Cri) 580 : AIR 1980 SC 898 : 1980 Cri LJ 636] will have to be culled out and applied to the facts of
each individual case where the question of imposing of death sentence arises. The following
propositions emerge from Bachan Singh case [(1980) 2 SCC 684 : 1980 SCC (Cri) 580 : AIR 1980 SC
898 : 1980 Cri LJ 636] :

“(i) The extreme penalty of death need not be inflicted except in gravest cases of
extreme culpability.

64

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

(ii) Before opting for the death penalty the circumstances of the ‘offender’ also
require to be taken into consideration along with the circumstances of the ‘crime’.

(iii) Life imprisonment is the rule and death sentence is an exception. In other words
death sentence must be imposed only when life imprisonment appears to be an
altogether inadequate punishment having regard to the relevant circumstances of the
crime, and provided, and only provided, the option to impose sentence of
imprisonment for life cannot be conscientiously exercised having regard to the nature
and circumstances of the crime and all the relevant circumstances.

(iv) A balance sheet of aggravating and mitigating circumstances has to be drawn up
and in doing so the mitigating circumstances have to be accorded full weightage and
a just balance has to be struck between the aggravating and the mitigating
circumstances before the option is exercised.

39. In order to apply these guidelines inter alia the following questions may be asked and answered:

(a) Is there something uncommon about the crime which renders sentence of
imprisonment for life inadequate and calls for a death sentence?

(b) Are the circumstances of the crime such that there is no alternative but to impose
death sentence even after according maximum weightage to the mitigating
circumstances which speak in favour of the offender?

40. If upon taking an overall global view of all the circumstances in the light of the aforesaid
proposition and taking into account the answers to the questions posed hereinabove, the
circumstances of the case are such that death sentence is warranted, the court would proceed to do
so.”

189. In Machhi Singh92, this court also attempted to categorise cases under broadly five heads (i.e.,
manner of commission of murder, motive, anti-social or socially abhorrent nature of the crime,
magnitude of crime, and personality of victim), by strongly analysing the aggravating circumstances
of the crime. A formalistic reliance on these categories however, has the potential of leading any
court awry as it has the unintended effect of drawing attention away from the criminal, and
focussing disproportionately on the crime – the dangers of this 92 Machhi Singh (para 32-37).

standardisation was also noted by this court in Swamy Shraddananda (2)93, Sangeet94 and more
recently in Justice Sanjiv Khanna’s dissenting opinion in Manoharan v. State by Inspector of
Police95.

190. This court in Bachan Singh had warned against categorising cases.96 Rejecting the contention
that standards and guidelines should be laid down, it was noted in Bachan Singh that degree of
culpability cannot be measured, and aggravating and mitigating circumstances could not be rigidly
enumerated so as to exclude “all free play of discretion”. Reiterating that criminal cases cannot be

65

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

categorised as there were infinite, unpredictable and unforeseen variations, it was held that by such
categorization, the sentencing process would cease to be judicial, and such standardisation or
sentencing discretion is beyond the court’s function. Therefore, it would be befitting if reliance were
placed not solely on those five categories of crimes (which lays undue emphasis on aggravating
circumstances) enumerated in Machhi Singh, and instead on the two question- test, and the four
guiding principles of Bachan Singh that were succinctly culled out in Machhi Singh.

191. The decades that followed, has witnessed a line of judgments in which this court has continually
taken judicial notice of the incongruence in application of the ‘rarest of rare’ test enunciated in
Bachan Singh, and therefore, tried to restrict imposition of the death penalty, in an attempt to
strengthen a principled application of the same.

192. This aspect was dealt with extensively in Santosh Bariyar where the court articulated the test to
be a two-step process to determine whether a case deserves the death sentence – firstly, that the
case belongs to the ‘rarest of rare’ category, and secondly, that the option of life imprisonment would
simply not suffice. For the first step, the aggravating and mitigating circumstances would 93 Swamy
Shraddananda (2) @ Mural Manohar Mishra v. State of Karnataka (2008) 13 SCC 767 94 Sangeet &
Anr. v. State of Haryana (2013) 2 SCC 452 95 Manoharan v. State by Inspector of Police, Variety
Hall Police Station, (2019) 7 SCC 716 96 para 169-175, 192-195.

have to be identified and considered equally. For the second test, the court had to consider whether
the alternative of life imprisonment was unquestionable foreclosed as the sentencing aim of
reformation was unachievable, for which the State must provide material.

193. About four years later, in Sangeet97, this court lamented the continuing lack of attention given
to circumstances of the criminal, reiterated that balancing of aggravating-mitigating circumstances
and failure to apply the Bachan Singh sentencing framework uniformly, was leading to judge-centric
and inconsistent jurisprudence in death penalty matters.

194. In Shankar Kisanrao Khade98 this court developed yet another framework of the ‘crime test’,
criminal test’ and ‘rarest of rare test’ (which, was held to be distinct from the ‘balance test’ that was
discouraged in Santosh Bariyar and subsequently, in Sangeet as well):

“52. …. In my considered view, the tests that we have to apply, while awarding death
sentence are “crime test”, “criminal test” and the “R-R test” and not the “balancing
test”. To award death sentence, the “crime test” has to be fully satisfied, that is, 100%
and “criminal test” 0%, that is, no mitigating circumstance favouring the accused. If
there is any circumstance favouring the accused, like lack of intention to commit the
crime, possibility of reformation, young age of the accused, not a menace to the
society, no previous track record, etc. the “criminal test” may favour the accused to
avoid the capital punishment. Even if both the tests are satisfied, that is, the
aggravating circumstances to the fullest extent and no mitigating circumstances
favouring the accused, still we have to apply finally the rarest of the rare case test
( R - R   t e s t ) .   R - R   t e s t   d e p e n d s   u p o n   t h e   p e r c e p t i o n   o f   t h e   s o c i e t y   t h a t   i s

66

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

“society-centric” and not “Judge-centric”, that is, whether the society will approve the
awarding of death sentence to certain types of crimes or not. While applying that test,
the court has to look into variety of factors like society's abhorrence, extreme
indignation and antipathy to certain types of crimes like sexual assault and murder of
intellectually challenged minor girls, suffering from physical disability, old and infirm
women with those disabilities, etc. Examples are only illustrative and not exhaustive.
The courts award death sentence since situation demands so, due to constitutional
compulsion, reflected by the will of the people and not the will of the Judges.”

195. Recently, while considering a review petition, this court in Rajendra Pralhadrao Wasnik v. State
of Maharashtra99 held that Bachan Singh had intended the test to be ‘probability’ and not
improbability, possibility or 97 Sangeet & Anr. v. State of Haryana (2013) 2 SCC 452 98 Shankar
Kisanrao Khade v. State of Maharashtra (2013) 5 SCC 546 99 (2019) 12 SCC 460 impossibility of
reformation and rehabilitation as a mandate of Section 354(4) CrPC.100 The court analysed
numerous earlier precedents, noting that evidence by the state on this has been sparse and limited,
but was essential for the courts to measure the probability of reform, rehabilitation and
reintegration. The court located this requirement in the right of the accused, who regardless of being
ruthless, was entitled to a life of dignity, notwithstanding his crime. 101 While this process is not
easy, it was noted that the neither is the process of rehabilitation since it involves reintegration into
society. When this is found to be not possible in certain cases, a longer duration of imprisonment
was instead permissible.

Uneven application of this framework and (in)consistency in sentencing

196. An overall analysis of capital punishment cases decided by this court will perhaps reflect that
that there is in fact, no pattern. While there are real and valid concerns in the non-uniform
application of the Bachan Singh framework, discretion in sentencing, in itself – is not worrisome,
and the concern needs to be dispelled. While generally judges may look to precedents for the
comfort of numbers, that process only gives an indication of how similar instances have been dealt
with and has a limited role when it comes to sentencing. The discretion afforded to the court in
sentencing, is not for it to be judge-centric or result in disparate rulings, but in fact to enable the
court with the flexibility of considering the case-specific factors relating to the crime and criminal,
without falling into pre-determined patterns. Sentencing is not a mathematical equation and ought
not be seen as one. This has been recognized in numerous cases starting from Bachan Singh itself. In
Santosh Bariyar, analyzing the equality principle, due process and proportionality requirement in
capital sentencing, it was held that rather than applying strict classification of the type of offences
that warrant death sentence, the court must focus on equally considering the 100 Ibid (para 45) 101
Ibid (para 47) aggravating and mitigating circumstances (in which commonality is to be drawn
across cases), and arrive at individualized sentencing outcomes on a case-to- case basis.102 It was
noted:

“132. ….The imprecision of the identification of aggravating and mitigating
circumstances has to be minimised. It is to be noted that the mandate of equality
clause applies to the sentencing process rather than the outcome. The comparative

67

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

review must be undertaken not to channel the sentencing discretion available to the
courts but to bring in consistency in identification of various relevant circumstances.
The aggravating and mitigating circumstances have to be separately identified under
a rigorous measure.

133. Bachan Singh [(1980) 2 SCC 684 : 1980 SCC (Cri) 580] when mandates
principled precedent-based sentencing, compels careful scrutiny of mitigating
circumstances and aggravating circumstances and then factoring in a process by
which aggravating and mitigating circumstances appearing from the pool of
comparable cases can be compared. The weight which is accorded by the court to
particular aggravating and mitigating circumstances may vary from case to case in
the name of individualised sentencing, but at the same time reasons for
apportionment of weights shall be forthcoming. Such a comparison may point out
excessiveness as also will help repel arbitrariness objections in future. A sentencing
hearing, comparative review of cases and similarly aggravating and mitigating
circumstances analysis can only be given a go-by if the sentencing court opts for life
imprisonment.” (emphasis supplied)

197. The strength of ‘precedent’ and ‘consistency’ is perhaps, therefore, lowest when it
comes to matters of sentencing, as long as it is within the confines of legality and
resulting in ‘principled sentencing’. In other words, the judicial incongruence when it
relates to sentencing, would in fact be a positive indicator, rather than a negative one,
provided it is still within the well-defined contours of ‘principled’ sentencing. For
sentencing in capital offences, discretion to arrive at individualised sentences is
encouraged, but must be constrained by the ‘rarest of rare’ principle, wherein the
court considers aggravating circumstances of the crime, and mitigating
circumstances of the criminal (a ‘liberal and expansive’ construction of the latter),
which in turn must inform their consideration of whether the option of life
imprisonment is unquestionably foreclosed owing to an impossibility103 to reform.

102 Santosh Bariyar (para 172) 103 held to be ‘probability’ and not ‘impossibility’ in Rajendra
Pralhadrao Wasnik v. State of Maharashtra, (2019) 12 SCC 460.

198. Deviation from this principle, i.e., unguided discretion on the other hand, would quite
obviously lead to bad law. For instance, Ravji v. State of Haryana104 (hereafter ‘Ravji’), in complete
contravention of this court’s earlier constitution bench decision of Bachan Singh (which focussed on
both the crime, and criminal), held that “… it is the nature and gravity of the crime but not the
criminal, which are germane for consideration of appropriate punishment in a criminal trial”. A line
of cases105, further relied on this (in this court’s considered opinion, incorrect) decision in Ravji
case, and concluded that the nature and gravity of the crime (i.e., its brutality or heinousness), were
sufficient to impose capital punishment, without considering mitigating circumstances of the
criminal. Subsequently, the decision in Ravji was -quite correctly- declared to be per incuriam by
another bench of this court in Santosh Bariyar, for non- consideration of circumstances of the
criminal. Other cases that have focussed on brutality of the crime, as negating or washing away the

68

need to consider mitigating circumstances, similarly serve as bad precedent.

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

199. This court in Rajesh Kumar v. State106 again reiterated that brutality in itself, was not enough
to impose death sentence – the accused was convicted for murder of two children who offered no
provocation or resistance to the brutal and inhuman fashion in which the accused committed the
crime, however, it was held that due consideration to the mitigating circumstances of the criminal
still had to be given. Evidence had to be placed on record by the State, demonstrating that he was
beyond reform or rehabilitation, the absence of which was a mitigating circumstance in itself. The
High Court had merely noted that he was a first-time offender and had a family to take care of –
which this court noted was a very narrow and myopic view on the mitigating circumstances.

104 (1996) SCC 2 175.

105 Surja Ram v. State of Rajasthan (1996) 6 SCC 271; Dayanidhi Bisoi v. State of Orissa (2003) 9
SCC 310; Mohan Anna Chavan v. State of Maharashtra, (2008) 7 SCC 561; Bantu v. State of Uttar
Pradesh, (2008) 11 SCC 113; Shivaji v. State of Maharashtra, (2008) 15 SCC 268; State of Uttar
Pradesh v. Sattan @ Satyendra and Ors. (2009) 4 SCC 736; etc. 106 Rajesh Kumar v. State, (2011) 13
SCC 706 (para 74)

200. Therefore, ‘individualised, principled sentencing’ – based on both the crime and criminal, with
consideration of whether reform or rehabilitation is achievable (held to be ‘probable’ in Rajendra
Pralhadrao Wasnik), and consequently whether the option of life imprisonment is unquestionably
foreclosed – should be the only factor of ‘commonality’ that must be discernible from decisions
relating to capital offences. With the creation of a new sentencing threshold in Swamy
Shraddananda (2)107, and later affirmed by a constitution bench in Union of India v. V
Sriharan108, of life imprisonment without statutory remission (i.e., Article 72 and 161 of the
Constitution are still applicable), yet another option exists, before imposition of death sentence.
However, serious concern has been raised against this concept, as it was upheld by a narrow
majority, and is left to be considered at an appropriate time.

Theories of punishment

201. The 262nd Report, speaks extensively to the penological justification of the death penalty. It
finds that there is inconclusive evidence that this form of punishment has more of a deterrent effect,
in comparison to life imprisonment. Dismissing the retributive theory of punishment on the ground
that it suffers from lack of guidance on quantifying the punishment that would be appropriate to
impose, it categorically states that:

“Capital punishment fails to achieve any constitutionally valid penological goals….In
focusing on death penalty as the ultimate measure of justice to victims, the
restorative and rehabilitative aspects of justice are lost sight of. Reliance on the death
penalty diverts attention from other problems ailing the criminal justice system such
as poor investigation, crime prevention and rights of victims of crime.”

69

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

202. While the 262nd Report recommends abolition of the death penalty on this ground, in addition
to sentencing having become judge-centric or arbitrary, it has not prompted Parliamentary
intervention. Whether the death penalty deserves a relook (as recommended by J. Kurian Joseph
(dissenting) in 107 Swamy Shraddananda (2) v. State of Karnataka (2008) 13 SCC 767 108 (2016) 7
SCC 1 Chhannu Lal Verma), in light of the 262nd Law Commission Report, evolving jurisprudence,
public discourse and international standards of human rights, is outside the purview of this court’s
jurisdiction given the constitutional bench decision in Bachan Singh, and a question best left for the
legislature to critically consider. In this backdrop, what this court can do, is try and bolster the
existing sentencing framework. This is possible only by giving true meaning to the existing
guidelines (without falling into the trap of ‘categorising’ crimes that automatically warrant death
penalty). To do so, this court finds it necessary to lay out certain practical guidelines (elaborated
below) that can facilitate consideration of mitigating circumstances as recognised in Bachan Singh,
and consequently ensure uniform application of this framework.

203. The 262nd Report recognised the paradigm shift, in policy and discourse, towards a
reformative and rehabilitative response to crime, and the development of jurisprudence such that
adjudging a case to be ‘rarest of rare’ was not sufficient, and special emphasis had to be placed in
considering whether the offender is amenable to reform. Implicit in this shift is the understanding
that the criminal is not a product of only their own decisions, but also a product of the state and
society’s failing, which is what entitles the accused to a chance of reformation. Thus, making life
imprisonment the norm, and death penalty the exception. In, Lehna v. State of Haryana109 while
deciding whether the facts in that case were appropriate for death penalty, traced this shift in
approach:

“14. ..Section 302 IPC prescribes death or life imprisonment as the penalty for
murder. While doing so, the Code instructs the court as to its application. The
changes which the Code has undergone in the last three decades clearly indicate that
Parliament is taking note of contemporary criminological thought and movement. It
is not difficult to discern that in the Code, there is a definite swing towards life
imprisonment. Death sentence is ordinarily ruled out and can only be imposed for
“special reasons”, as provided in Section 354(3). There is another provision in the
Code which also uses the significant expression “special reason”. It is Section 361.
Section 360 of the 1973 Code re-enacts, in substance, Section 562 of the Criminal
Procedure Code, 1898 (in short “the old Code”). Section 361 which is a new provision
in the Code makes it mandatory for the court to record “special reasons” for not
applying the provisions of Section 360. Section 361 thus 109 (2002) 3 SCC 76 casts a
duty upon the court to apply the provisions of Section 360 wherever it is possible to
do so and to state “special reasons” if it does not do so. In the context of Section 360,
the “special reasons” contemplated by Section 361 must be such as to compel the
court to hold that it is impossible to reform and rehabilitate the offender after
examining the matter with due regard to the age, character and antecedents of the
offender and the circumstances in which the offence was committed. This is some
indication by the legislature that reformation and rehabilitation of offenders and not
mere deterrence, are now among the foremost objects of the administration of

70

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

criminal justice in our country. Section 361 and Section 354(3) have both entered the
statute-book at the same time and they are part of the emerging picture of acceptance
by the legislature of the new trends in criminology. It would not, therefore, be wrong
to assume that the personality of the offender as revealed by his age, character,
antecedents and other circumstances and the tractability of the offender to reform
must necessarily play the most prominent role in determining the sentence to be
awarded. Special reasons must have some relation to these factors. Criminal justice
deals with complex human problems and diverse human beings. A Judge has to
balance the personality of the offender with the circumstances, situations and the
reactions and choose the appropriate sentence to be imposed.

(emphasis supplied)

204. Mitigating factors in general, rather than excuse or validate the crime committed, seek to
explain the surrounding circumstances of the criminal to enable the judge to decide between the
death penalty or life imprisonment. An illustrative list of indicators first recognised in Bachan
Singh110 itself:

“Mitigating circumstances.—In the exercise of its discretion in the above cases, the
court shall take into account the following circumstances:

(1) That the offence was committed under the influence of extreme mental or
emotional disturbance.

(2) The age of the accused. If the accused is young or old, he shall not be sentenced to
death.

(3) The probability that the accused would not commit criminal acts of violence as
would constitute a continuing threat to society.

(4) The probability that the accused can be reformed and rehabilitated. The State
shall by evidence prove that the accused does not satisfy the conditions (3) and (4)
above. (5) That in the facts and circumstances of the case the accused believed that he
was morally justified in committing the offence.

(6) That the accused acted under the duress or domination of another person. (7)
That the condition of the accused showed that he was mentally defective and that the
said defect impaired his capacity to appreciate the criminality of his conduct.” 110
Para 206 These are hardly exhaustive; subsequently, this court in several judgments
has recognised, and considered commutation to life imprisonment, on grounds such
as young age111, socio-economic conditions112, mental illness113, criminal
antecedents114, as relevant indicators on the questions of sentence. Many of these
factors reflect demonstrable ability or merely the possibility even, of the accused to
reform (i.e. (3) and (4) of the Bachan Singh list), which make them important

71

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

indicators when it comes to sentencing.

Pre-sentence hearing – opportunity and obligation to provide material on the accused

205. This court in Bachan Singh held that the introduction of pre-sentencing hearing to the accused
in 1973 through Section 235(2) CrPC altered the Jagmohan Singh principle that the court is
primarily concerned with the circumstances connected with crime. Therefore, now due
consideration has to be given to the circumstances of the criminal as well, when adjudicating
whether the case falls within ‘rarest of rare’ and if the option of life imprisonment as an alternative,
is unquestionably foreclosed. In Bachan Singh, this court categorically stated that, “the probability
that the accused would not commit criminal acts of violence as would constitute a continuing threat
to the society”, is a relevant circumstance, that must be given great weight in the determination of
sentence. The sentencing hearing contemplated under Section 235(2), is not confined merely to oral
hearing but intended to afford a real opportunity to the prosecution as well as the accused, to place
on record facts and material relating to various factors on the question of sentence and if interested
by either side, to have evidence adduced to show mitigating 111 Mahesh Dhanaji Shinde v. State of
Maharashtra (2014) 4 SCC 292, Gurvail Singh v. State of Punjab (2013) 2 SCC 713, etc. 112 Mulla &
Anr. v. State of U.P. (2010) 3 SCC 508; Kamleshwar Paswan v. UT Chandigarh (2011) 11 SCC 564;
Sunil Gaikwad v. State of Maharashtra (2014) 1 SCC 129. 113 Shatrughan Chauhan v. Union of India
(2014) 3 SCC 1 114 Dilip Premnarayan Tiwari v. State of Maharashtra, (2010) 1 SCC 775
circumstances to impose a lesser sentence or aggravating grounds to impose death penalty.115

206. In the absence of an individual’s capacity to effectively bring forth mitigating factors, this court
in Bachan Singh placed the burden of eliciting mitigating circumstances on the court, which has to
consider them liberally and expansively, whereas the responsibility of providing material to show
that the accused is beyond the scope of reform or rehabilitation, thereby unquestionably foreclosing
the option of life imprisonment and making it is a fit case for imposition of death penalty, is one
which falls squarely on the State. This has been reiterated and further spelt out by this court in
Santosh Bariyar, Rajesh Kumar, Chhannu Lal Verma, and other decisions116. In Santosh Bariyar,
making observations on nature of information to be collected at the pre-sentencing stage, this court
further observed that “56. At this stage, Bachan Singh [(1980) 2 SCC 684 : 1980 SCC (Cri) 580]
informs the content of the sentencing hearing. The court must play a proactive role to record all
relevant information at this stage. Some of the information relating to crime can be culled out from
the phase prior to sentencing hearing. This information would include aspects relating to the nature,
motive and impact of crime, culpability of convict, etc. Quality of evidence adduced is also a relevant
factor. For instance, extent of reliance on circumstantial evidence or child witness plays an
important role in the sentencing analysis. But what is sorely lacking, in most capital sentencing
cases, is information relating to characteristics and socio-economic background of the offender. This
issue was also raised in the 48th Report of the Law Commission.” (emphasis supplied)

207. The state’s duty is heightened in importance even more so, in the Indian context where a
majority of the accused have a poor or rudimentary level of legal representation. The importance of
collecting socio-economic factors in the context of our criminal justice system was critically noted by
the 262 nd Report as follows:

72

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

115 Malkiat Singh and Ors. v. State of Punjab (1991) 4 SCC 341. 116 Muniappan v.
State of T.N. (1981) 3 SCC 11; Anil @ Anthony Arikswamy Joseph v. State of
Maharashtra, (2014) 4 SCC 69, etc. “7.1.6 Numerous committee reports as well as
judgments of the Supreme Court have recognised that the administration of criminal
justice in the country is in deep crisis. Lack of resources, outdated modes of
investigation, over-stretched police force, ineffective prosecution, and poor legal aid
are some of the problems besetting the system. Death penalty operates within this
context and therefore suffers from the same structural and systemic impediments.
The administration of capital punishment thus remains fallible and vulnerable to
misapplication. The vagaries of the system also operate disproportionately against
the socially and economically marginalised who may lack the resources to effectively
advocate their rights within an adversarial criminal justice system.”

208. However, despite over four decades since Bachan Singh there has been little to no
policy-driven change, towards formulating a scheme or system that elaborates how mitigating
circumstances are to be collected, for the court’s consideration. Scarce information about the
accused at the time of sentencing, severely disadvantages the process of considering mitigating
circumstances. It is clarified that mere mention of these circumstances by counsel, serve no purpose
– rather, they must be connected to the possibility of reformation and assist principled judicial
reasoning (as required under S. 235(2) CrPC). Constrained by this lack of assistance, this court (as
mentioned above) in Rajesh Kumar has even gone so far as to hold that the very fact that the state
had not given any evidence to show that the convict was beyond reform and rehabilitation was a
mitigating circumstance, in itself.

209. The lack of forthcoming information has led to attempts by the courts, to look backwards –
sometimes many years after the crime has been committed – to evaluate on the one hand,
circumstances that could not have been paused in time, and on the other those which can be
captured, but for which there exists no frame of reference from the past, for comparison. This
inconsistency in some courts calling for reports, while others fail to – further contributes to our
patchwork jurisprudence on capital sentencing, and in turn undermines the equality principle and
due process protection that Santosh Bariyar recognises as existing, in favour of death row convicts.

210. The move to call for a Probation Officer’s Report 117 (as done by this court even in this case), is
in fact a desperate attempt by the courts at the appellate stage, to obtain information on the accused
– at present. Good conduct of the accused at the post-conviction stage in prison (through a jail
report), and psychiatric evaluation to evaluate possibility of reform (albeit at the appellate
sentencing stage), were considered recently in Chhannu Lal Verma as necessary indicators for
considering mitigating circumstances:

“15. …Since the appellant has been in jail, we wanted to know whether there was any
attempt on his part for reformation. The Superintendent of the jail has given a
certificate that his conduct in jail has been good. Thus, there is a clear indication that
despite having lost all hope, yet no frustration has set on the appellant. On the
contrary, there was a conscious effort on his part to lead a good life for the remaining

73

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

period. A convict is sent to jail with the hope and expectation that he would make
amends and get reformed. That there is such a positive change on a death row
convict, in our view, should also weigh with the Court while taking a decision as to
whether the alternative option is unquestionably foreclosed. As held by the
Constitution Bench in Bachan Singh [Bachan Singh v. State of Punjab, (1980) 2 SCC
684 : 1980 SCC (Cri) 580] it was the duty of the State to prove by evidence that the
convict cannot be reformed or rehabilitated. That information not having been
furnished by the State at the relevant time, the information now furnished by the
State becomes all the more relevant. The standard set by the “rarest of rare” test in
Bachan Singh [Bachan Singh v. State of Punjab, (1980) 2 SCC 684 : 1980 SCC (Cri)
580] is a high standard. The conduct of the convict in prison cannot be lost sight of.
The fact that the prisoner has displayed good behaviour in prison certainly goes on to
show that he is not beyond reform.

16. In the matter of probability and possibility of reform of a criminal, we do not find
that a proper psychological/psychiatric evaluation is done. Without the assistance of
such a psychological/psychiatric assessment and evaluation it would not be proper to
hold that there is no possibility or probability of reform. The State has to bear in
mind this important aspect while proving by evidence that the convict cannot be
reformed or rehabilitated” (emphasis supplied)

211. However, this too, is too little, too late and only offers a peek into the circumstances of the
accused after conviction. The unfortunate reality is that in the absence of well-documented
mitigating circumstances at the trial level, the aggravating circumstances seem far more compelling,
or overwhelming, rendering the sentencing court prone to imposing the death penalty, on the basis
of an incomplete, and hence, incorrect application of the Bachan Singh test.

117 Birju v. State of M.P., (2014) 3 SCC 421; Anil @ Anthony Arikswamy Joseph v. State Of
Maharashtra, (2014) 4 SCC 69; Bharat Singh vs. State (NCT of Delhi), Order dated 17.04.2014, DSR
No. 1/2014.

212. The goal of reformation is ideal, and what society must strive towards – there are many
references to it peppered in this court’s jurisprudence across the decades – but what is lacking is a
concrete framework that can measure and evaluate it. Unfortunately, this is mirrored by the failure
to implement prison reforms of a meaningful kind, which has left the process of incarceration and
prisons in general, to be a space of limited potential for systemic reformation. The goal of
reformative punishment requires systems that actively enable reformation and rehabilitation, as a
result of nuanced policy making. As a small step to correct these skewed results and facilitate better
evaluation of whether there is a possibility for the accused to be reformed (beyond vague references
to conduct, family background, etc.), this court deems it necessary to frame practical guidelines for
the courts to adopt and implement, till the legislature and executive, formulate a coherent
framework through legislation. These guidelines may also offer guidance or ideas, that such a
legislative framework could benefit from, to systematically collect and evaluate information on
mitigating circumstances.

74

Practical guidelines to collect mitigating circumstances

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

213. There is urgent need to ensure that mitigating circumstances are considered at the trial stage, to
avoid slipping into a retributive response to the brutality of the crime, as is noticeably the situation
in a majority of cases reaching the appellate stage.

214. To do this, the trial court must elicit information from the accused and the state, both. The
state, must - for an offence carrying capital punishment - at the appropriate stage, produce material
which is preferably collected beforehand, before the Sessions Court disclosing psychiatric and
psychological evaluation of the accused. This will help establish proximity (in terms of timeline), to
the accused person’s frame of mind (or mental illness, if any) at the time of committing the crime
and offer guidance on mitigating factors (1), (5), (6) and (7) spelled out in Bachan Singh. Even for
the other factors of (3) and (4) - an onus placed squarely on the state – conducting this form of
psychiatric and psychological evaluation close on the heels of commission of the offence, will
provide a baseline for the appellate courts to use for comparison, i.e., to evaluate the progress of the
accused towards reformation, achieved during the incarceration period.

215. Next, the State, must in a time-bound manner, collect additional information pertaining to the
accused. An illustrative, but not exhaustive list is as follows:

a) Age

b) Early family background (siblings, protection of parents, any history of violence or
neglect)

c) Present family background (surviving family members, whether married, has
children, etc.)

d) Type and level of education

e) Socio-economic background (including conditions of poverty or deprivation, if
any)

f) Criminal antecedents (details of offence and whether convicted, sentence served, if
any)

g) Income and the kind of employment (whether none, or temporary or permanent
etc);

h) Other factors such as history of unstable social behaviour, or mental or
psychological ailment(s), alienation of the individual (with reasons, if any) etc. This
information should mandatorily be available to the trial court, at the sentencing
stage. The accused too, should be given the same opportunity to produce evidence in
rebuttal, towards establishing all mitigating circumstances.

75

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

216. Lastly, information regarding the accused’s jail conduct and behaviour, work done (if any),
activities the accused has involved themselves in, and other related details should be called for in the
form of a report from the relevant jail authorities (i.e., probation and welfare officer, superintendent
of jail, etc.). If the appeal is heard after a long hiatus from the trial court’s conviction, or High
Court’s confirmation, as the case may be – a fresh report (rather than the one used by the previous
court) from the jail authorities is recommended, for an more exact and complete understanding of
the contemporaneous progress made by the accused, in the time elapsed. The jail authorities must
also include a fresh psychiatric and psychological report which will further evidence the reformative
progress, and reveal post-conviction mental illness, if any.

217. It is pertinent to point out that this court, in Anil v. State of Maharashtra118 has in fact directed
criminal courts, to call for additional material:

“Many a times, while determining the sentence, the courts take it for granted, looking
into the facts of a particular case, that the accused would be a menace to the society
and there is no possibility of reformation and rehabilitation, while it is the duty of the
court to ascertain those factors, and the State is obliged to furnish materials for and
against the possibility of reformation and rehabilitation of the accused. The facts,
which the courts deal with, in a given case, cannot be the foundation for reaching
such a conclusion, which, as already stated, calls for additional materials. We,
therefore, direct that the criminal courts, while dealing with the offences like Section
302 IPC, after conviction, may, in appropriate cases, call for a report to determine,
whether the accused could be reformed or rehabilitated, which depends upon the
facts and circumstances of each case.” (emphasis supplied) We hereby fully endorse
and direct that this should be implemented uniformly, as further elaborated above,
for conviction of offences that carry the possibility of death sentence.

Sentencing of present accused

218. This court is of the opinion, that there can no doubt that the crime committed by the three
accused was brutal, and grotesque. The three defenceless victims were women of different age
groups (22, 46, 76 years) who 118 (2014) 4 SCC 69 were caught off-guard and severely physically
assaulted, resulting in their death, in the safety and comfort of their own home. To have killed three
generations of women from the family of PW-1, is without a doubt, grotesque. The manner of the
offence was also vicious and pitiless – Ashlesha and Rohini, were stabbed repeatedly to their death,
while Megha was shot point blank in the face. The post-mortem (Ex. P44) reflects that the stab
wounds were extensive – ranging across the bodies of the victim. The extensive bleeding at the
crime scene further reflects cruel and inhumane manner of attack, against the three women. The
crime in itself, could no doubt be characterised as “extremely brutal, grotesque, diabolical, revolting
or dastardly manner so as to arouse intense and extreme indignation of the community”119 as
defined in Machhi Singh. These are the aggravating circumstances.

219. On an application of the Bachan Singh test (as clarified and explained, in numerous decisions
elaborated above), however, the mitigating circumstances need to be considered (and that too,

76

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

liberally and expansively). Prior to the hearing on sentencing before this court, a direction was
issued the State to (on the basis of personal interviews and prison records) file for each of the
accused – a Psychological Evaluation Report, a Probation Officer’s Report, and Prison Report
including material on their conduct and work done. Furthermore, each of the accused has placed
material on record before this court, to demonstrate circumstances of the criminal. Given that in
this case there are three accused – this court cannot baldly consider their circumstances collectively,
and instead find that an individualised approach is necessary.

(i) Manoj

220. The material states that Manoj’s conduct appears to be disciplined, correctional in nature and
overall satisfactory, barring one physical altercation during an earlier confinement period. He has a
wife and two young children 119 Macchi Singh (para 32) with whom he has repaired relations and is
regularly in touch with. He makes special effort to be a part of his growing children’s lives,
demonstrating strong continued family ties. While in prison, owing to his interest in cricket, he has
also taken up the responsibility of being the Captain of the Jail Block team. The probation officer
concludes that he seems remorseful, and keen to reintegrate into society with his family.

(ii) Rahul

221. The report received from the Superintendent of Jail indicates that he too was involved in an
altercation with another inmate in his previous confinement period, but his overall conduct appears
to be normal, and correctional in nature. He has been voluntarily working as a health worker (based
on his request) since 05.01.2021 wherein he helps transports sick inmates to the Jail Hospital. While
in prison, he has completed 12 th standard education, and proceeded to pursue B. Com from
IGNOU, New Delhi (in his final year). He actively participates in cultural and spiritual programmes
conducted in the prison. His family consists of his ailing father, mother, and three married sisters.
He expressed concern for his old parents and wished to help them financially by rejoining society.

(iii) Neha

222. Her prison record reflects that she had, on a few occasions, got into fights and exchanged
abuses with the other female inmates, and lady guard officers in the jail. After counselling, however,
her conduct has improved and was found to be disciplined and corrective in nature. While in prison,
she actively participates in cultural programmes, has undergone training for embroidery, knitting
and lamination. In 2017, she received a national award for Jardosi work in Indore District Court and
has received numerous other accolades for her participation in activities. In prison, she teaches
children of other female inmates. Before detention, she was pursuing her B. Com degree, which she
completed in prison.

Her family consists of her parents and two married brothers (of which one, is paralysed), who she is
regularly in touch with.

Conclusion on sentence of the three accused

77

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

223. It is unfortunate to note that both the trial Court, and High Court, failed to provide an effective
sentencing hearing to the accused, at the relevant stage, which is a right under Section 235(2) CrPC
recognised by this court in several cases.120 In fact, it was argued by the accused that the trial court
in contravention of this court’s judgments121, had proceeded to hear on sentencing almost
immediately, depriving the accused of the opportunity to put forth their case for a less stringent
sentence. The trial court order on sentencing, records in passing

- the plea of ‘young age’ and ‘socio-economic factors’ as mitigating circumstances, but reflects, at
best, a mechanical consideration of the same. Swayed by the brutality of the crime and “shock of the
collective and judicial conscience”, the High Court affirmed imposition of the death penalty solely on
the basis of the aggravating circumstances of the crime, with negligible consideration of mitigating
circumstances of the criminal. This is in direct contravention of Bachan Singh.

224. The crime that the appellants have been held guilty of, is heinous; its execution was vicious and
cruel, by any stretch of imagination. The deception practised by the appellants, in entering the flat,
and, when encountering resistance, attacking the three women, was calculated and ruthless. The
repeated stabbings of two of the deceased, almost in a frenzy, on the one hand, and the defenceless
state of the victims, on the other, highlights that the accused were willing to go ahead with their
plans (of robbing) after eliminating the women of 120 Bachan Singh (para 152), Md. Mannan @
Abdul Mannam v. State of Bihar (2019) 16 SCC 584 (para 39), Allaudin Mian v. State of Bihar (1989)
3 SCC 5 (para 10), Rameshbhai Chandubhai Rathod v. State of Gujarat (2009) 5 SCC 740 (para 106),
Rajesh Kumar v. State (NCT of Delhi) (2011) 13 SCC 706 (para 52), Mukesh vv. State (NCT of Delhi)
(2017) 3 SCC 717 (para 9), Chhannulal Verma v. State of Chhattisgarh (2019) 12 SCC 438 (para 17).

121 Santa Singh v. State of Punjab (1967) 4 SCC 190 (para 3, 4, 5, 7); Allaudin Mian v. State of Bihar
(1989) 3 SCC 5 (para 10); Rajesh Kumar v. State (2011) 13 SCC 706 (para 52); Ajay Pandit @ Jagdish
v. State of Maharashtra (2012) 8 SCC 43 (para 38, 47).

three generations. No doubt, two of the victims appear to have put up resistance, if one looks at the
stab wounds inflicted all over their bodies, including on their arms and faces. Yet, they were
unarmed and weak.

225. At the same time, the young age of the accused at the time of the incident (35, 20, 22
respectively) and lack of criminal antecedents (except in the case of Manoj, who was allegedly
involved in a case of petty theft) cannot be lost sight of. Further, the prosecution case is silent on any
real motive that may have instigated or moved the three accused to have pre-planned for the
commission of murder – other than robbery, itself. This coupled with the fact that Rahul was shot in
his leg during the commission of the crime, indicates that perhaps it is reasonable to assume that
they were amateurs in a robbing-gone-wrong situation, who were not intent on taking the lives of
these three women. One can surmise that having ventured to rob, perhaps they did not contemplate
the kind of resistance that was put up by the victims, which led them to act the way they did, to
continue with their plan, and ensure that the victims did not survive to tell the tale.

78

Manoj vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 May, 2022

226. The reports received from the Superintendent of Jail reflect that each of the three accused, have
a record of overall good conduct in prison and display inclination to reform. It is evident that they
have already, while in prison, taken steps towards bettering their lives and of those around them,
which coupled with their young age122 unequivocally demonstrates that there is in fact, a
probability of reform. On consideration of all the circumstances overall, we find that the option of
life imprisonment is certainly not foreclosed.

227. While there is no doubt that this case captured the attention and indignation of the society in
Indore, and perhaps the state of Madhya Pradesh, 122Gurvail Singh & Anr v. State of Punjab (2013)
2 SCC 713 (para 13, 19); Amit v. State of Uttar Pradesh (2012) 4 SCC 107 (para 22); Shyam Singh @
Bhima v. State of Maharashtra (2017) 11 SCC 265 (para 8) and Ramnaresh & Ors. v. State of
Chhattisgarh (2012) 4 SCC 257 (para 88).

as a cruel crime that raised alarm regarding safety within the community – it must be remembered
that public opinion has categorically been held to be neither an objective circumstance relating to
crime, nor the criminal, and the courts must exercise judicial restraint and play a balancing role.123

228. In view of the totality of facts and circumstances, and for the above stated reasons, this court
finds that imposition of death sentence would be unwarranted in the present case. It would be
appropriate and in the overall interests of justice to commute the death sentence of all three
accused, to life imprisonment for a minimum term of 25 years. The appeals are partly allowed in the
above terms.

….......................................................J [UDAY UMESH LALIT] ...........................................................J
[S. RAVINDRA BHAT] ...........................................................J [BELA. M. TRIVEDI] New Delhi, May
20, 2022.

123 Chhannu Lal Verma (para 25), Santosh Bariyar (para 80-89), M.A Antony @ Antappan v. State
of Kerala, (2020) 17 SCC 751, Bachan Singh (para 126).

79