Mohamed Ali vs V. Jaya on 11 July, 2022

Mohamed Ali vs V. Jaya on 11 July, 2022

Author: M.R. Shah

Bench: B.V. Nagarathna, M.R. Shah

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4113 OF 2022

Mohamed Ali                                                …Appellant(s)
Versus
V. Jaya & Ors.                                          …Respondent(s)
With
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4114 OF 2022

JUDGMENT

M.R. SHAH, J.

1. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned common judgment and order dated
19.11.2021 passed by the High Court of Madras at Madurai Bench in Civil Revision Petition (NPD)
No. 1054/2021 and Civil Revision Petition (PD) No. 1301/2021, by which, in exercise of powers
under Article 227 of the Constitution of India the High Court has set aside the ex−parte judgment
and decree passed by the learned Trial Court, the original plaintiff has preferred the present appeals.

2. The facts leading to the present appeals in a nutshell are as under: − 2.1 That the appellant herein
– original plaintiff instituted a suit being O.S. No. 15/2010 on the file of I Additional District Judge
(PCR), Trichy for specific performance of an agreement to sell dated 17.07.2009. The said suit was
filed against four defendants. The defendants were placed ex− parte. The learned Trial Court passed
an ex−parte judgment and decree dated 31.10.2012. That original defendant Nos. 2 to 4 filed an
application to set aside the ex−parte judgment and decree. There was a delay of 2345 days in filing
the petition to set aside the ex−parte judgment and decree. Therefore, original defendant Nos. 2 to 4
filed an application requesting to condone the delay of 2345 days. The original defendant No. 1 also
filed an application to set aside the ex−parte judgment and decree. There was a delay of 1522 days in
filing the petition to set aside the ex−parte judgment and decree. Therefore, original defendant No. 1
also filed an application to condone the delay of 1522 days in filing the petition to set aside the ex−
parte judgment and decree. The learned Trial Court dismissed both the applications, one filed by
original defendant No. 1 and another filed by original defendant Nos. 2 to 4.

1

Mohamed Ali vs V. Jaya on 11 July, 2022

2.2 Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the order passed by the learned Trial Court refusing to
condone the delay of 2345 days in filing the petition to set aside the ex−parte judgment and decree,
original defendant Nos. 2 to 4 preferred Civil Revision Petition No. 1054/2021 before the High
Court. Though, original defendant No. 1 did not challenge the order passed by the learned Trial
Court dismissing his application to condone the delay of 1522 days in filing the petition to set aside
the ex−parte judgment and decree, filed revision petition before the High Court under Article 227 of
the Constitution of India being Civil Revision Petition No. 1301/2021 to set aside the ex− parte
judgment and decree. By the impugned common judgment and order, the High Court has allowed
the aforesaid two revision petitions and has set aside the judgment and decree passed by the learned
Trial Court by observing that the judgment and decree passed by the learned Trial Court is on a total
non−application of mind as before passing the decree for specific performance, the learned Trial
Court has not considered the aspect of readiness and willingness on the part of the plaintiff. Thus,
by the impugned common judgment and order in exercise of powers under Article 227 of the
Constitution of India, the High Court has set aside the ex−parte judgment and decree passed by the
learned Trial Court, without expressing anything on merits, whether the learned Trial Court was
justified in refusing to condone the delay of 2345 days in filing the petition to set aside the ex−parte
judgment and decree. Thus, the High Court has allowed Civil Revision Petition (CRP) No.
1045/2021 filed by original defendant Nos. 2 to 4. Being aggrieved by the impugned judgment(s)
and order(s) passed by the High Court in CRP No. 1301/2021 (filed by original defendant No. 1 to
set aside the ex−parte judgment and decree) and CRP No. 1045/2021 (filed by original defendant
Nos. 2 to

4) challenging the order passed by the learned Trial Court refusing to condone the delay of 2345
days in filing the petition to set aside the ex−parte judgment and decree, the original plaintiff has
preferred the present appeals.

3. Shri R. Balasubramanian, learned Senior Advocate, appearing on behalf of the appellant has
vehemently submitted that in the facts and circumstances of the case the High Court has committed
a grave error in setting aside the ex−parte judgment and decree in revision petition in exercise of
powers under Article 227 of the Constitution of India.

3.1 It is vehemently submitted by learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the appellant that
the ex−parte judgment and decree passed by the learned Trial Court was an appealable order and
therefore, defendant No. 1 ought to have preferred an appeal rather than filing the revision petition
under Article 227 of the Constitution of India. It is submitted that therefore, when a statutory appeal
was provided against the judgment and decree passed by learned Trial Court, the High Court ought
not to have entertained the revision petition under Article 227 of the Constitution of India and ought
not to have set aside the judgment and decree in exercise of powers under Article 227 of the
Constitution of India.

3.2 It is further contended that even otherwise the impugned judgment and order passed by the
High Court setting aside the ex−parte judgment and decree is unsustainable. It is submitted that the
High Court has recorded the findings on legality and validity of the judgment and decree passed by
the learned Trial Court as if the High Court was considering the appeal against the judgment and

2

Mohamed Ali vs V. Jaya on 11 July, 2022

decree passed by the learned Trial Court. It is further submitted that the High Court has not at all
considered and/or given any findings on whether the learned Trial Court was justified in passing the
ex−parte judgment and decree or not. It is submitted that only in a case where the ex−parte
judgment and decree is set aside after giving the specific findings that the learned Trial Court was
not justified and/or right in passing the ex−parte judgment and decree that the merits of the
judgment and decree was required to be considered.

3.3 It is further submitted by learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the appellant –
original plaintiff that even otherwise the High Court has not properly considered the fact that there
was a delay of 1522 days in filing the petition by original defendant No. 1 seeking to set aside the ex−
parte judgment and decree. It is submitted that the learned Trial Court dismissed the application
and refused to condone the delay of 1522 days. That the order passed by the learned Trial Court
refusing to condone the delay of 1522 days in filing the petition seeking to set aside the judgment
and decree, had attained finality as the same was not challenged by original defendant No. 1. It is
contended that therefore in the absence of any challenge to the order passed by the learned Trial
Court refusing to condone the delay of 1522 days, the revision petition/application filed by
defendant No. 1 challenging the ex−parte judgment and decree was not required to be entertained.

3.4 It is further submitted that even otherwise while setting aside the ex−parte judgment and decree
in exercise of powers under Article 227 of the Constitution of India, the High Court has not
exercised its discretion judiciously and has acted beyond the scope and ambit of exercise of powers
under Article 227 of the Constitution of India. 3.5 It is further urged by learned Senior Advocate
appearing on behalf of the appellant – original plaintiff that even otherwise there are no findings
recorded by the High Court on whether the learned Trial Court was justified in not condoning the
delay of 2345 and 1522 days in filing the petition for setting aside the ex−parte judgment and decree.
That when there was a huge delay of 2345 and 1522 days in filing the petition for setting aside the
ex−parte judgment and decree filed by original defendants No. 2 to 4 and defendant No. 1,
respectively and when the learned Trial Court by a detailed order refused to condone the delay, the
same ought not to have been set aside by the High Court, that too, without considering the legality
and validity of the order refusing to condone the delay.

3.6 It is further submitted by learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the original plaintiff
that the High Court has set aside the ex−parte judgment and decree in exercise of powers under
Article 227 of the Constitution of India as if the High Court was exercising the appellate jurisdiction.

3.7 Making the above submissions, it is prayed to allow the present appeals.

4. Present appeals are vehemently opposed by Shri M. Karpagavinayagam, learned Senior Advocate,
appearing on behalf of the respondents – original defendants. 4.1 It is vehemently submitted by
learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of original defendants that the High Court has rightly
set aside the ex−parte judgment and decree on the ground that the ex−parte judgment and decree
for specific performance of the agreement to sell was not in consonance with the procedure
enunciated under Order XII of the Code of Civil Procedure (CPC). It is submitted that the High
Court has set aside the ex−parte judgment and decree by observing that while passing the decree for

3

Mohamed Ali vs V. Jaya on 11 July, 2022

specific performance, the requirement of proving readiness and willingness was not considered by
the learned Trial Court. It is submitted that even the respondents – original defendants filed written
submission before the learned Trial Court. However, the learned Trial Court did not consider the
said aspect while passing the ex−parte judgment and decree.

4.2 Now so far as the submissions made by the learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the
appellant on the maintainability of the revision petition under Article 227 of the Constitution of
India, the learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the respondents – original defendants,
has heavily relied upon the decisions of this Court in the case of Radhey Shyam and Anr. Vs. Chhabi
Nath and Ors.; (2015) 5 SCC 423 as well as in the case of K.P. Natarajan and Anr. Vs. Muthalammal
and Ors; (2021) SCC Online SC 467. Relying upon the said decisions, it is submitted that as held by
this Court in the aforesaid decisions, challenge to the judicial orders could lie by way of statutory
appeal or revision or under Article 227 but not by way of writ under Article 226 or 32. It is
submitted that in the present case, the defendants invoked the jurisdiction of the High Court under
Section 115 of CPC as well as Article 227 of the Constitution of India by way of two different revision
petitions and on different grounds. That therefore, having found the ex−parte judgment and decree
of specific performance of agreement to sell passed by the learned Trial Court was not in consonance
with the procedure to be followed under the CPC and the relevant aspects, which were required to be
considered under the provisions of the Specific Relief Act, were not considered, the High Court has
not committed any error in setting aside the ex−parte judgment and decree.

4.3 Making the above submissions and relying upon the above decisions of this Court, it is prayed to
dismiss the present appeals.

5. We have heard learned Senior Advocates appearing on behalf of the respective parties at length.
We have also gone through the impugned common judgment and order passed by the High Court.

6. At the outset, it is required to be noted that the learned Trial Court passed the ex−parte judgment
and decree in the year 2012. That after a period of 1522 and 2345 days, original defendant No. 1 and
defendants No. 2 to 4, respectively, filed the applications to set aside the ex−parte judgment and
decree. The learned Trial Court by a detailed order refused to condone the delay of 1522 and 2345
days by specifically observing that no sufficient cause has been shown in explaining the huge delay
in filing the applications to set aside the ex−parte judgment and decree. The defendant Nos. 2 to 4
alone filed the revision application before the High Court challenging the order passed by the
learned Trial Court refusing to condone the delay of 2345 days. Defendant No. 1 did not file any
revision application before the High Court challenging the order passed by the learned Trial Court
refusing to condone the delay in filing the application to set aside the ex−parte judgment and decree.
Instead, defendant No. 1 directly filed the revision application before the High Court under Article
227 of the Constitution of India challenging the ex−parte judgment and decree and without
considering the legality and validity of the order/orders passed by the learned Trial Court refusing to
condone the huge delay of 1522/2345 days, by the impugned common judgment and order, the High
Court has set aside the ex−parte judgment and decree in exercise of powers under Article 227 of the
Constitution of India.

4

Mohamed Ali vs V. Jaya on 11 July, 2022

6.1 Having gone through the impugned common judgment and order passed by the High Court, it
can be seen that as such the High Court has not at all considered whether the learned Trial Court
was justified in refusing to condone such a huge delay of 2345 days. The High Court has also not
appreciated and considered the fact that as such the order passed by the learned Trial Court refusing
to condone the delay of 1522 days in so far as original defendant No. 1, had attained the finality.
Original defendant No. 1 straightway challenged the ex−parte judgment and decree passed by the
learned Trial Court by way of revision application under Article 227 of the Constitution of India.
Whether the revision application before the High Court under Article 227 of the Constitution of
India can be said to be maintainable or not has not at all been considered. Even otherwise, the
remedy against an ex−parte judgment and decree available to the defendants was, either to file an
application under Order IX Rule 13 of CPC or to prefer an appeal before the First Appellate Court.
The defendants availed the first remedy by way of filing the applications under Order IX Rule 13 of
CPC. However, there was a huge delay of 1522 and 2345 days, which was not condoned by the
learned Trial Court. Without expressing anything on whether the learned Trial Court was justified in
refusing to condone the delay, the High Court has simply set aside the order passed by the learned
Trial Court refusing to condone the delay in so far as original defendant Nos. 2 to 4 are concerned.
The High Court ought to have dealt with and considered the question, whether, the learned Trial
Court was justified in refusing to condone the delay or not. There is no discussion at all on the order
passed by the learned Trial Court refusing to condone the delay.

6.2 Even otherwise and as observed hereinabove, against the ex−parte judgment and decree, the
remedy by way of an appeal before the First Appellate Court was available. Therefore, the High
Court ought not to have entertained the revision application under Section 115 of CPC and under
Article 227 of the Constitution of India. The High Court ought not to have entertained such a
revision application challenging the ex−parte judgment and decree.

Once there was a statutory alternative remedy by way of an appeal available to the defendants, the
High Court ought not to have entertained a writ petition or revision application under Article 227 of
the Constitution of India.

7. At this stage, the decision of this Court in the case of Virudhunagar Hindu Nadargal Dharma
Paribalana Sabai and Ors. Vs. Tuticorin Educational Society and Ors.; (2019) 9 SCC 538, is required
to be referred to. In the said decision, it is observed and held by this Court that wherever the
proceedings are under the Code of Civil Procedure and the forum is the civil court, the availability of
a remedy under CPC, will deter the High Court and therefore, the High Court shall not entertain the
revision under Article 227 of the Constitution of India especially in a case where a specific remedy of
appeal is provided under the CPC itself. While holding so, it is observed and held in paragraphs 11 to
13 as under: − “11. Secondly, the High Court ought to have seen that when a remedy of appeal under
Section 104(1)(i) read with Order 43, Rule 1(r) of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, was directly
available, Respondents 1 and 2 ought to have taken recourse to the same. It is true that the
availability of a remedy of appeal may not always be a bar for the exercise of supervisory jurisdiction
of the High Court. In A. Venkatasubbiah Naidu v. S. Chellappan [A. Venkatasubbiah Naidu v. S.
Chellappan, (2000) 7 SCC 695] , this Court held that “though no hurdle can be put against the
exercise of the constitutional powers of the High Court, it is a well− recognised principle which

5

gained judicial recognition that the High Court should direct the party to avail himself of such
remedies before he resorts to a constitutional remedy”.

Mohamed Ali vs V. Jaya on 11 July, 2022

12. But courts should always bear in mind a distinction between (i) cases where such alternative
remedy is available before civil courts in terms of the provisions of Code of Civil Procedure, and (ii)
cases where such alternative remedy is available under special enactments and/or statutory rules
and the fora provided therein happen to be quasi−judicial authorities and tribunals. In respect of
cases falling under the first category, which may involve suits and other proceedings before civil
courts, the availability of an appellate remedy in terms of the provisions of CPC, may have to be
construed as a near total bar. Otherwise, there is a danger that someone may challenge in a revision
under Article 227, even a decree passed in a suit, on the same grounds on which Respondents 1 and
2 invoked the jurisdiction of the High Court. This is why, a 3−member Bench of this Court, while
overruling the decision in Surya Dev Rai v. Ram Chander Rai [Surya Dev Rai v. Ram Chander Rai,
(2003) 6 SCC 675] , pointed out in Radhey Shyam v. Chhabi Nath [Radhey Shyam v. Chhabi Nath,
(2015) 5 SCC 423 : (2015) 3 SCC (Civ) 67] that “orders of civil court stand on different footing from
the orders of authorities or tribunals or courts other than judicial/civil courts”.

13. Therefore wherever the proceedings are under the Code of Civil Procedure and the forum is the
civil court, the availability of a remedy under the CPC, will deter the High Court, not merely as a
measure of self−imposed restriction, but as a matter of discipline and prudence, from exercising its
power of superintendence under the Constitution. Hence, the High Court ought not to have
entertained the revision under Article 227 especially in a case where a specific remedy of appeal is
provided under the Code of Civil Procedure itself.” 7.1 Applying the law laid down by this Court in
the aforesaid decision to the facts of the case on hand, the High Court ought not to have entertained
the revision petition under Article 227 of the Constitution of India against the ex−parte judgment
and decree passed by the learned Trial Court in view of a specific remedy of appeal as provided
under the Code of Civil Procedure itself. Therefore, the High Court has committed a grave error in
entertaining the revision petition under Article 227 challenging the ex−parte judgment and decree
passed by the learned Trial Court and in quashing and setting aside the same in exercise of powers
under Article 227 of the Constitution of India. 7.2 Even otherwise considering the impugned
common judgment and order passed by the High Court, it appears that while setting aside the ex−
parte judgment and decree, the High Court has commented upon the legality and validity of the
judgment and decree passed by the learned Trial Court as if the High Court was exercising the
appellate jurisdiction against the judgment and decree passed by the learned Trial Court. Before
considering the judgment and decree on merits and/or expressing anything on merits on the legality
and validity of the judgment and decree (ex−parte), the High Court was required to consider
whether the learned Trial Court was justified in passing the ex−parte judgment and decree or not.
The High Court was also required to consider whether the learned Trial Court was justified in
refusing to condone the delay of 1522 and 2345 days in filing the petition challenging the ex−parte
judgment and decree. Therefore, in the facts and circumstances of the case, the impugned common
judgment and order passed by the High Court is unsustainable, both, on law as well as on facts. The
High Court has exceeded in its jurisdiction while setting aside the ex−parte judgment and decree in
exercise of powers under Article 227 of the Constriction of India. The impugned common judgment
and order passed by the High Court is on irrelevant considerations and the relevant aspects as

6

Mohamed Ali vs V. Jaya on 11 July, 2022

observed hereinabove have not been considered and dealt with by the High Court. Under the
circumstances, the impugned common judgment and order passed by the High Court deserve to be
quashed and set aside.

8. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the present Appeals Succeed. The
impugned common judgment and order dated 19.11.2021 passed by the High Court in Civil Revision
Petition (NPD) No. 1054/2021 and Civil Revision Petition (PD) No. 1301/2021, is hereby quashed
and set aside. The ex−parte judgment and decree passed by the learned Trial Court as well as the
order(s) passed by the learned Trial Court refusing to condone the delay of 2345 days in preferring
the revision petition(s) challenging the ex−parte judgment and decree filed by original defendant
Nos. 2 to 4 is/are hereby restored. Present appeals are allowed accordingly. In the facts of the case,
there shall be no order as to costs.

………………………………….J.
[M.R. SHAH]

NEW DELHI;                              ………………………………….J.
July, 11th 2022                         [B.V. NAGARATHNA]

7