Mohd. Sabeer @ Shabir Hussain vs Regional Manager, U.P. State Road ... on 9 December, 2022

Mohd. Sabeer @ Shabir Hussain vs Regional Manager, U.P.
State Road ... on 9 December, 2022

Author: Krishna Murari

Bench: S. Ravindra Bhat, Krishna Murari

REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 9070-9071 OF 2022
(Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) Nos. 481-482 of 2019)

MOHD. SABEER @ SHABIR HUSSAIN                         …    APPELLANT (S)

VERSUS

REGIONAL MANAGER, U.P. STATE ROAD
TRANSPORT CORPORATION                               …     RESPONDENT (S)

JUDGMENT

KRISHNA MURARI, J.

Leave granted.

2. The present appeals are directed against the final order dated 12.10.2018 passed by the High
Court of Delhi, (hereinafter referred to as “High Court”) in Review Petition No. 391 of 2018 and
against the impugned final judgment dated 11.09.2018 passed by the High Court of New Delhi.

3. Briefly, the facts relevant for the purpose of this appeal are as follows:

I. The Appellant, who is a scrap dealer, was travelling in a bus bearing No.
UP-25T-9664 towards his residence in Delhi from his native place at Noor Pur,
Gajrola.

II. The driver of the bus, who is the Respondent No.1 herein was driving in a rash and
negligent manner. At around 12:30 am, near the Jindal Pipe Factory in Ghaziabad,
the Respondent no.1 driver hit a standing tempo which was parked on the left side of

1

Mohd. Sabeer @ Shabir Hussain vs Regional Manager, U.P. State Road ... on 9 December, 2022

the road. III. As a result of this accident, the Appellant and the other passengers in
the bus received grave injuries all over their bodies. The Appellant was aged 37 years
at the time of the accident and was earning Rs.10,000/- per month. As per the
Disability Certificate, the Appellant suffered permanent disability of 70%, his right
lower limb amongst other injuries.

4. The Appellant after the accident filed a claim petition before the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal
Delhi-II, Dwarka Court, New Delhi claiming a compensation of Rs.20,00,000/- (Twenty Lakhs).

5. The Ld. Motor Accident Claim Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as ‘MACT’) after examining the
evidence and issues at hand, held that the Respondent No.1 was the driver of the vehicle, and it was
his rash and negligent driving that caused the accident. The Ld. MACT awarded a compensation of
Rs.15,76,465/- to the Appellant along with 7.5% interest per annum, the breakup of the same is as
follows:

Cost Of Artificial limb and its Maintenance Rs. 5,70,000/-

Loss Of Future Earning                          Rs. 6,09,345/-

Medical Expenses                                Rs. 57,650/-

Attendant Charges                               Rs. 11,802/-

Conveyance                                      Rs. 10,000/-

Special Diet                                    Rs. 15,000/-

Pain and Suffering                              Rs. 1,00,000/-

Loss of Amenities of Life                       Rs. 1,00,000/-

Loss due to Disability and Disfigurement        Rs. 1,00,000/-

TOTAL                    Rs. 15,76,465/-

6. The Appellant then filed MAC App. No. 444/2013 before the High Court of Delhi
on grounds that the Ld. MACT did not calculate the loss of earning capacity, future
prospects and wrong computation of the Appellant’s disability.

7. The High Court of Delhi vide judgment dated 11.09.2018 modified the award
passed by the Ld. MACT and disposed of the Appeal by enhancing the compensation
to Rs.16,70,932/- with 9% interest per annum. The relevant part of the judgment
reads as follows:-

2

Mohd. Sabeer @ Shabir Hussain vs Regional Manager, U.P. State Road ... on 9 December, 2022

“…Upon hearing and on perusal of impugned Award and the evidence on record, I
find that on the aspect of discrepancy in timing of the accident, there is no cross-
examination of Injured and so, Insurer cannot be absolved from paying the
compensation awarded. It is not the case of Conductor (R2W1) that the Injured was
not travelling in the bus in question. Therefore, the Tribunal has rightly relied upon
the evidence of Injured (PW-4) to hold that the negligence was of the bus driver in
causing of the accident in question. The Tribunal has assessed the functional
disability of Injured to be 30%. The permanent disability is 70% in relation to right
lower limb. It is a case of amputation of right leg below the knee and so, the
functional disability is assessed at 35%. On the quantum aspect, I find that though
there is "loss of future earning", but the "earning capacity" of the Injured has been
certainly compromised. Income of the deceased has been assessed by the Tribunal on
the basis of ITRS, which were filed after this accident, but there is no basis to
conclude that the income of Injured was less than the one reflected in the ITRS for
the year 2008-09. On this aspect also, there is no cross-examination of Injured.
Therefore, in the facts of instant case, the Tribunal has rightly assessed the "loss of
earning capacity" while taking the income of the Injured as reflected in the ITRs. The
Tribunal has erred in applying the multiplier of 16. The applicable multiplier is of 15.
As regards the age of Injured, there is no cross- examination of the Injured on this
aspect. Therefore, the age of the Injured is taken to be 37 years, which would attract
the multiplier of 15. ITRS relied upon by Injured reveals that his income had
increased despite the disability caused and so, it cannot be said that there is "loss of
future earning.…”

8. Subsequently, the Appellant filed a Review Petition No. 391 of 2018 before the
H i g h   C o u r t   o f   N e w   D e l h i   s e e k i n g   f o r   e n h a n c e m e n t   o f   c o m p e n s a t i o n   t o
Rs.20,00,000/-, and the same was dismissed vide judgment dated 12.10.2018 whilst
upholding the judgment passed in the appeal. Being aggrieved by the same, the
Appellant herein has filed the present Civil Appeal.

ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT

9. The Ld. Counsel for the Appellant contended that : -

I. The High Court wrongly assessed the appellant’s loss of income due to the
disability to be only 35%, when the medical board has assessed the petitioner’s
permanent disability to be 70%. The appellant as a result of the injuries cannot drive
his vehicle and cannot lift heavy weights. II. Since the Appellant’s income was
assessed on the basis of documentary evidence, the Appellant ought to have been
awarded future prospects to the extent of 50%.

III. The compensation granted for the repair, purchase and maintenance of the
Artificial leg is inadequate. It was submitted that the cost of the artificial limb is
Rs.2,60,000/-, and the life of the limb is 5-6 years. The limb further requires repair

3

Mohd. Sabeer @ Shabir Hussain vs Regional Manager, U.P. State Road ... on 9 December, 2022

after every 6 months, and the cost of repair is between Rs.15,000/- to Rs.20,000/-.
The Appellant is aged only 37 years and will require the limb for the rest of his life,
which would mean that the current compensation of Rs.5,20,000/- is inadequate. IV.
The compensation awarded to the Appellant under the head “Pain and Agony” and
“loss due to disability and disfigurement” being Rs.1,00,000/- each is inadequate.
The counsel relied on Anant son of Sidheshwar Dukre Vs. Pratap son of Zhamnnappa
Lamzane & Anr.1. ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENTS

10. Per contra, The Ld. Counsel for the respondents contended that:

I. The High Court has rightly taken functional disability as 35% towards amputation
of lower limb. The High Court has already increased the future loss of Income from
Rs.6,09,345/- to Rs.6,66,480/- and further increased the amount towards
conveyance from Rs.10,000/- to Rs.50,000/-.

II. The High Court has rightly not granted future prospects as the Income Tax
Returns of the Appellant has increased despite disability caused from Rs. 1,26,947/-
from 01.04.2007 to 31.03.2008 to Rs.1,67,147/- from 01.04.2008 to 31.03.2009.

1 Civil Appeal No. 8420 of 2018 (Dated : August 21, 2022) III. The Appellant is a
scrap dealer and works out of his shop. He does not require a lot of movement to
carry out his work and therefore his disability does not affect his earning capacity.

IV. The Appellant had already filed a review petition in the High Court and the same was dismissed
rightfully.

ANALYSIS

11. We have heard the counsels appearing on behalf of the Appellant and the Respondents in great
detail.

12. The High Court has rightly held that the accident in question did take place, the Appellant did
suffer damages due to the negligence of Respondent No.1 driver and that the Insurer cannot be
absolved from paying the compensation Awarded. The only question that remains for us to decide is
on the aspect of the quantum of damages awarded. LOSS OF INCOME DUE TO FUNCTIONAL
DISABILITY

13. The Appellant has suffered an amputation of the lower right limb, a fracture in the medial wall of
the bilateral orbit, crush injury right leg, fracture tibia right leg, exposed vessels and other injuries.
As per the disability certificate, the Appellant has suffered 70% disability, however the High Court
has held that the Appellant has only suffered 35% loss in future earnings due to the disability.

14. To assess the quantum of compensation to be awarded, this Court has to assess whether the
permanent disability caused has any adverse effect on the earning capacity of the Appellant, as held

4

Mohd. Sabeer @ Shabir Hussain vs Regional Manager, U.P. State Road ... on 9 December, 2022

by this Court in the case of Sandeep Khanuja Vs. Atul Dande and Anr. 2. The relevant paragraph of
the judgment is quoted hereunder :-

“The crucial factor which has to be taken into consideration thus is to assess whether
the permanent disability has any adverse effect on the earning capacity of the injured.
We feel that the conclusion of the MACT on the application of aforesaid test is
erroneous. A very myopic view is taken by the MACT in taking the view that 70%
permanent disability suffered by the appellant would not impact the earning capacity
of the appellant. The MACT thought that since the appellant is a chartered
accountant he is supposed to do sitting work and therefore his working capacity is
not impaired….. A person who is engaged and cannot freely move to attend to his
duties may not be able to match the earning in comparison with the one who is
healthy and bodily able. Movements of the appellant have been restricted to a large
extent and that too at a young age.”

15. This Court has also laid out in the case of Raj Kumar Vs Ajay Kumar and Anr.3 that where the
claimant suffers a permanent disability as a result of injuries, the assessment of compensation for
loss of future earnings would 2 (2017) 3 SCC 351 3 (2011) 1 SCC 343 depend upon the impact and
effect of the Permanent Disability on his earning capacity. This Court observed as under :-

“Where the claimant suffers a permanent disability as a result of injuries, the
assessment of compensation under the head of loss of future earnings, would depend
upon the effect and impact of such permanent disability on his earning capacity. The
Tribunal should not mechanically apply the percentage of permanent disability as the
percentage of economic loss or loss of earning capacity. In most of the cases, the
percentage of economic loss, that is, percentage of loss of earning capacity, arising
from a permanent disability will be different from the percentage of permanent
disability. Some Tribunals wrongly assume that in all cases, a particular extent
(percentage) of permanent disability would result in a corresponding loss of earning
capacity, and consequently, if the evidence produced show 45% as the permanent
disability, will hold that there is 45% loss of future earning capacity. In most of the
cases, equating the extent (percentage) of loss of earning capacity to the extent
(percentage) of permanent disability will result in award of either too low or too high
a compensation. What requires to be assessed by the Tribunal is the effect of the
permanently disability on the earning capacity of the injured; and after assessing the
loss of earning capacity in terms of a percentage of the income, it has to be quantified
in terms of money, to arrive at the future loss of earnings (by applying the standard
multiplier method used to determine loss of dependency). We may however note that
in some cases, on appreciation of evidence and assessment, the Tribunal may find
that percentage of loss of earning capacity as a result of the permanent disability, is
approximately the same as the percentage of permanent disability in which case, of
course, the Tribunal will adopt the said percentage for determination of
compensation.”

5

Mohd. Sabeer @ Shabir Hussain vs Regional Manager, U.P. State Road ... on 9 December, 2022

16. The Appellant herein has suffered permanent disability of 70% and has an
amputated right lower limb amongst other injuries. The High Court has wrongly
taken the view that the Appellant has only suffered 35% functional disability. The
Appellant is not a salaried person but is self-employed who manages his business.
For the Appellant to be able to augment his income, he is most definitely required to
move around. The Appellant can also not drive on his own, which hinders his
mobility further. This proves that the functional disability of the Appellant will
severely impact his earning capacity, and the 35% functional disability calculated by
the High Court is incorrect in the facts and circumstances of the case and in our view
the loss of future earning capacity must be calculated at 60%.

FUTURE PROSPECTS

17. The High Court has not applied the quantum for future prospect in the compensation granted. In
its reasoning, the High Court has stated that the Income tax returns relied upon by the Appellant
show that despite the injury the Appellant’s income had subsequently increased and hence it cannot
be said that there is a loss of future earnings.

18. It is a well settled position of law that in cases of permanent disablement caused by a motor
accident, the claimant is entitled to not just future loss of income, but also future prospects. It has
been reiterated by this Court in multiple instances that “just compensation” must be interpreted in
such a manner as to place the claimant in the same position as he was before the accident took
place.

19. The accident that caused the injury took place on 12.06.2009. The acknowledgement of both the
Income Tax Returns produced by the Appellant show that Tax Returns were till 31.03.2008 and
31.03.2009. Both the Income Tax Returns produced as proof of income were from before the
accident took place, and hence the High Court’s finding that the income of the Appellant has
increased after the disability is incorrect.

20. It is also to be noted that even if the income of the Appellant had increased after the accident, it
would not be enough grounds to disable the Appellant from claiming compensation for future
prospect as the rise in income may be attributed to multiple other factors.

21. In light of National Insurance Company Limited v. Pranay Sethi & Others4, the applicable 40%
addition of future prospects will be given as compensation to the Appellant herein.

COMPENSATION FOR THE PURCHASE AND MAINTENANCE OF THE PROSTHETIC LEG

22. The High Court has awarded a compensation of Rs.5,20,000/- for the prosthetic limb and
Rs.50,000/- towards repair and maintenance of the 4 (2017) 16 SCC 680 same. The Appellant
submits that the cost of the prosthetic limb itself is Rs. 2,60,000/- and the life of the prosthetic limb
is only 5-6 years. The prosthetic limb also requires repair and maintenance after every 6 months to 1
year, and each repair costs between Rs.15,000 to Rs.20,000/-. This would mean that the prosthetic

6

Mohd. Sabeer @ Shabir Hussain vs Regional Manager, U.P. State Road ... on 9 December, 2022

limb would last the Appellant for only 15 years under the current compensation. The Appellant at
the time of the accident was aged 37 years and has a full life ahead. It has been clearly stated by this
Court in the case of Anant Son of Sidheshwar Dukre (Supra) that the purpose of fair compensation
is to restore the injured to the position he was in prior to the accident as best as possible. The
relevant paragraph of the judgment is being extracted herein:

“In cases of motor accidents leading to injuries and disablements, it is a well settled
principle that a person must not only be compensated for his physical injury, but also
for the non-pecuniary losses which he has suffered due to the injury. The Claimant is
entitled to be compensated for his inability to lead a full life and enjoy those things
and amenities which he would have enjoyed, but for the injuries.” “The purpose of
compensation under the Motor Vehicles Act is to fully and adequately restore the
aggrieved to the position prior to the accident.”

23. As per the current compensation given for the prosthetic limb and its
maintenance, it would last the Appellant for only 15 years, even if we were to assume
that the limb would not need to be replaced after a few years. The Appellant was only
37 years at the time of the accident, and it would be reasonable to assume that he
would live till he is 70 years old if not more. We are of the opinion that the Appellant
must be compensated so that he is able to purchase three prosthetic limbs in his
lifetime and is able to maintain the same at least till he has reached 70 years of age.
For the Prosthetic limbs alone, the Appellant is to be awarded compensation of Rs.
7,80,000 and for maintenance of the same he is to be awarded an additional Rs.
5,00,000/-.

NON-PECUNIARY COMPENSATION

24. The High Court has upheld the compensation awarded by the Ld. Tribunal for non-pecuniary
damages, which comes to Rs. 3,00,000/- in total. Considering the nature of the permanent
disability caused by the accident and the effect it will have on the Appellant’s life, this Court is of the
opinion that the compensation provided by the High Court for non- pecuniary heads is inadequate.

25. In R.D. Hattangadi v. Pest Control (India) (P) Ltd. 5 dealing with the different heads of
compensation in injury cases this Court held that:

5 (1995) 1 SCC 551 “Broadly speaking while fixing the amount of compensation
payable to a victim of an accident, the damages have to be assessed separately as
pecuniary damages and special damages. Pecuniary damages are those which the
victim has actually incurred and which are capable of being calculated in terms of
money; whereas non-pecuniary damages are those which are incapable of being
assessed by arithmetical calculations. In order to appreciate two concepts pecuniary
damages may include expenses incurred by the claimant: (i) medical attendance; (ii)
loss of earning of profit up to the date of trial; (iii) other material loss. So far as non-

7

Mohd. Sabeer @ Shabir Hussain vs Regional Manager, U.P. State Road ... on 9 December, 2022

pecuniary damages are concerned, they may include: (i) damages for mental and physical shock,
pain and suffering, already suffered or likely to be suffered in the future; (ii) damages to compensate
for the loss of amenities of life which may include a variety of matters i.e. on account of injury the
claimant may not be able to walk, run or sit; (iii) damages for loss of expectation of life i.e. on
account of injury the normal longevity of the person concerned is shortened; (iv) inconvenience,
hardship, discomfort, disappointment, frustration and mental stress in life.”

26. In light of the above decision of this Court and the facts and circumstances of the case at hand,
the compensation to be awarded is as follows:

I. Compensation for pain and suffering – Rs. 2,00,000/- II. Compensation for Loss of
Amenities of Life – Rs. 2,00,000/- III. Compensation for disability and
disfigurement – Rs. 2,00,000/- CONCLUSION

27. We are of the opinion that while awarding compensation in cases of permanent disability caused
to claimants, the courts must look at the case in totality, and must consider the socio-economic
background of the claimants. The Appellant herein comes from an economically weaker section of
the society.

28. It is almost universally seen that persons from marginalized backgrounds often face an
additional layer of discrimination due to bodily disabilities. This is because persons from
marginalized sections of the society already face severe discrimination due to a lack of social capital,
and a new disability more often than not compounds to such discrimination. In such circumstances,
to preserve the essence of justice, it becomes the duty of the Court to at the very least restore the
claimant as best as possible to the position he was in before the occurrence of the disability, and to
do so must award compensation in a liberal manner.

29. While no material compensation can completely negate the trauma and suffering that the
injured and his family faces, the law only knows the language of monetary compensation in such
cases. It then becomes to duty of the court to translate the provisions of monetary compensation
into a fabrication that helps the injured and his family in coping with their loss.

30. On the basis of the abovementioned facts and analysis, this Court is of the opinion that the just
compensation to be awarded to the claimant/appellant under different heads ought to be as under :-

Cost Of Artificial limb and its Maintenance Rs. 12,80,000/- Loss Of Earning Capacity
due to Functional Rs. 11,34,000/-

Disability

Future Prospects                                 Rs. 7,61,668

Medical Expenses                                 Rs. 57,650/-

Attendant Charges                                Rs. 11,802/-

8

Mohd. Sabeer @ Shabir Hussain vs Regional Manager, U.P. State Road ... on 9 December, 2022

Conveyance                                       Rs. 10,000/-

Special Diet                                     Rs. 15,000/-

Pain and Suffering                               Rs. 2,00,000/-

Loss of Amenities of Life                        Rs. 2,00,000/-

Loss due to Disability and Disfigurement         Rs. 2,00,000/-

TOTAL                    Rs. 38,70,120 /-

31. In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances, the impugned judgment is liable
to be modified as above and the claimant/appellant is held entitled to be awarded
compensation to the tune of Rs. 38,70,120/-

along with 9% interest per annum from the date of making the application.

32. Accordingly, the appeals stand allowed.

….......…………....……….,J.

(KRISHNA MURARI) ….…..…....…................…,J.

(S. RAVINDRA BHAT) NEW DELHI;

09TH DECMEBER, 2022

9