My Palace Mutually Aided Co Operative ... vs B. Mahesh on 23 August, 2022

My Palace Mutually Aided Co Operative ... vs B. Mahesh on 23
August, 2022

Author: N. V. Ramana

Bench: Hima Kohli, Krishna Murari, N. V. Ramana

NON-REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5784 OF 2022
(@ S.L.P (CIVIL) NO. 7015/2022)

MY PALACE MUTUALLY AIDED                                       …APPELLANT(S)
CO−OPERATIVE SOCIETY
VERSUS

B. MAHESH & ORS.                                               …RESPONDENT(S)

JUDGMENT

N. V. Ramana, CJI

1. Leave granted.

2. The present Civil Appeal has been filed by the appellant against impugned final judgment and
order dated 21.09.2021, passed by the High Court of Telangana in Interlocutory Application No.
5/2020 in Application No. 837/2013 in CS No. 7/1958.

3. The brief facts of this case necessary for the disposal of the appeal are as follows: the present
dispute relates to Sy. No. 57 (Old Sy. 17:18:34 IST Reason:

No. 274) in Shamsguda Village, Ranga Reddy District, Telangana forming part of S.
No. 252 of the list of Mukthas in the preliminary decree dated 06.04.1959 by the
erstwhile High Court of Andhra Pradesh in CS No. 7/1958.

1

My Palace Mutually Aided Co Operative ... vs B. Mahesh on 23 August, 2022

4. The underlying original suit was filed in 1953 before the City Civil Court, Hyderabad by one Smt.
Sultana Jahan Begum, the daughter of Nawab Moinuddowla Bahadur. The plaintiff was seeking
partition of properties of the Nawab known as ‘Asman Jahi Paigah’. This suit was ultimately
transferred to the file of the High Court numbered as C.S. No. 7/1958. The suit along with certain
applications were disposed of by a preliminary−cum−final decree dated 06.04.1959 passed by the
learned Judge of the High Court of Andhra Pradesh. The judgment recorded that the plaintiff
withdraws the suit against defendant Nos. 27 to 49. It also recorded that a compromise was affected
amongst some of the defendants. The litigation relating to this original suit subsequently enters a
complicated phase, wherein several different parallel proceedings take place. Suffice to state, that
even after 60 years, the issues in the same are not settled.

5. It is the say of the present appellant that they acquired the property in Sy. No. 57 of Shamsguda
Village under an Assignment Deed dated 16.09.2000 executed by the earlier predecessor−in−
interest under the preliminary decree. The predecessors−in−interest had also executed a
Conveyance Deed dated 03.08.2003 in favour of the appellant, conveying the schedule property
with specific boundaries. As the earlier Assignment Deed dated 16.09.2000 and Conveyance Deed
dated 03.08.2003 were unregistered documents, the predecessors−in−interest also executed a
registered document in favour of the appellant, namely a ‘Deed of Declaration/ Confirmation’ dated
12.08.2011.

6. On the above basis, an application (No. 837/2013) was filed in C.S. No. 7/1958 by the appellant
herein along with a party (not before us) for passing a final decree in their favour in respect of
property measuring Acs 92.56 cts. and Acs. 27.00 gts land in Sy. No. 57 of Shamsguda Village,
Balanagar Mandal, Ranga Reddy District. A further prayer was made for a direction to deliver the
physical possession of the said properties.

7. The learned Single Judge of the High Court of Andhra Pradesh allowed the said Application in
part vide final decree dated 19.09.2013 as sought by the appellant, and granted a declaration that
they are the absolute owners of Acs. 92.56 cts in Sy. No. 57 of Shamsguda Village.

8. The State of Andhra Pradesh challenged the said order in OSA SR No. 3744 of 2014. After
formation of the State of Telangana on the bifurcation of the composite State of Andhra Pradesh, the
State of Telangana filed IA No. 2 of 2016 seeking condonation of delay of 182 days in filing the
Appeal. Responding to the said IA, the appellant stated that the delay in filing of the Appeal is much
longer, amounting to 729 days. Thereafter, I.A. No. 2 of 2017 was filed by the State of Telangana to
condone a delay of 913 days in filing the Appeal.

9. By order dated 22.12.2020, the Division bench of the High Court of Telangana dismissed the two
applications for condonation of delay in filing the appeal, being I.A. No. 2 of 2016 and I.A. No. 2 of
2017. As a consequence of the same, the State of Telangana’s appeal, OSA SR No. 3744 of 2014 was
dismissed.

10. In these circumstances, after lapse of nearly 7 years since the final decree was granted in favor of
the appellant herein, the respondents herein filed 6 IAs (in Application 837/2013 in CS No. 7/1958)

2

My Palace Mutually Aided Co Operative ... vs B. Mahesh on 23 August, 2022

before the High Court of Telangana in 2020. The details of the applications are as follows:

I.A No. Prayer 1/2020 To grant leave to the respondents to file implead petition in the above−
mentioned application.

2/2020 To dispense with the filing of a neatly typed copy of material papers in application filed in
the abovementioned application 3/2020 To allow impleadment 4/2020 To allow impleadment.

5/2020 To recall the order dated 19.09.2013 passed in the above−mentioned application and to set
aside and pass such other order or orders as deemed fit and proper in the circumstances of the case
6/2020 To direct the appellant to not to alienate, not to interfere, not to change peaceful possession,
not register any documents in scheduled property in Sy No.57 and any subdivision numbers in Sy
No 57 of Shamsguda in the above−mentioned application.

11. A Division Bench of the High Court of Telangana vide order dated 05.01.2021, allowed IA No.
1/2021 preferred by the respondents and granted them leave to file the application recalling the final
decree dated 19.09.2013, passed by the learned Single Judge of the High Court in Application No.
837/2013 in C.S No. 7/1958.

12. The aforesaid order was challenged before this Court in an earlier Special Leave Petition, being
SLP(C) No. 8025/2021. This Court, by order dated 06.07.2021, dismissed the said petition and gave
the parties liberty to raise all objections when the substantial application for recalling the final
decree was being heard.

13. After hearing the submissions of the parties, the Division Bench of the High Court in I.A No.
5/2020 in Application No. 837 of 2013 in CS No. 7 of 1958, passed the impugned order dated
21.09.2021, allowing the recall of the final decree dated 19.09.2013.

14. One of the primary objections taken by the appellant herein before the Division Bench of the
High Court related to the fact that the senior member of the Bench hearing the recall application
was presiding over the Bench which had heard and dismissed the appeal filed by the State of
Telangana against the same final decree dated 19.09.2013. On this issue, the Division Bench held
that the earlier appeal filed by the State of Telangana had been dismissed as a consequence of the
dismissal of the application for condonation of delay in filing the appeal filed by the State. There was
no discussion on the merits of the matter, particularly the claim of the appellant. Further, the
Division Bench held that as per the roster prepared by the Hon’ble Chief Justice of the High Court of
Telangana, all matters arising out of C.S. No. 7 of 1958 were placed before it. As such, the Division
Bench held that there were no strong reasons put forth by the appellant for the said member of the
Bench to recuse from the hearing of the present matter.

15. The High Court, on merits, held that the appellant had obtained the final decree dated
19.09.2013 by suppressing certain information and by exercising its powers under Section 151, Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908 (“CPC”), has recalled its earlier final decree dated 19.09.2013. At the same
time, the High Court clarified that recalling of the order would not enure to the benefit of the State

3

My Palace Mutually Aided Co Operative ... vs B. Mahesh on 23 August, 2022

of Telangana, whose appeal had already been dismissed, or the respondents, who would have to
establish their right, title and interest in the subject property in appropriate proceedings.

16. Aggrieved by the impugned judgment of the High Court recalling the final decree dated
19.09.2013, the appellant has approached this Court by way of the present Civil Appeal.

17. It is appropriate to mention here that the State of Telangana, despite dismissal of its appeal in
2020, and the specific observations of the High Court in the impugned order, initially filed an
impleadment application, being IA No. 98965/2022, in the present Civil Appeal. This Court
dismissed the abovementioned application for impleadment vide order dated 22.07.2022.

18. The State of Telangana also filed separate Special Leave Petitions challenging the present
impugned order dated 22.12.2020, as well and the earlier order dated 22.12.2020 dismissing their
intra court appeal [SLP (C) No. 13453 of 2022 and SLP (C) No. 13454− 13456 of 2022]. These
Special Leave Petitions were heard on 01.08.2022 by this Court and were dismissed in light of the
observations made by the High Court in paragraph 116 of the impugned order. In any case, the claim
of the State over the scheduled property is not sufficiently supported by any documentary evidence.

19. Dr. A. M. Singhvi, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant, submitted as
follows:

(i) No recall application could have been filed by the respondents.

Their only remedy was a separate civil suit for declaration of title.

(ii) The preliminary decree in the matter was passed on 06.04.1959 and the final decree in favour of
the appellant was passed on 19.09.2013. The appeal preferred by the State of Telangana challenging
the final decree was dismissed by the High Court on 22.12.2020. The respondents’ application for
recall of final decree, in which the impugned order has been passed, was filed before the High Court
on 16.12.2020, raising issues of fraud for the first time. The High Court ought to have dismissed the
application for recall on the grounds of delay.

(iii) A reading of the impugned order shows that the survey numbers claimed by the respondents are
distinct from those claimed by the appellant.

(iv) The Senior Judge heading the Division Bench, Justice M.S. Rama Chander Rao who passed the
impugned judgment appeared on behalf of one of the parties who were claiming possession in
parallel proceedings relating to the subject property, which party had also filed an FIR against the
appellant herein.

(v) The respondents alleged fraud on the basis of non−disclosure of certain orders passed against
the appellant. The first such order is of 10.06.2003, whereby the High Court set aside recognition of
the assignment deed in favor of the appellant. The second order is of 26.08.2013, passed in
injunction proceedings preferred by the appellant against the revenue authorities. However, both

4

My Palace Mutually Aided Co Operative ... vs B. Mahesh on 23 August, 2022

these orders were passed at a time when the assignment deed in favour of the appellant was
unregistered. At the time when final decree was passed in 2013 the appellant had a registered
assignment deed in their favour with respect to the subject property. The earlier orders are therefore
not relevant.

(vi) The fact that the subject property had certain proceedings pending against it was recorded in the
preliminary decree, and the same was in the notice of the learned Single Judge at the time of passing
of the final decree in 2013. No fraud can be alleged on this ground by the respondents.

20. Mr. Dushyant Dave, learned Senior Counsel also appearing on behalf of the appellant, submitted
as follows:

(i) After the final decree was passed on 19.09.2013, the respondents, who are rank
outsiders to the proceedings, filed the application for recall only in 2020. The
respondents have neither provided an explanation as to the delay, nor have they filed
any application for condonation of delay.

(ii) The affidavit supporting the application for recall was filed by power of attorney
holders. The person who signs the affidavit must have personal knowledge of the
facts. Without such personal knowledge, such an affidavit could not have been filed.

(iii) The present litigation is nothing but a proxy litigation.

Unrelated third parties are seeking to interfere in the present matter as the value of the subject
property is very high.

(iv) The allegations of fraud were never taken before any forum until the impugned recall
application before the High Court. Such plea taken by the third party without any supporting
documents cannot be raised at a belated stage.

(v) Once the State’s appeal against the final decree was dismissed on grounds of delay, the
respondents’ recall application should have been similarly dismissed.

21. Mr. C. S. Sundaram, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of respondent No. 1, submitted
as follows:

(i) respondent No.1 is claiming through the original pattedar of the property. The
recall applications were filed soon after his possession over the property was sought
to be disturbed.

Therefore, the question of delay does not arise.

(ii) The preliminary decree indicates that the title to the suit property was conditional. The
respondents’ claim was upheld in the Atiyat Court, which was not shown before the learned Single

5

My Palace Mutually Aided Co Operative ... vs B. Mahesh on 23 August, 2022

Judge at the time of passing of the final decree on 19.09.2013.

(iii) Respondents had also filed another application seeking leave to file the recall application, which
was allowed by the High Court on 05.01.2021. The Special Leave Petition against the same was
dismissed by this Court on 06.07.2021 and, as such, the locus of the parties to file recall application
cannot be questioned at this stage.

(iv) The Court always has the power to recall its order, if such an order was obtained by playing
fraud upon the Court.

(v) Ultimately, the impugned order does not decide the title of the parties. The parties have been
relegated to file a civil suit to decide title. The appellant may exercise its right and do the same.

22. Mr. V. Giri, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents no. 3 to 8, submitted
as follows:

(i) The preliminary decree was a conditional decree as it was subject to pending
Revenue Court proceedings.

(ii) The respondents are the pattedars of the property who were owners in
possession.

(iii) The appellant’s earlier application seeking delivery of the property on the basis of
assignment deed was remanded to the Single Judge and subsequently dismissed for
non−prosecution as it was not pressed. They abandoned their original application.
Additionally, the civil suit filed by the appellant for injunction in 2007 was also
dismissed.

(iv) None of these facts and findings against the appellant were disclosed by them in
2013 when the final decree was sought. It is a clear case of fraud on the Court.

(v) In any event, no final decree could have been passed on the assignment deed as
no order for partition of property was ever passed.

(vi) These points moved the learned Division Bench in allowing the recall application
filed by the respondents. The impugned order therefore, merits no interference by
this Court.

23. Mr. Yatin Oza, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent no. 4, submitted as
follows:

(i) The conduct of the appellant is clear for all to see. They committed fraud on the
Court to have the final decree dated 19.9.2013 passed in their favour by supressing
judgement of Nazim Atiyat.

6

My Palace Mutually Aided Co Operative ... vs B. Mahesh on 23 August, 2022

(ii) The fundamental principle of equity is that the parties must come to Court with clean hands. In
the present case, this Court should not show any indulgence to the appellant by interfering with the
well−reasoned impugned judgment of the High Court under Article 136 of the Constitution.

24. We have heard the learned Senior counsel on either side, perused the entire material on record.
Though several grounds have been raised, the first ground taken is that the High Court erred in
exercising jurisdiction under Section 151 of the CPC, when alternate remedies exist under the CPC.
Second ground is that the Senior Judge on the Bench, who appeared for one of the parties, ought not
to have heard the matter.

25. In response to the first leg of challenge, i.e., on the procedural aspect, we may note that the recall
application was filed under Section 151 of the CPC against the final decree dated 19.09.2013. It is in
this context that we must ascertain whether a third party to a final decree can be allowed to file such
applications, by invoking the inherent powers of the Court under Section 151 of the CPC.

26. Section 151 of the CPC provides for Civil Courts to invoke their inherent jurisdiction and utilize
the same to meet the ends of justice or to prevent abuse of process. Although such a provision is
worded broadly, this Court has tempered the provision to limit its ambit to only those circumstances
where certain procedural gaps exist, to ensure that substantive justice is not obliterated by hyper
technicalities. As far back as in 1961, this Court in Padam Sen v. State of U.P., AIR 1961 SC 218,
observed as under:

“8. …The inherent powers of the Court are in addition to the powers specifically
conferred on the Court by the Code. They are complementary to those powers and
therefore it must be held that the Court is free to exercise them for the purposes
mentioned in Section 151 of the Code when the exercise of those powers is not in any
way in conflict with what has been expressly provided in the Code or against the
intentions of the Legislature. It is also well recognized that the inherent power is not
to be exercised in a manner which will be contrary to or different from the procedure
expressly provided in the Code.” (emphasis supplied)

27. In exercising powers under Section 151 of the CPC, it cannot be said that the civil courts can
exercise substantive jurisdiction to unsettle already decided issues. A Court having jurisdiction over
the relevant subject matter has the power to decide and may come either to a right or a wrong
conclusion. Even if a wrong conclusion is arrived at or an incorrect decree is passed by the
jurisdictional court, the same is binding on the parties until it is set aside by an appellate court or
through other remedies provided in law.

28. Section 151 of the CPC can only be applicable if there is no alternate remedy available in
accordance with the existing provisions of law. Such inherent power cannot override statutory
prohibitions or create remedies which are not contemplated under the Code. Section 151 cannot be
invoked as an alternative to filing fresh suits, appeals, revisions, or reviews. A party cannot find
solace in Section 151 to allege and rectify historic wrongs and bypass procedural safeguards inbuilt
in the CPC.

7

My Palace Mutually Aided Co Operative ... vs B. Mahesh on 23 August, 2022

29. The respondents in the present case had access to recourse under Section 96 of the CPC, which
allows for appeals from an original decree. It must be remembered that the present matter was
being heard by the High Court exercising its original jurisdiction. The High Court was in effect
conducting a trial, and the final decree passed by the High Court on 19.09.2013 was in effect a
decree in an original suit. As such, there existed a right of appeal under Section 96 of the CPC, for
the respondents. Though they were not parties to the suit, they could have filed an appeal with the
leave of the Court as an affected party. Section 96 of the CPC reads as under:

96. Appeal from original decree .−(1) Save where otherwise expressly provided in the
body of this Code or by any other law for the time being in force, an appeal shall lie
from every decree passed by any Court exercising original jurisdiction to the Court
authorized to hear appeals from the decisions of such Court.

(2) An appeal may lie from an original decree passed ex parte.

(3) No appeal shall lie from a decree passed by the Court with the consent of parties.

[(4) No appeal shall lie, except on a question of law, from a decree in any suit of the nature
cognizable by Courts of Small Causes, when the amount or value of the subject−matter of the
original suit does not exceed [ten thousand rupees.]

30. Sections 96 to 100 of CPC deals with the procedure for filing appeals from original decrees. A
perusal of the above provision makes it clear that the provisions are silent about the category of
persons who can prefer an appeal. But it is well settled legal position that a person who is affected by
a judgment but is not a party to the suit, can prefer an appeal with the leave of the Court. The sine
qua non for filing an appeal by a third party is that he must have been affected by reason of the
judgment and decree which is sought to be impugned.

31. In the light of the above, it can be safely concluded any aggrieved party can prefer an appeal with
the leave of the Court.

32. The High Court, in the impugned judgment, relied on the judgment of this Court in Indian Bank
vs Satyam Fibres (India) Pvt. Ltd., (1996) 5 SCC 550, wherein this Court acknowledges the
possibility of maintaining a recall application against a judgement if it is obtained by fraud on the
Court. However, it went on to hold that in cases of fraud, the Court may direct the affected party to
file a separate suit for setting aside the decree obtained by fraud. The Court held as follows:

“22. The judiciary in India also possesses inherent power, specially under Section 151
CPC, to recall its judgment or order if it is obtained by fraud on court. In the case of
fraud on a party to the suit or proceedings, the court may direct the affected party to
file a separate suit for setting aside the decree obtained by fraud…”

33. The subsequent judgment of this Court in Ram Prakash Agarwal v. Gopi Krishan, (2013) 11 SCC
296 further clarifies the law on the use of the power under Section 151 of the CPC by the Court in

8

My Palace Mutually Aided Co Operative ... vs B. Mahesh on 23 August, 2022

cases of fraud and holds as follows:

“13. Section 151 CPC is not a substantive provision that confers the right to get any
relief of any kind. It is a mere procedural provision which enables a party to have the
proceedings of a pending suit conducted in a manner that is consistent with justice
and equity. The court can do justice between the parties before it. Similarly, inherent
powers cannot be used to re−open settled matters. The inherent powers of the Court
must, to that extent, be regarded as abrogated by the legislature. A provision barring
the exercise of inherent power need not be express, it may even be implied. Inherent
power cannot be used to restrain the execution of a decree at the instance of one who
was not a party to suit. Such power is absolutely essential for securing the ends of
justice, and to overcome the failure of justice. The Court under Section 151 CPC may
adopt any procedure to do justice, unless the same is expressly prohibited.

Xxx

19. In view of the above, the law on this issue stands crystallised to the effect that the
inherent powers enshrined under Section 151 CPC can be exercised only where no
remedy has been provided for in any other provision of CPC. In the event that a party
has obtained a decree or order by playing a fraud upon the court, or where an order
has been passed by a mistake of the court, the court may be justified in rectifying
such mistake, either by recalling the said order, or by passing any other appropriate
order. However, inherent powers cannot be used in conflict of any other existing
provision, or in case a remedy has been provided for by any other provision of CPC.

Moreover, in the event that a fraud has been played upon a party, the same may not be a case where
inherent powers can be exercised.” (emphasis supplied)

34. The High Court, relying upon the above judgments of this Court which recognizes the power to
recall, seems to have lost sight of the restrictions imposed while exercising jurisdiction under
Section 151 of the CPC, which were elaborately discussed by this Court in the above referred
judgment about exercising of the power under Section 151 of the CPC being only in circumstances
where alternate remedies do not exist.

35. Therefore, we are of the firm opinion that recalling a final decree in such circumstances cannot
be countenanced under Section 151 of the CPC. The High Court erred in exercising its jurisdiction
under Section 151 of the CPC, to hear and pass a detailed judgment recalling its earlier final decree
dated 19.09.2013, rather than directing the respondents to pursue the effective alternate remedies
under law. Having said the above, we must clarify that we are not, in any way, doubting the
proposition of law that fraud nullifies all proceedings, or that the Court has power to recall an order
which was passed due to a fraud played on the Court. However, while exercising the power under
Section 151 CPC for setting aside the final judgment and decree, the Division Bench should have
taken into consideration the restriction which was observed by this Court in the captioned
judgment. Once we have come to the irresistible conclusion that exercising power under Section 151

9

My Palace Mutually Aided Co Operative ... vs B. Mahesh on 23 August, 2022

CPC in the facts and circumstances of the case is bad, we are not inclined to go into further issues
that were extensively argued.

36. The other ground that the learned senior judge who passed the present impugned order had
represented one of the opposite parties in certain collateral proceedings related to the subject
property, merits some discussion. It appears that although the appellant raised this ground before
us, it was neither raised before the High Court nor brought to the attention of the learned senior
Judge. The party ought to have raised this issue also at the time of arguments, particularly when the
issue of recusal of the learned Judge had been specifically raised on the other ground that he had
been the presiding member of the Bench which had dismissed the appeal filed by the State.

37. When an issue was not raised before the learned Division Bench, we do not wish to spill much
ink on this issue. However, the material placed on record by the counsel for the appellant cannot be
ignored. Annexure P8 of the appeal paper book indicates that the Senior Judge heading the Division
Bench, while being an advocate, had represented the Andhra Pradesh State Financial Corporation in
one of the connected proceedings related to this case.

38. Although we have no doubt in our mind about the absence of bias of any form of the learned
senior Judge, we must at the same time also look at the issue of whether right minded persons could
consider there exists any real likelihood of bias. In the case of State of West Bengal v. Shivananda
Pathak, 1998 5 SCC 513, this Court held as under:

“34. In Metropolitan Properties Co. v. Lannon [(1968) 1 WLR 815 : (1968) 1 All ER
354] it was observed “whether there was a real likelihood of bias or not has to be
ascertained with reference to right−minded persons; whether they would consider
that there was a real likelihood of bias”. Almost the same test has also been applied
here in an old decision, namely, in Manak Lal v. Dr Prem Chand Singhvi [AIR 1957
SC 425 : 1957 SCR 575] . In that case, although the Court found that the Chairman of
the Bar Council Tribunal appointed by the Chief Justice of the Rajasthan High Court
to enquire into the misconduct of Manak Lal, an advocate, on the complaint of one
Prem Chand was not biased towards him, it was held that he should not have
presided over the proceedings to give effect to the salutary principle that justice
should not only be done, it should also be seen to be done in view of the fact that the
Chairman, who, undoubtedly, was a Senior Advocate and an ex−Advocate General,
had, at one time, represented Prem Chand in some case. These principles have had
their evolution in the field of administrative law but the courts performing judicial
functions only cannot be excepted from the rule of bias as the Presiding Officers of
the court have to hear and decide contentious issues with an unbiased mind. The
maxim nemo debet esse judex in propria sua causa and the principle “justice should
not only be done but should manifestly be seen to be done” can be legitimately
invoked in their cases.” (emphasis supplied)

39. It is a well−established principle, both in our jurisprudence and across the world, that “[N]ot
only must justice be done; it must also be seen to be done”.1 In the present circumstances, it may

10

My Palace Mutually Aided Co Operative ... vs B. Mahesh on 23 August, 2022

have been more apposite for the concerned Judge to have recused from this case. The appellant
should have brought it to the notice of the learned senior Judge at the very first instance, and not at
this belated stage.

1 R v. Sussex Justices, ex parte McCarthy, 1924 (1) KB 256.

40. In the above circumstances, we are of the opinion that the High Court should not have decided
the recall application filed by the respondents, let alone pass such extensive orders which has the
effect of unsettling proceedings and transactions which have a history of more than 60 years in a
proceeding, basing on an application filed under Section 151 of the CPC.

41. In view of the above, the appeal is allowed by setting aside the order dated 21.09.2021 passed in
I.A No. 5/2020 in Application No. 837 of 2013 in CS No. 7 of 1958.

............................CJI.

(N. V. RAMANA) ..…..........................J. (KRISHNA MURARI) .........…………….......J. (HIMA KOHLI)
NEW DELHI;

AUGUST 23, 2022.

11