Narcotics Control Bureau vs Mohit Agarwal on 19 July, 2022

Narcotics Control Bureau vs Mohit Agarwal on 19 July, 2022

Author: Hima Kohli

Bench: Hima Kohli, Krishna Murari, N. V. Ramana

Criminal Appeal Nos. ………… of 2022 @ Petitions for Special Leave to Appeal (Criminal) No. 6128-6129 OF 2021

REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 1001-1002 OF 2022
ARISING OUT OF
PETITIONS FOR SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (CRL.) NO. 6128-29 OF 2021

NARCOTICS CONTROL BUREAU                                                               …..         APPELLANT

VERSUS

MOHIT AGGARWAL                                                                         …..      RESPONDENT

JUDGMENT

Hima Kohli, J.

1. Leave granted.

2. The appellant-NCB is aggrieved by the judgment and order dated 16.03.2021 passed by the High
Court of Delhi granting post-arrest bail to the respondent-accused in Case No.SC/1334/2020, where
the respondent is facing trial for the offence under Sections 8/22 and 29 of the Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 1.

3. information received by the officials of the Narcotic Control Bureau 2 on 1 For short ‘NDPS Act’ 2
For short ‘NCB’ Criminal Appeal Nos. ………… of 2022 @ Petitions for Special Leave to Appeal
(Criminal) No. 6128-6129 OF 2021 09.01.2020, that one parcel had been booked by a person from
Agra named Gaurav Kumar Aggarwal, to be delivered to one Manoj Kumar at Ludhiana, Punjab and
was stored at the godown of a courier company at Village Samalkha, Kapasehra, New Delhi,
suspected to contain NRX tablets, being a narcotic drug, the NCB team reached the said godown and
conducted search proceedings. The suspected parcel was identified and opened in the presence of
two independent witnesses from amongst the staff members of the courier company. The said parcel

1

Narcotics Control Bureau vs Mohit Agarwal on 19 July, 2022

was opened and 50,000 Tramadol tablets weighing 20 kgs were recovered. As the tablets contained
in the suspected parcel had been mis-declared and were without any valid bill, seizure proceedings
were initiated by the officials of the NCB.

4. In the voluntary statement made by the accused, Gaurav Kumar Aggarwal under Section 67 of the
NDPS Act, he stated that he had booked the parcel through a courier company to be delivered to
Manoj Kumar, resident of Ludhiana, Punjab and that he had purchased the Tramadol tablets
recovered during the search proceedings from the respondent herein, without any bill or
prescription. Rather, it was mentioned on the parcel that it contained “surgical items”. The accused
Gaurav Kumar Aggarwal further stated that the respondent herein had purchased the above
medicines from one Promod Jaipuria alias Criminal Appeal Nos. ………… of 2022 @ Petitions for
Special Leave to Appeal (Criminal) No. 6128-6129 OF 2021 Davinder Khandelwal, a resident of
Jaipur and the son-in-law of Promod Jaipuria used to look after his business in Agra and that he had
a godown where the drugs were stored.

5. The prosecution further stated that Gaurav Kumar Aggarwal had disclosed that he knew where
the residence and the shop of the respondent were located and he could identify them. Accordingly,
the said accused person accompanied the Raiding team to the premises of the respondent herein.
On the disclosure made by the respondent herein, the Raiding team proceeded to the godown of
Promod Jaipuria and conducted a search during which a cache of drugs covered under the NDPS
Act, were recovered. The said drugs included 6,64,940 tablets of different psychotropic substances
including Tramadol, Zolpidem and Alprazolam tablets/capsules weighing around 328.82 Kgs, 1400
Pazinc Injections amounting to 1.4 ltrs and 80 Corex Syrup bottles weighing 8 ltrs. Another 9,900
tablets weighing 990 gms. were recovered during the search conducted by the NCB officials at the
premises of the co- accused, Manoj Kumar at Ludhiana.

6. In his statement recorded under Section 67 of the NDPS Act, the respondent herein disclosed that
he had been illegally selling and purchasing the said tablets and capsules from Promod Jaipuria. The
Criminal Appeal Nos. ………… of 2022 @ Petitions for Special Leave to Appeal (Criminal) No.
6128-6129 OF 2021 respondent was taken into custody on 11th January, 2020. He moved two
applications for grant of bail before the learned Special Judge, NDPS. Both the said applications
were vehemently opposed by the appellant-NCB and were rejected by the Special Judge, NDPS.
Aggrieved by the order dated 21 st July, 2020, whereby his second bail application was dismissed,
the respondent filed a petition under Section 439 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 3 for
grant of bail which has been allowed by the impugned order passed by the learned Single Judge of
the High Court.

7. Arguing for the appellant-NCB, Mr. Jayant K. Sud, learned Additional Solicitor General,
submitted that while passing the impugned order granting bail to the respondent, the High Court
has erred in observing that no incriminating material was recovered by the NCB officials at his
residence. He stated that the High Court has completely overlooked the fact that it was on the basis
of the disclosures made by the respondent himself that huge quantities of narcotic drugs and
injections were seized from the godown of the co-accused, Promod Jaipuria who was subsequently
arrested by the Department; that the High Court has committed a grave error by not applying the

2

Narcotics Control Bureau vs Mohit Agarwal on 19 July, 2022

terms and conditions imposed under Section 37 of the NDPS Act; that the offence 3 For short
‘Cr.P.C.’ Criminal Appeal Nos. ………… of 2022 @ Petitions for Special Leave to Appeal (Criminal)
No. 6128-6129 OF 2021 committed by the respondent falls under the category of recovery of
commercial quantity of narcotic drugs and in the light of the embargo placed in Section 37 of the
NDPS Act, the respondent ought not to have been admitted to bail and that this is a case of
constructive/conscious possession of the contraband substances as the respondent was an active
participant in a organized gang that was involved in smuggling of drugs. Lastly, it was stated that
there was sufficient circumstantial evidence available against the respondent which would disentitle
him for being admitted to bail.

8. On the other hand, Mr. P.K. Jain, learned Advocate-on-Record appearing for the respondent
vehemently opposed the present appeal and submitted that the High Court has rightly admitted the
respondent to bail after he remained in custody for a period of one year and three months. He
submitted that the impugned order was passed after granting a hearing to the counsel for the
appellant-NCB and the respondent and the respondent has not violated any of the terms and
conditions of bail imposed on him. On merits, it was urged that in the alleged incident, neither was
the consignment of the narcotic drugs booked by or for the respondent. No recovery was made from
the respondent and nothing was found from the search conducted at his residence and shop.
Describing the respondent as a small-time Criminal Appeal Nos. ………… of 2022 @ Petitions for
Special Leave to Appeal (Criminal) No. 6128-6129 OF 2021 shopkeeper selling medicines at Agra,
learned counsel submitted that he had no connection with the other co-accused persons and that his
name had cropped up in the course of the statement of the co-accused, Gaurav Kumar Aggarwal
under Section 67 of the NDPS Act, which was partly recorded at Agra and partly at Delhi. Though
Gaurav Kumar Agarwal had taken the officials of the NCB team to the respondent’s shop which was
duly searched, nothing incriminating was recovered from there. Besides the above, both the
co-accused, Gaurav Kumar Aggarwal and the respondent herein had at the first opportunity,
retracted from their statements recorded under Section 67 of the NDPS Act and in view of law
laid-down by this Court in Tofan Singh v. State of Tamil Nadu 4, any confessional statement
recorded under Section 67 of the NDPS Act, is inadmissible in the trial of an offence under the said
Act. Urging that the High Court has followed the aforesaid judicial dicta and after noting the fact
that the charge-sheet had already been filed and besides the confessional statements of the accused
recorded under Section 67 of the NDPS Act, no other incriminating material was forthcoming, the
respondent had been rightly admitted to bail. Thus, learned counsel for the respondent contended
that there is no infirmity in the impugned order that deserves interference.

4 2020 SCC Online SC 882 Criminal Appeal Nos. ………… of 2022 @ Petitions for Special Leave to
Appeal (Criminal) No. 6128-6129 OF 2021

9. We have carefully considered the arguments advanced by learned counsel for the parties and have
perused the records.

10. The provisions of Section 37 of the NDPS Act read as follows:

3

Narcotics Control Bureau vs Mohit Agarwal on 19 July, 2022

“[37. Offences to be cognizable and non-bailable.–(1) Notwithstanding anything
contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) –

(a) every offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable;

(b) no person accused of an offence punishable for [offences under section 19 or
section 24 or section 27A and also for offences involving commercial quantity] shall
be released on bail or on his own bond unless –

(i) the Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity to oppose the application for
such release, and

(ii) where the Public Prosecutor opposes the application, the court is satisfied that
there are reasonable grounds for believing that he is not guilty of such offence and
that he is not likely to commit any offence while on bail. (2) The limitations on
granting of bail specified in clause (b) of sub-

section (1) are in addition to the limitations under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)
or any other law for the time being in force, on granting of bail.]

11. It is evident from a plain reading of the non-obstante clause inserted in sub-section (1) and the
conditions imposed in sub-section (2) of Section 37 that there are certain restrictions placed on the
power of the Court when granting bail to a person accused of having committed an offence under
the NDPS Act. Not only are the limitations imposed under Section 439 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 to be kept in mind, the restrictions placed under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of
Section 37 are also to be factored in. The conditions imposed in sub- section (1) of Section 37 is that
(i) the Public Prosecutor ought to be given an opportunity to oppose the application moved by an
accused Criminal Appeal Nos. ………… of 2022 @ Petitions for Special Leave to Appeal (Criminal)
No. 6128-6129 OF 2021 person for release and (ii) if such an application is opposed, then the Court
must be satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for believing that the person accused is not
guilty of such an offence. Additionally, the Court must be satisfied that the accused person is
unlikely to commit any offence while on bail.

12. The expression “reasonable grounds” has come up for discussion in several rulings of this Court.
In “Collector of Customs, New Delhi v. Ahmadalieva Nodira”5, a decision rendered by a Three
Judges Bench of this Court, it has been held thus :-

“7. The limitations on granting of bail come in only when the question of granting bail
arises on merits. Apart from the grant of opportunity to the Public Prosecutor, the
other twin conditions which really have relevance so far as the present
accused-respondent is concerned, are:

the satisfaction of the court that there are reasonable grounds for believing that the
accused is not guilty of the alleged offence and that he is not likely to commit any

4

Narcotics Control Bureau vs Mohit Agarwal on 19 July, 2022

offence while on bail. The conditions are cumulative and not alternative. The
satisfaction contemplated regarding the accused being not guilty has to be based on
reasonable grounds. The expression “reasonable grounds” means something more
than prima facie grounds. It contemplates substantial probable causes for believing
that the accused is not guilty of the alleged offence. The reasonable belief
contemplated in the provision requires existence of such facts and circumstances as
are sufficient in themselves to justify satisfaction that the accused is not guilty of the
alleged offence.” [emphasis added]

13. The expression “reasonable ground” came up for discussion in “State of Kerala and others Vs.
Rajesh and others” 6 and this Court has observed as below:

5 (2004) 3 SCC 549 6 (2020) 12 SCC 122 Criminal Appeal Nos. ………… of 2022 @
Petitions for Special Leave to Appeal (Criminal) No. 6128-6129 OF 2021 “20. The
expression ”reasonable grounds” means something more than prima facie grounds. It
contemplates substantial probable causes for believing that the accused is not guilty
of the alleged offence. The reasonable belief contemplated in the provision requires
existence of such facts and circumstances as are sufficient in themselves to justify
satisfaction that the accused is not guilty of the alleged offence. In the case on hand,
the High Court seems to have completely overlooked the underlying object of Section
37 that in addition to the limitations provided under the CrPC, or any other law for
the time being in force, regulating the grant of bail, its liberal approach in the matter
of bail under the NDPS Act is indeed uncalled for.” [emphasis added]

14. To sum up, the expression “reasonable grounds” used in clause (b) of Sub-Section (1) of Section
37 would mean credible, plausible and grounds for the Court to believe that the accused person is
not guilty of the alleged offence. For arriving at any such conclusion, such facts and circumstances
must exist in a case that can persuade the Court to believe that the accused person would not have
committed such an offence. Dove-tailed with the aforesaid satisfaction is an additional
consideration that the accused person is unlikely to commit any offence while on bail.

15. We may clarify that at the stage of examining an application for bail in the context of the Section
37 of the Act, the Court is not required to record a finding that the accused person is not guilty. The
Court is also not expected to weigh the evidence for arriving at a finding as to whether the accused
has committed an offence under the NDPS Act or not. The entire exercise that the Court is expected
to undertake at this stage is for the limited purpose of releasing him on bail. Thus, the focus is on the
Criminal Appeal Nos. ………… of 2022 @ Petitions for Special Leave to Appeal (Criminal) No.
6128-6129 OF 2021 availability of reasonable grounds for believing that the accused is not guilty of
the offences that he has been charged with and he is unlikely to commit an offence under the Act
while on bail.

16. Coming back to the facts of the instant case, the learned Single Judge of the High Court cannot
be faulted for holding that the appellant- NCB could not have relied on the confessional statements
of the respondent and the other co-accused recorded under Section 67 of the NDPS Act in the light

5

Narcotics Control Bureau vs Mohit Agarwal on 19 July, 2022

of law laid down by a Three Judges Bench of this Court in Tofan Singh (supra), wherein as per the
majority decision, a confessional statement recorded under Section 67 of the NDPS Act has been
held to be inadmissible in the trial of an offence under the NDPS Act. Therefore, the admissions
made by the respondent while in custody to the effect that he had illegally traded in narcotic drugs,
will have to be kept aside. However, this was not the only material that the appellant- NCB had
relied on to oppose the bail application filed by the respondent. The appellant-NCB had specifically
stated that it was the disclosures made by the respondent that had led the NCB team to arrive at and
raid the godown of the co-accused, Promod Jaipuria which resulted in the recovery of a large haul of
different psychotropic substances in the form of tablets, injections and syrups. Counsel for the
appellant-NCB had also pointed out that it was the respondent who had disclosed the Criminal
Appeal Nos. ………… of 2022 @ Petitions for Special Leave to Appeal (Criminal) No. 6128-6129 OF
2021 address and location of the co-accused, Promod Jaipuria who was arrested later on and the
CDR details of the mobile phones of all co- accused including the respondent herein showed that
they were in touch with each other.

17. Even dehors the confessional statement of the respondent and the other co-accused recorded
under Section 67 of the NDPS Act, which were subsequently retracted by them, the other
circumstantial evidence brought on record by the appellant-NCB ought to have dissuaded the High
Court from exercising its discretion in favour of the respondent and concluding that there were
reasonable grounds to justify that he was not guilty of such an offence under the NDPS Act. We are
not persuaded by the submission made by learned counsel for the respondent and the observation
made in the impugned order that since nothing was found from the possession of the respondent, he
is not guilty of the offence for which he has been charged. Such an assumption would be premature
at this stage.

18. In our opinion the narrow parameters of bail available under Section 37 of the Act, have not been
satisfied in the facts of the instant case. At this stage, it is not safe to conclude that the respondent
has successfully demonstrated that there are reasonable grounds to believe Criminal Appeal Nos.
………… of 2022 @ Petitions for Special Leave to Appeal (Criminal) No. 6128-6129 OF 2021 that he is
not guilty of the offence alleged against him, for him to have been admitted to bail. The length of the
period of his custody or the fact that the charge-sheet has been filed and the trial has commenced
are by themselves not considerations that can be treated as persuasive grounds for granting relief to
the respondent under Section 37 of the NDPS Act.

19. As a result of the aforesaid discussion, the present appeals are allowed and the impugned order
releasing the respondent on post-arrest bail, is quashed and set aside. The bail bonds of the
respondent are cancelled and he is directed to be taken into custody forthwith.

.................................CJI.

[N. V. RAMANA] ...................................J. [KRISHNA MURARI] ...................................J. [HIMA
KOHLI] New Delhi, July 19, 2022

6