P. Ponnusamy vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 7 November, 2022

P. Ponnusamy vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 7 November, 2022

Author: Bela M. Trivedi

Bench: Chief Justice, S. Ravindra Bhat, Bela M. Trivedi

1

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S).            OF 2022
[@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRL.) NO(S). 9288 of 2022]

P. PONNUSAMY                                                      …APPELLANT(S)

VERSUS

THE STATE OF TAMIL NADU                                          …RESPONDENT(S)

1.              Leave granted. This appeal arises out of an order dated 14.09.2022 in RT

No. 2/2021, by the High Court of Judicature at Madras. In those proceedings, the

High Court had by order dated 27.04.2022 fixed the hearing of the main

proceeding – which is a death reference.

2.              The appellant and some others were convicted under Section 302 of the

IPC along with other provisions and Section 120B. The appellant (A1); A3; A4;

A5; A7; A8 and A9 were sentenced to death. Consequently, reference was made

to the High Court which was seized of all the proceedings and heard it from time

to time. On 27.04.2022 after ascertaining convenience of all the counsels the

appeals were listed for final hearing on 15.06.2022.
Signature Not Verified                                                         The judgment of
Digitally signed by
BABITA PANDEY
Date: 2022.11.07

1

P. Ponnusamy vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 7 November, 2022

17:48:58 IST
Reason:
Bela Trivedi J., has recounted all these facts in detail. The further proceedings

which took place before the High Court, the hearing and the order made on
(cid:12)                                                      2

14.09.2022, declining to direct State to produce documents enlisted in letter

written to the public prosecutor on behalf of the appellant on 05.09.2022, is

impugned here.

3.         The final order proposed by Bela Trivedi J., of rejecting an appeal is in our

opinion justified in the circumstances of the case. However, we are unable to

agree with the observations made during the course of her order as to the nature

of the directions made in Suo Motu W.P. (Crl.) No. 1 of 2017, concerning the

right of the accused to be supplied with documents or material, seized or collected

during the investigation, but not relied upon.

4.         While hearing a criminal appeal1 and connected matters, concern was

raised regarding common deficiencies and practices adopted by trial courts in the

course of criminal trial and disposal of cases, in the absence of uniform

guidelines. This resulted in Suo Motu WP (Crl.) No. 1 of 2017, wherein this court

appointed amici curiae, and issued notice to all High Courts and governments of

all States and Union Territories, so general consensus could be arrived at

regarding the need to amend rules of practice/criminal manuals to bring about

uniform best practices across the country.2 The court noted salient aspects and

inconsistencies in the practices and rules of the High Courts.

5.         A wide consultative process was undertaken. Firstly, High Courts and

governments of States/Union Territories, filed their responses. Taking note of

1
Criminal Appeal No. 400/2006
2
Order dated 30.03.2017 in Suo Motu WP (Crl) No. 1/2017.

2

P. Ponnusamy vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 7 November, 2022

(cid:12)                                                      3

these, the amici curiae prepared a consultation paper and invited written

responses from stakeholders. Next, a colloquium was convened on 30.03.2019 to

discuss this paper, wherein High Courts, governments of States/Union Territories

and police departments participated. Based on the feedback, the amici curiae

prepared a report containing the ‘Draft Rules of Criminal Practice, 2020’ which

was taken on record on 05.03.2020 and made available3 publicly through the

Supreme Court website.

6.      Before passing directions on the same, this court thought it appropriate to

hear the High Courts again, on these draft rules.4 Once responses were received

from all High Courts, the matter was heard; in the final order dated 20.04.20215

it was noted that most of the suggestions had been agreed upon, except in regard

to few aspects – the divergence, or additional points of view, were taken note of6.

7.      The amici curiae had pointed out that before the commencement of the

trial, the accused only receives a list of documents and statements relied upon by

the prosecution but is kept in the dark on other material in the possession of the

prosecution, even if it has exculpatory value. On this, the court unequivocally

held:

“11. … This Court is of the opinion that while furnishing the list of
statements, documents and material objects under Sections 207/208 CrPC,
the Magistrate should also ensure that a list of other materials, (such as
statements, or objects/documents seized, but not relied on) should be

3
<https://main.sci.gov.in/pdf/LU/06032020_103012.pdf> (accessed on 31.10.2022, 18:28 pm).
4
See order dated 27.10.2020, and again on 19.01.2021 in Suo Motu WP (Crl) No. 1/2017.
5
Reported as Criminal Trials Guidelines Regarding Inadequacies and Deficiencies, In re. v. State of Andhra
Pradesh and Ors., (2021) 10 SCC 598.
6
Ibid, para 9.
(cid:12)                                                         4

3

P. Ponnusamy vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 7 November, 2022

furnished to the accused. This is to ensure that in case the accused is of the
view that such materials are necessary to be produced for a proper and just
trial, she or he may seek appropriate orders, under CrPC7 for their
production during the trial, in the interests of justice. It is directed
accordingly; the Draft Rules have been accordingly modified. [Rule 4(i)]”
(emphasis supplied)

8.       Rule 4 of Draft Rules of Criminal Practice 2021, which was appended to,

and considered part and parcel of this court’s order, reads as follows:

“4. Supply of documents under Sections 173, 207 and 208 CrPC.—(i)
Every accused shall be supplied with statements of witness recorded under

Sections 161 and 164 CrPC and a list of documents, material objects and

exhibits seized during investigation and relied upon by the investigating
officer (IO) in accordance with Sections 207 and 208 CrPC.
Explanation : The list of statements, documents, material objects and
exhibits shall specify statements, documents, material objects and exhibits
that are not relied upon by the investigating officer.”

9.       The matter was disposed of with the following directions:
“19. The Court is of the opinion that the Draft Rules of Criminal Practice,
2021, (which are annexed to the present order, and shall be read as part of
it) should be hereby finalised in terms of the above discussion. The
following directions are hereby issued:
19.1. All High Courts shall take expeditious steps to incorporate the said
Draft Rules, 2021 as part of the rules governing criminal trials, and ensure
that the existing rules, notifications, orders and practice directions are
suitably modified, and promulgated (wherever necessary through the
Official Gazette) within 6 months from today. If the State Government's
co-operation is necessary in this regard, the approval of the department or
departments concerned, and the formal notification of the said Draft Rules,
shall be made within the said period of six months.
19.2. The State Governments, as well as the Union of India (in relation to
investigating agencies in its control) shall carry out consequential
amendments to their police and other manuals, within six months from
today. This direction applies, specifically in respect of Draft Rules 1-3.

7
“91. Summons to produce document or other thing.—(1) Whenever any court or any officer in charge of a
police station considers that the production of any document or other thing is necessary or desirable for the
purposes of any investigation, inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Code by or before such Court or officer,
such Court may issue a summons, or such officer a written order, to the person in whose possession or power such
document or thing is believed to be, requiring him to attend and produce it, or to produce it, at the time and place
stated in the summons or order.(2) Any person required under this section merely to produce a document or other
thing shall be deemed to have complied with the requisition if he causes such document or thing to be produced
instead of attending personally to produce the same.(3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed—(a) to affect
Sections 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), or the Bankers' Books Evidence Act, 1891
(13 of 1891) or(b) to apply to a letter, postcard, telegram or other document or any parcel or thing in the custody

4

P. Ponnusamy vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 7 November, 2022

of the postal or telegraph authority.”
(cid:12)                                                      5

The appropriate forms and guidelines shall be brought into force, and all
agencies instructed accordingly, within six months from today.”

10.     The Draft Rules framed, therefore, were a product of a thorough

consultative exercise undertaken to remedy asymmetries caused by the lack of

uniformity in Rules across States, which could hamper appreciation of evidence,

and in turn delay proceedings, especially at the appellate stage. Recognition of

the need to streamline trials or mitigate delays, however, cannot come at the cost

of the accused’s right to fair trial.

11.     Taking note of the case law in Siddharth Vasisht @ Manu Sharma v. State

of NCT Delhi8, this court in Manoj & Ors. v. State of Madhya Pradesh9,

highlighted the dual role played by the public prosecutor and the court in

safeguarding the accused’s right to fair investigation and trial, by scrutinizing the

material and ensuring fair disclosure. In light of this, and the aforementioned draft

Rule 4, this court went on to hold in Manoj that:

“…In view of the above discussion, this court holds that the prosecution,
in the interests of fairness, should as a matter of rule, in all criminal trials,
comply with the above rule, and furnish the list of statements, documents,
material objects and exhibits which are not relied upon by the investigating
officer. The presiding officers of courts in criminal trials shall ensure
compliance with such rules.”

12.     In addition to the decision in Manu Sharma (as noticed in Manoj), there is

another decision – Manjeet Singh Khera v. State of Maharashtra10 - which had

8
(2010) 6 SCC 1 (referred to as ‘Manu Sharma’). See paragraphs 187, 199, 201, 202, 218-222 (relied on in
Manoj & Ors. v. State of Madhya Pradesh).
9
Judgment dated 20.05.2022 in Criminal Appeal Nos. 248-250 of 2015; 2022 SCC OnLine SC 677.
10
(2013) 9 SCC 276
(cid:12)                                                       6

5

P. Ponnusamy vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 7 November, 2022

highlighted how the requirement of disclosure, is an intrinsic part of the right to

fair trial under Article 21 of the Constitution.11 Relying upon its previous decision

in V.K. Sasikala v. State12, this court noted in Manjeet Singh Khera:

“…In that case, the documents were forwarded to the court under Section
173(5) CrPC but were not relied upon by the prosecution and the accused
wanted copies/inspection of those documents. This Court held that it was
incumbent upon the trial court to supply the copies of these documents to
the accused as that entitlement was a facet of just, fair and transparent
investigation/trial and constituted an inalienable attribute of the process of
a fair trial which Article 21 of the Constitution guarantees to every
accused. We would like to reproduce the following portion of the said
judgment discussing this aspect: (V.K. Sasikala case [V.K. Sasikala v.
State, (2012) 9 SCC 771 : (2013) 1 SCC (Cri) 1010] , SCC p. 788, para
21)
“21. The issue that has emerged before us is, therefore, somewhat larger
than what has been projected by the State and what has been dealt with by
the High Court. The question arising would no longer be one of
compliance or non-compliance with the provisions of Section 207 CrPC
and would travel beyond the confines of the strict language of the
provisions of CrPC and touch upon the larger doctrine of a free and fair
trial that has been painstakingly built up by the courts on a purposive
interpretation of Article 21 of the Constitution. It is not the stage of making
of the request; the efflux of time that has occurred or the prior conduct of
the accused that is material. What is of significance is if in a given situation
the accused comes to the court contending that some papers forwarded to
the court by the investigating agency have not been exhibited by the
prosecution as the same favours the accused the court must concede a right
to the accused to have an access to the said documents, if so claimed. This,
according to us, is the core issue in the case which must be answered
affirmatively. In this regard, we would like to be specific in saying that we
find it difficult to agree with the view [V.K. Sasikala v. State, 2012 SCC
OnLine Kar 9209] taken by the High Court that the accused must be made
to await the conclusion of the trial to test the plea of prejudice that he may
have raised. Such a plea must be answered at the earliest and certainly
before the conclusion of the trial, even though it may be raised by the
accused belatedly. This is how the scales of justice in our criminal
jurisprudence have to be balanced.”
(emphasis supplied)

11
This was also reaffirmed in P. Gopalkrishnan v. State of Kerala (2020) 9 SCC 161 where it was held that
“furnishing of documents to the accused under Section 207 of the 1973 Code is a facet of right of the accused to
a fair trial enshrined in Article 21 of the Constitution”.
12

6

P. Ponnusamy vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 7 November, 2022

(2012) 9 SCC 771
(cid:12)                                         7

13.   It is true that this court in V.K. Sasikala (supra) was dealing with

material/documents that were forwarded to the Magistrate under Section 173

CrPC, but were not being relied upon by the prosecution. However, it is

undeniable that there could also arise a situation wherein the investigating officer,

ignores or does not rely on seized documents, material or evidence which favours

the accused, and fails to forward it to the Magistrate [as required under Section

173 CrPC, specifically sub-section (6)]. Merely because it is not already on the

record of the court, cannot disentitle the accused from accessing material that may

have exculpatory value. It is this gap, that was recognised and addressed

(paragraph 11 of final order) in the suo-moto proceedings, and suitably codified

in the text of the Draft Rule 4, by introducing a requirement of providing a list (at

the commencement of the trial) of all documents, material, evidence, etc. seized

during the course of investigation or in the possession of the prosecution,

regardless of whether the prosecution plans to rely on it. The facts in Manoj,

having reflected such a situation (of suppression of evidence that favoured the

accused) similarly, necessitated elaboration of this right.

14.   The framework that emerges (by reading Section 173, 207, 208 and Draft

Rule 4) is that based on the list of statements, documents, etc. received at the

commencement of the trial, the accused can seek appropriate orders under Section

91 of the CrPC, wherein the magistrate on application of judicial mind, may

decide on whether it ought to be called for. Additionally, by virtue of Section
(cid:12)                                                          8

39113 of the CrPC, the appellate court, if it deems necessary, may take further

evidence (or direct it be taken by a magistrate or court of sessions) upon recording

reasoning. This safeguards the right of the accused in a situation where concern

7

P. Ponnusamy vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 7 November, 2022

has been raised regarding evidence or material in possession of the prosecution,

that had not been furnished, but was material to the trial and disposal of the case.

15.       By way of Miscellaneous Application No. 505/2022 in SMW(Crl) No. 1

of 2017, this court was apprised of the fact that some states had complied, and

other had not complied with the directions in final order dated 20.04.202114

regarding adoption of the Draft Rules and amending police manuals, etc. in a

time-bound manner (6 months); the states were directed15 to comply within 8

weeks and the matter is still pending.

16.       That some High Courts or governments of the States/ Union Territories

have failed to comply with this court’s order and are delayed in adopting the Draft

Rules or amending the concerned police/practice manuals, cannot prejudice the

right of an accused (to receive this list of the statements, documents, material, etc.

in the possession of the prosecution), which has unequivocally been recognized

13
391. Appellate Court may take further evidence or direct it to be taken.—(1) In dealing with any appeal
under this Chapter, the Appellate Court, if it thinks additional evidence to be necessary, shall record its reasons
and may either take such evidence itself, or direct it to be taken by a Magistrate, or when the Appellate Court is a
High Court, by a Court of Session or a Magistrate.
(2) When the additional evidence is taken by the Court of Session or the Magistrate, it or he shall certify such
evidence to the Appellate Court, and such Court shall thereupon proceed to dispose of the appeal.
(3) The accused or his pleader shall have the right to be present when the additional evidence is taken.
(4) The taking of evidence under this section shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter XXIII, as if it were an
inquiry.
14
Suo Motu WP (Crl) No. 1/2017
15
By order dated 28.04.2022 in Miscellaneous Application No. 505/2022 in SMW(Crl) No. 1/2017.
(cid:12)                                                    9

by this court in its final order16 of the suo-moto proceedings (paragraph 11,

extracted above), itself. Further, to say that the judgment in Manoj in relation to

this, and the right of the accused to receive the said list of documents, material,

etc. would only apply after the draft rules are adopted – would lead to an

8

P. Ponnusamy vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 7 November, 2022

anomalous situation where the right of the accused in one state, prejudicially

differs from that afforded to an accused, in another.

17.     As stated earlier, the requirement of disclosure elaborated on in Manoj, not

only was premised on the formulation of draft rules, but normatively premised on

the ratio of the three-judge bench decision in Manu Sharma (supra). In these

circumstances, the proper and suitable interpretation of the disclosure

requirement in Manoj (supra) would be that:

(a) It applies at the trial stage, after the charges are framed.
(b) The court is required to give one opportunity of disclosure, and the
accused may choose to avail of the facility at that stage.
(c) In case documents are sought, the trial court should exercise its
discretion, having regard to the rule of relevance in the context of the
accused’s right of defence. If the document or material is relevant and
does not merely have remote bearing to the defence, its production may
be directed. This opportunity cannot be sought repeatedly – the trial
court can decline to issue orders, if it feels that the attempt is to delay.

(d) At the appellate stage, the rights of the accused are to be worked out
within the parameters of Section 391 CrPC.

16
Order dated 20.04.2021 in Suo Motu WP (Crl) No. 1/2017, reported as Criminal Trials Guidelines Regarding
Inadequacies and Deficiencies, In re. v. State of Andhra Pradesh and Ors., (2021) 10 SCC 598.
(cid:12)                                         10

18.   That the accused, has a right to fair trial, was not in doubt; but what is

reiterated is that this right is manifested in the fair disclosure requirement

elaborated above. While the concern of delay in conclusion of trial undoubtedly

weighs heavily in the mind of the judge, it cannot entail compromise of the right

of the accused to fair investigation and trial.

19.   Having regard to the above discussion we are of the opinion that the

circumstances in which the request was made – through the letter after appeal was

set down for hearing despite repeated opportunities, was not justified. The

appellant could have sought recourse by filing an appropriate application, in

9

P. Ponnusamy vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 7 November, 2022

accordance with the procedures set out above, well in time. We therefore agree

that the appeal made at this late stage, appears to be to prolong the hearing. In

these circumstances, the Court declines to interfere. The appeal is accordingly

dismissed.

…........................................CJI.
[UDAY UMESH LALIT]

.....…........................................J.
[S. RAVINDRA BHAT]

NEW DELHI
NOVEMBER 07, 2022
(cid:12)                                                            REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.             OF 2022
[Arising out of SLP(CRIMINAL) NO. 9288 OF 2022]

P. PONNUSAMY                                      …APPELLANT

VERSUS

THE STATE OF TAMIL NADU                          …RESPONDENT

JUDGEMENT

BELA M. TRIVEDI, J.

1) Leave granted.

2) The appellant (original accused no. 1) has filed the present appeal being aggrieved by the
impugned order dated 14.09.2022 passed by the High Court of Judicature at Madras in RT No. 02 of
2021, whereby the High Court had directed the learned Counsels appearing for the parties to
proceed with the hearing of the matter on 17.10.2022. The relevant part of the impugned order reads
as under: -

10

P. Ponnusamy vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 7 November, 2022

“17. In our opinion, this communication is not at all appreciable and we strongly
record our disapproval on such tactics adopted by the learned counsel on record. All
the papers relied upon by the prosecution were placed by the Investigating Officer
before the trial court and copies were furnished to the accused under Section 207
Cr.P.C. The same have got translated as legal evidence during trial and the case of the
accused should have to stand or fall based on that unless additional evidence is
sought to be taken.

18. Mrs. Anjana Prakash, learned Senior Counsel requested fervently that she has
discussed with all the counsel including the Senior Counsel, who have been engaged
by various counsel on record and sought final adjournment to 17.10.2022, on which
date, all the counsel assured that they would not seek any adjournment.

19. This Court explain to the learned counsel that the case of the persons, who have
been sentenced to death, has to be completed within six months, whereas, in this
case, for the last one year, there has not been any progress on account of non-

cooperation of the accused. Under Section 386 Cr.P.C., if the counsel for the appellant or the Public
Prosecutor does not appear, it is open to this Court to peruse the records and proceed with the case.

When we explained to Mrs. Anjana Prakash that the Public Prosecutor may be permitted to begin
the case at least and that she may reply to his submissions later, she requested us not to do that, as it
would be easier if both sides’ submissions are heard continuously. She repeatedly assured us that no
one would seek adjournment on 17.10.2022.

Hence, more out of courtesy and respect for Mrs. Anjana Prakash, Senior Advocate, the case is
adjourned to 17.10.2022.”

3) The appellant instead of appearing before the High Court on 17.10.2022, rushed to this Court
challenging the said order. This Court on 17.10.2022 passed the following order:-

“Mr. Gopal Sankaranarayanan, learned Senior Advocate submits that:

a) This Court in its decision dated 22.05.2022 passed in Manoj & Others v. State of
Madhya Pradesh, reported in 2022 (9) SCALE 67, dealt with certain issues from
paragraph 170 of the decision whereafter conclusions were drawn in paragraph

179.

b) Relying on these observations, a letter was written on behalf of the accused on 05.09.2022
seeking documents which were in the possession of the investigating machinery.

c) Without deciding the issues raised in said letter, the High Court has proceeded to fix the matter
for hearing in death confirmation case.

11

P. Ponnusamy vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 7 November, 2022

We issue notice on this petition, returnable on 20.10.2022 and direct that the matter be placed
before the same Bench which dealt with and rendered the decision in Manoj & Others (supra). Dasti
service, in addition, is permitted.

Liberty is granted to serve the learned Standing Counsel for the State.

Since the matter is posted before the High Court for final disposal, at this stage, we do not deem it
appropriate to pass any interim directions except to request the High Court not to pronounce the
final order in case the matter is taken up for final disposal.”

4) In the present Appeal, we need not go deep into the merits of the Appeals or the Reference case,
which are pending before the High Court. Suffice it to say that the appellant along with other eight
accused were convicted and sentenced by the City Civil and Sessions Court, Chennai in Sessions
Case No. 348/2015 for the offences punishable under Section 120-B, 109, 341, 302 read with section
34 of IPC. Some of the accused were sentenced to death penalty and some with life imprisonment
and other sentences. The Sessions Court had referred its judgement and order to the High Court for
confirmation of the death penalty awarded to some of the accused under Section 366 Cr.P.C., which
was registered as RT No. 02 of 2021. The accused also had filed separate nine appeals before the
High Court challenging the judgement and order passed by the Sessions Court in the said sessions
case. All the said appeals were directed to be tagged with RT No. 02 of 2021 by the High Court.

5) As transpiring from the impugned order, the High Court after ascertaining the convenience of all
the advocates appearing for the parties had fixed the date for final hearing on 15.06.2022 vide the
order dated 27.04.2022. Thereafter, the roster was changed and the matters were listed on
06.09.2022 on which date the hearing was adjourned at the request made by the learned counsel for
the appellant-accused and therefore, it was again adjourned to 14.09.2022 for final disposal. On
14.09.2022, though the State Public Prosecutor was ready to argue, one of the learned senior
advocates from Delhi appeared before the High Court and requested the High Court to adjourn the
hearing. At that time, the State Public Prosecutor drew the attention of the High Court to a letter
dated 05.09.2022 sent by Mr. G. Sriram, learned counsel appearing for the present appellant
(accused no. 1) P. Ponnusamy, the accused no. 02 Mary Pushpam and the accused no. 03 Basil,
addressed to the Inspector (Law and Order) E-4 Abiramapuram Police Station, Chennai, asking him
to produce certain documents, stating therein inter-alia that the said documents were required for
fair adjudication of their case, in the light of the Supreme Court’s decision (in case of Manoj and
others Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh, Criminal Appeal No. 248-250 of 2015 decided on 20th May,
2022). The said letter was placed on record by the State Public Prosecutor. On the said date i.e.,
14.09.2022, the learned senior advocate who had come from Delhi assured the court that she had
discussed with all the counsels who were appearing for the appellants and that all had assured her
that they would proceed with the hearing on 17.10.2022. The High Court appraised her that the case
pertained to the sentence of death penalty, which had to be completed within six months and that
for the last one year there was no progress in the case on account of non- cooperation of the accused.
However, she repeatedly assured the court that no one would seek adjournment on 17.10.2022, and
therefore the High Court out of sheer courtesy and respect for the senior advocate adjourned the
case to 17.10.2022.

12

P. Ponnusamy vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 7 November, 2022

6) Despite such assurance having been given by the senior advocate and all other advocates
including other senior advocates appearing for the other appellants-accused to the High Court to
proceed with the hearing of the Reference case and the appeals, the appellant rushed to this Court to
hamper the hearing fixed before the High Court on 17.10.2022. Such a dilatory tactics adopted by
the parties and their advocates and thereby deflecting the course of justice in the cases like the
present one, where some of the appellant-accused are facing the death penalty and some sentence of
life imprisonment are strongly deprecated. It is needless to say that the death Reference cases
referred by the Sessions Courts to the High Court have to be given utmost priority and should be
heard and completed by the High Court as expeditiously as possible and preferably within six
months. However, as transpiring from the observations made by the High Court in the impugned
order, which have remained unchallenged before us, it was only because of the non-cooperation on
behalf of the counsels appearing for the appellant-accused, the High Court was not able to hear the
Reference case. The court may not have to remind the senior advocates of their duties to assist the
courts for the cause of justice, and not to indulge into dilatory tactics and hamper the cause of
justice.

7) Having said that, let us examine the merits of the submissions made before us. Placing heavy
reliance on the observations made by this court in case of Manoj and others Vs. State of Madhya
Pradesh (supra), the learned senior counsel for the appellant submitted that the appellant alongwith
the other two accused on 05.09.2022 had sent a letter addressed to the Inspector (Law and Order)
E-4 Abiramapuram Police Station, Chennai requesting him to produce certain documents as
mentioned in the letter, which were required for fair adjudication in the case. He further submitted
that till the copies of the documents demanded by the accused as mentioned in the said letter were
furnished to them, it was not possible for them to proceed with the hearing of the appeals or the
Reference case pending before the High Court. According to them, the observations made by this
Court in para 177 to 179 in case of Manoj and others Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh (supra) were very
much significant for safeguarding the rights of the accused to a fair investigation carried out by the
mighty State’s police machinery; and that the interest of the justice warranted that the further
hearing of RT No. 02 of 2021 pending before the High Court be stayed till the appellants and other
accused were provided with the documents demanded by them.

8) The said submissions made by the learned senior advocates appearing for the appellant deserve
to be outrightly rejected, having been advanced out of sheer misconception of the law and
misinterpretation of the observations made by this Court in case of Manoj and others Vs. State of
Madhya Pradesh (supra). The precise observations made by this Court in para 177, 178 and 179 of
the judgement in the said case of Manoj and others may be reproduced here under: -

“177. In this manner, the public prosecutor, and then the trial court’s scrutiny, both
play an essential role in safeguarding the accused’s right to fair investigation, when
faced with the might of the state’s police machinery.

178. This view was endorsed in a recent three judge decision of this court in Criminal
trials guidelines regarding Inadequacies and Deficiencies, in re v.

13

P. Ponnusamy vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 7 November, 2022

State of Andhra Pradesh. This court has highlighted the inadequacy mentioned above, which would
impede a fair trial, and inter alia, required the framing of rules by all states and High Courts, in this
regard, compelling disclosure of a list containing mention of all materials seized and taken in,
during investigation-to the accused. The relevant draft guideline, approved by this Court, for
adoption by all states is as follows:

“4. SUPPLY OF DOCUMENTS UNDER SECTIONS 173, 207 AND 208 CR.PC Every
Accused shall be supplied with statements of witness recorded under Sections 161
and 164 Cr.PC and a list of documents, material objects and exhibits seized during
investigation and relied upon by the Investigating Officer (I.O) in accordance with
Sections 207 and 208, Cr.PC.

Explanation: the list of statements, documents, material objects and exhibits shall
specify statements, documents, material objects and exhibits that are not relied upon
by the Investigating Officer.”

179. In view of the above discussion, this court holds that the prosecution, in the
interests of fairness, should as a matter of rule, in all criminal trials, comply with the
above rule, and furnish the list of statements, documents, material objects and
exhibits which are not relied upon by the investigating officer. The presiding officers
of courts in criminal trials shall ensure compliance with such rules.”

9) It may be noted that the draft guidelines were given by this Court to all the High
Courts and the State Governments and Union of India in the suo-moto proceedings
initiated by this Court under Article 32, during the course of hearing of a criminal
appeal, whereby the court had noticed certain common deficiencies occurring during
the course of criminal trials and certain practices adopted by the trial courts in the
criminal proceedings. The said suo moto proceedings were registered as “Criminal
Trials Guidelines Regarding Inadequacies and Deficiencies, in Re Vs. State of Andhra
Pradesh and others1.” The said case related, amongst others to deficiencies/lapses
with regard to the manner in which the documents (list of witnesses, list of exhibits,
list of material objects) referred to and presented and exhibited in the judgements,
and lack of uniform practices in regard to preparation of injury reports, deposition of
witnesses, translation of statements, numbering and nomenclature of (2021) 10 SCC
598 witnesses, labeling of material objects etc. which often led to a asymmetries and
hamper appreciation of evidence, which in turn had a tendency prolonging the
proceedings especially at the appellate stage.

The court in the said case had noticed that on these aspects, some High Courts had framed the rules,
however some had not, which had led to a lack of clarity and uniformity in regard to the
presentation of trial court proceedings and records, for the purpose of appreciation at the High
C o u r t   a n d   S u p r e m e   C o u r t   l e v e l .   T h e   c o u r t   i n   t h e   s a i d   c a s e ,   a f t e r   c o n s i d e r i n g   t h e
suggestions/submissions of the Amici Curie and of the counsels appearing for the High Courts,
States and the Union Territories, on “the Draft Rules of Criminal Practice 2020” prepared by the

14

Amici Curie, had given the following directions vide the order dated 20.04.2021:-

P. Ponnusamy vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 7 November, 2022

“19. The Court is of the opinion that the Draft Rules of Criminal Practice, 2021,
(which are annexed to the present order, and shall be read as part of it) should be
hereby finalised in terms of the above discussion. The following directions are hereby
issued:

19.1. All High Courts shall take expeditious steps to incorporate the said Draft Rules,
2021 as part of the rules governing criminal trials, and ensure that the existing rules,
notifications, orders and practice directions are suitably modified, and promulgated
(wherever necessary through the Official Gazette) within 6 months from today. If the
State Government's co-operation is necessary in this regard, the approval of the
department or departments concerned, and the formal notification of the said Draft
Rules, shall be made within the said period of six months.

19.2. The State Governments, as well as the Union of India (in relation to
investigating agencies in its control) shall carry out consequential amendments to
their police and other manuals, within six months from today. This direction applies,
specifically in respect of Draft Rules 1-3. The appropriate forms and guidelines shall
be brought into force, and all agencies instructed accordingly, within six months from
today.”

10) From the above, it clearly emerges that this Court in the afore-stated suo moto
proceedings had directed all the High Courts to take expeditious steps to incorporate
the said Draft Rules as part of the Rules governing criminal trials and to ensure that
the existing rules, notifications, orders and practice are suitably modified and
promulgated, wherever necessary through the official gazette within six months from
the date of the said order. The court had also directed the State Governments as well
as the Union of India to carry out consequential amendments to the police and other
manuals. However, neither the High Courts nor the State Governments appear to
have taken any steps pursuant to the said directions. As a result thereof, the said
Draft Rules have neither been adopted by the respective High Courts/State
Governments nor have come into force. Unless and until the Draft Rules as suggested
by the court in the suo moto proceedings are incorporated by the High Courts in the
Rules governing criminal trials and unless the consequential amendments are made
by the State Governments and the Union of India in the Police and other Manuals,
the same could not have been pressed into service by any party to a criminal
proceeding. The observations made in para 179 of the judgement in case of Manoj
and others Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh (Supra) were in the context of the said
directions given by the court in the suo moto proceedings and therefore were
required to be read in conjunction with the earlier paras 177 and 178 of the said
judgement.

15

P. Ponnusamy vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 7 November, 2022

Meaning thereby, the prosecution is expected to comply with the Draft Rule no. 4 pertaining to the
supply of documents, as and when the said set of Draft Rules are adopted by the High Courts and
State Governments, giving them a statutory force.

11) May it be noted that in any case, the Draft Rule no. 4 with regard to the supply of documents
under Sections 173, 207 and 208 Cr.P.C. is part of the Chapter I of the said Draft Rules, to be
followed during the course of investigation and before the commencement of the trial. The said
Draft Rule no.4 as and when brought into force after following the due process of law could be
pressed into service by the accused only during the course of investigation and during the course of
trial, and not at the appellate stage before the High Court or the Supreme Court.

12) In the aforesaid premises, the attempt made on behalf of the appellant-

accused and the other accused to delay the hearing of the appeals and the death Reference case
pending before the High Court, under the guise that they had demanded certain documents from
the Investigating Officer was absolutely reprehensible. As observed by the High Court in the
impugned order, “all the papers relied upon by the prosecution were placed by the Investigating
Officer before the trial court and copies were furnished to the accused under Section 207 Cr.P.C. The
same have got translated as legal evidence during trial and the case of the accused should have to
stand or fall based on that unless additional evidence is sought to be taken.”

13) This Court does not express any opinion on the merits of the case, and dismisses the present
appeal being devoid of merits.

14) The registry is directed to circulate a copy of this order to all the High Courts, who in turn shall
circulate the same to their respective subordinate courts.

…..................................J. [BELA M. TRIVEDI] NEW DELHI 07.11.2022

16