Padhiyar Prahladji Chenaji vs Maniben Jagmalbhai (Deceased) Through ... on 3 March, 2022

Padhiyar Prahladji Chenaji vs Maniben Jagmalbhai (Deceased)
Through ... on 3 March, 2022

Author: M.R. Shah

Bench: B.V. Nagarathna, M.R. Shah

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1382 OF 2022

Padhiyar Prahladji Chenaji
(Deceased) Through L.R.s                                   …Appellant(s)

Versus

Maniben Jagmalbhai (Deceased)
Through L.R.s and Ors.                                    …Respondent(s)

JUDGMENT

M.R. SHAH, J.

1. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment and order dated 24.10.2018
passed by the High Court of Gujarat in Second Appeal No. 8 of 2016 by which the High Court has
dismissed the said appeal and has confirmed the judgment and decree passed by the trial court
further confirmed by the First Appellate Court granting injunction in favour of the original plaintiff
restraining the defendant from disturbing the possession of the plaintiff, the original defendant has
preferred the present appeal.

2. That the dispute is with respect to the land bearing Revenue NatarajanSurvey No.49
ad-measuring 6 acres and 15 gunthas situated at the village Mahadeviya, District Deesa. The
husband of the original plaintiff had executed a Sale Deed dated 17.06.1975 in favour of the
appellant herein – original defendant (hereinafter referred to as the “original defendant”) by which
he sold his agricultural land in question. 2.1 That on the basis of the sale deed, the name of the
defendant No.1 was mutated in the Revenue record in the year 1976 itself. All throughout the name
of the original defendant No.1 was mutated in the Revenue record as an owner right from the year
1976 onwards. It is the case on behalf of the defendants that thereafter between 1975 to 1997, he had
authorised and completed construction projects on the land. He also availed a bank loan where the
suit property was given as a collateral security.

1

Padhiyar Prahladji Chenaji vs Maniben Jagmalbhai (Deceased) Through ... on 3 March, 2022

2.2 That in the year 1999, the husband of the original plaintiff, who executed the registered sale deed
died. That after a period of approximately 22 years, respondent No.1 herein – original plaintiff
(hereinafter referred to as “original plaintiff”) instituted Regular Civil Suit No. 123 of 1997 in the
Court of Civil Judge (Junior Division), Deesa for the reliefs of cancellation of the registered Sale
Deed dated 17.06.1975, declaration and permanent injunction.

2.3 The case on behalf of the original plaintiff was that her husband was addicted to liquor and as
the family was in need of finances, her husband decided to sell 1 acre of the land out of total 6 acres
and 15 gunthas to the defendant No.1. According to the plaintiff, defendant No.1 taking advantage
fraudulently got the sale deed registered of the entire suit property, i.e., 6 acres and 15 gunthas.
Therefore, it was the case on behalf of the plaintiff that the defendant No.1 played a fraud upon her
family. According to the plaintiff, the possession of only 1 acre was handed over to the defendant
No.1 and the plaintiff continued to be in possession of the remaining 5 acres and 15 gunthas of land.
It is the case of the plaintiff, no sooner she came to learn about the alleged fraud and as the
defendant No.1 tried to disturb her settled possession in the suit land, she instituted the regular civil
suit for the aforesaid reliefs. 2.4 The suit was opposed by defendant No.1. It was the specific case on
behalf of the defendant No.1 that he has purchased the entire land, i.e., 6 acres and 15 gunthas under
the registered sale deed duly executed by the husband of the plaintiff. It was also the case on behalf
of the defendant No.1 that he is in possession of the entire suit land and is cultivating the same since
many years. According to the defendant No.1, the plaintiff has no right, title or interest in the suit
property. At this stage, it is required to be noted that the plaintiff joined the brothers of her husband
as defendant Nos. 2 and 3 against whom as such no reliefs were claimed.

2.5 The trial court framed the following issues:-

“1. Whether the plaintiff proves that her husband had given in writing 1 acre land
located on the North from survey no. 49 paiki for construction of well?

2. Whether the plaintiff proves that the defendant no.1 along with defendant no. 2
and 3 got the sale deed of survey no. 49 admeasuring 6 acre - 15 guntha land
executed. on 17/6/75 for Rs. 4000/- from her husband falsely?

3. Whether the defendant proves that the husband of plaintiff had sold him 6 acre -
15 guntha land of survey no. 49. by registered sale deed dated 17/6/75 and he has the
possession of the land since then?

4. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to get declaration as prayed?

5. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to get the relief sought?

6. What order and decree?” 2.6 On appreciation of evidence, both oral as well as
documentary, the trial court partly allowed the suit. The trial court declined to grant
the relief of cancellation of the sale deed and declaration and held that defendant
No.1 purchased the entire 6 acres and 15 gunthas of the land under the registered

2

Padhiyar Prahladji Chenaji vs Maniben Jagmalbhai (Deceased) Through ... on 3 March, 2022

Sale Deed dated 17.06.1975. However, the trial court believed the plaintiff to be in
possession of the suit land to the extent of 5 acers and 15 gunthas of land and
accordingly granted the relief of permanent injunction.

2.7 Defendant No.1, feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the judgment and decree
of permanent injunction passed by the trial court, preferred the Regular Civil Appeal
No. 15 of 2000 before the First Appellate Court – District Court of Banaskantha at
Deesa. The First Appellate Court dismissed the said appeal and confirmed the
judgment and decree of permanent injunction passed by the trial court. 2.8 At this
stage, it is required to be noted that so far as the judgment and decree passed by the
trial court refusing to grant the decree of cancellation of the registered sale deed and
refusing to grant declaration of title of the property in her favour attained finality and
it was the defendant No.1 who unsuccessfully preferred the appeal before the First
Appellate Court challenging the decree of permanent injunction in favour of the
original plaintiff.

2.9 Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the judgment and decree passed by the
First Appellate Court, defendant No.1 preferred the Second Appeal before the High
Court. The High Court framed the following substantial questions of law:-

“(1) Whether in the facts and circumstances of the case. Courts below, particular
appellate Court has committed serious error of law in holding that so far as the relief
of cancellation of sale deed is concerned, it is barred by limitation and so far as the
relief of injunction is concerned, it is not barred by limitation as plaintiff has
continuous cause of action for that relief?

(2) Whether in the facts and circumstances of the case, is it possible to draw
conclusion about possession of the either party? Whether in arriving at finding as to
the possession Courts below have correctly appreciated materials on record or have
committed serious error of law?” 2.10 By the impugned judgment and order, the
High Court has dismissed the second appeal by observing and holding that the relief
of permanent injunction sought by the original plaintiff can be said to be substantive
relief and not a consequential relief and therefore, the trial court was justified in
granting the permanent injunction in favour of the plaintiff as the plaintiff was/is
found to be in possession of 5 acres and 15 gunthas of land out of total area
ad-measuring 6 acres and 15 gunthas.

2.11 Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment and order passed by the High
Court dismissing his second appeal and confirming the judgment and decree passed by the trial
court of granting permanent injunction in favour of the original plaintiff, the original defendant
No.1 has preferred the present appeal.

3. Shri Pallav Shishodia, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the original defendant No.1
has vehemently submitted that once the relief relating to declaration as to title of the plaintiff to suit

3

Padhiyar Prahladji Chenaji vs Maniben Jagmalbhai (Deceased) Through ... on 3 March, 2022

land is declined, the trial court erred in granting the relief of permanent injunction to protect the
alleged “possession” of the plaintiff. 3.1 It is submitted that the permanent injunction sought and
granted in favour of the plaintiff is unjust and contrary to Section 38 read with Section 41 of the
Specific Relief Act.

3.2 It is further contended that even the relief for permanent injunction was contrary to the evidence
on record. It is submitted that as such, right from the execution of the registered Sale Deed dated
17.06.1975, the defendant No.1 is in possession of the entire suit land. It is submitted that right from
1975 in the Revenue record, the name of the defendant No.1 is shown as a cultivator and in
possession. It is submitted that even defendant No.1 also availed a bank loan where the suit property
was given as a collateral security. It is submitted that even in the registered sale deed, it was
specifically mentioned that the full sale consideration has been paid and that the defendant No.1 –
purchaser was put in possession of the entire land. It is urged that once the trial court believed the
execution of the registered sale deed with respect to the entire land in question and also believed
that the full sale consideration with respect to the entire land in question had been paid, the trial
court ought to have believed that part of the sale deed in which it was specifically mentioned that
possession of the entire land in question was handed over to the defendant No.1. It is submitted
therefore that all the Courts have materially erred in believing the possession of the plaintiff with
respect to 5 acres and 15 gunthas of land. 3.3 It is further submitted by Shri Shishodia, learned
Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the original defendant No.1, that even otherwise, all the
Courts below have materially erred in granting the relief of permanent injunction in favour of the
plaintiff. It is contended that once the plaintiff failed to get any relief regarding the declaration as to
title and the registered sale deed in favour of the defendant No.1 has been believed, in that case, as
the relief for permanent injunction was a consequential relief sought in the suit, the plaintiff shall
not be entitled to any protection and/or any injunction protecting her alleged possession. 3.4 It is
further submitted that the Courts below have not properly appreciated the fact that once the
plaintiff failed to get any relief regarding declaration as to title and the registered sale deed in favour
of the defendant No.1 came to be believed, the so called possession of the plaintiff can be said to be
unlawful and/or illegal possession and in any case cannot be said to be lawful possession and
therefore is not entitled for the permanent injunction as prayed and granted by the trial court
confirmed by the High Court.

3.5 It is also submitted that if the suit for declaration was barred by limitation, then the relief
seeking permanent injunction was also barred by limitation, as the plaintiff challenged the Sale
Deed dated 17.06.1975 after a period of 22 years.

3.6 It is further submitted that after the suit was filed in the year 1997 challenging the sale deed of
1975, the trial court declined the temporary injunction vide order dated 12.12.1997. Thereafter, the
First Appellate Court protected the possession of the appellant – defendant No.1 by granting an
order of status quo during the pendency of the first appeal, which was further continued even by the
High Court vide order dated 21.03.2016. It is submitted that even the order of status quo had been
extended by the High Court after the impugned judgment and continued by this Court vide order
dated 11.01.2019. It is submitted that the defendant No.1 all along has been in possession and in
exclusive possession of the suit land, which stand protected by the judicial orders all throughout in

4

Padhiyar Prahladji Chenaji vs Maniben Jagmalbhai (Deceased) Through ... on 3 March, 2022

recognition of the said fact.

3.7 Making the above submissions, it is prayed to allow the present appeal and quash and set aside
the judgment and decree passed by the trial court of granting permanent injunction as affirmed by
the High Court.

4. Present appeal is vehemently opposed by Shri Rauf Rahim, learned Advocate appearing on behalf
of the original plaintiff. 4.1 It is vehemently submitted by Shri Rahim, learned Advocate appearing
on behalf of the original plaintiff that as such there are concurrent findings of fact recorded by all
the Courts below holding that the plaintiff is in possession of the entire suit land, i.e., 5 acre and 15
gunthas of land. It is submitted that these finding of facts have been recorded by all the Courts
below on appreciation of evidence on record, both oral as well as documentary. It is further
submitted that as the plaintiff is found to be in settled possession, the only remedy available to
defendant No.1 would be to file a substantive suit to get the relief of possession. Reliance is placed
on the decision of this Court in the case of Anathula Sudhakar Vs. P. Buchi Reddy, (2008) 4 SCC
594. 4.2 It is submitted that in the suit filed by the plaintiff to protect her possession, defendant
No.1 cannot get the relief of possession in his favour. It is submitted that even no counter claim was
filed on behalf of the defendant No.1 to protect his possession, if any.

4.3 It is further submitted by the learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the original plaintiff that
the plaintiff proved by oral as well as documentary evidence that she is cultivating the suit land in
question and that she is in possession of the said land. It is submitted that on the other hand
defendant No.1 did not lead any evidence to prove his possession. It is submitted that no evidence
was led by the defendant No.1 to prove his possession. It is urged that, once the plaintiff was found
to be in possession of the suit land, no error was committed by the trial court granting the relief of
permanent injunction and the same is rightly affirmed by the First Appellate Court as well as the
High Court. 4.4 It is further submitted by learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the original
plaintiff that the High Court has rightly observed that the relief of permanent injunction sought by
the plaintiff was a substantial relief and not a consequential relief.

4.5 Making the above submissions, it is prayed to dismiss the present appeal.

5. Heard the learned counsel for the respective parties at length.

6. At the outset, it is required to be noted that the suit filed by the original plaintiff was for
cancellation of the registered Sale Deed dated 17.06.1975 and for a declaration that the registered
Sale Deed dated 17.06.1975 is bogus and not binding to the plaintiff. While praying for the
substantive relief of declaration that the aforesaid sale deed is not binding on her, the plaintiff also
prayed for return of the land ad- measuring 1-0 guntha, which even according to the plaintiff was in
possession of the defendant No.1. The plaintiff also prayed for permanent injunction with respect to
the entire agricultural land ad- measuring 6 acres and 15 gunthas, though even according to the
plaintiff also the defendant No.1 was handed over the possession of 1-0 guntha of land out of 6 acres
and 15 gunthas of land.

5

Padhiyar Prahladji Chenaji vs Maniben Jagmalbhai (Deceased) Through ... on 3 March, 2022

6.1 On appreciation of the entire evidence on record, the trial court refused to pass the decree for
cancellation of the registered sale deed and refused to grant a declaration as prayed. Therefore, so
far as on the aspect of title of the land in question is concerned, the plaintiff lost. On appreciation of
evidence, the trial court held that the husband of the plaintiff executed the registered sale deed in
favour of the defendant No.1 for a value consideration. The judgment and order passed by the trial
court refusing to grant the decree of cancellation of the registered sale deed and the declaration has
attained finality. This is because no appeal was filed by the plaintiff.

6.2 However, the trial court granted the permanent injunction in favour of the plaintiff restraining
defendant No.1 from disturbing the possession of the plaintiff with respect to 5 acres and 15 gunthas
of land. It was the defendant No.1, who preferred the appeal before the First Appellate Court and
thereafter before the High Court challenging the decree for permanent injunction. The High Court
by the impugned judgment and order has observed that as relief for permanent injunction, by the
plaintiff can be said to be a substantive relief, therefore, when the plaintiff is found to be in
possession of 5 acres and 15 gunthas of land, the plaintiff is entitled to the relief of permeant
injunction for protecting her possession.

7. Therefore, the short question, which is posed for the consideration of this Court is, whether, in a
case where the plaintiff has lost so far as the title is concerned and the defendant against whom the
permanent injunction is sought is the true owner of the land, whether the plaintiff is entitled to a
relief of permanent injunction against the true owner, more particularly, when the plaintiff has lost
so far as the title is concerned and can thereafter the plaintiff be permitted to contend that despite
the fact that the plaintiff has lost so far as the title is concerned, her possession be protected by way
of injunction and that the true owner has to file a substantive suit claiming the possession.

8. So far as the submission on behalf of the defendant No.1 that even the suit for permanent
injunction is barred by law of limitation and the further submission of defendant No.1 that the
registered sale deed was executed on 17.06.1975 and immediately thereafter the name of the
defendant No.1 was mutated in the Revenue record and thereafter all throughout the name of the
defendant No.1 continued in the Revenue record as a cultivator and the suit was filed after a period
of 22 years, is concerned, it is true that there are concurrent findings by the trial court as well as the
First Appellate Court that the plaintiff is in possession of the disputed land in question. However, it
is required to be noted that in the Revenue record, right from 1976 onwards and after the registered
sale deed in favour of the defendant No.1, the name of the defendant No.1 was mutated in the
Revenue record and in the column of farmer and the cultivator, the name of the defendant No.1 is
mentioned. Even the crops being cultivated by the cultivator are mentioned in the Revenue record.
Thus, right from 1976 onwards till 1997 in the Revenue record, the name of defendant No.1 is
mutated as an owner and cultivator. Nothing is on record to the effect that at any point of time and
after the registered sale deed was executed in favour of defendant No.1, the plaintiff paid any
revenue in respect of the land in question. After the execution of the registered sale deed in favour of
defendant No.1, which has been believed by all the courts below, the name of defendant No.1 was
mutated in the Revenue record as an owner and cultivator and the plaintiff, who claims to be in
possession of the land and cultivating the same, is deemed to have the knowledge of the said entry.
8.1 In the case of Dilboo Vs. Dhanraji, (2000) 7 SCC 702, it is observed and held by this Court that

6

Padhiyar Prahladji Chenaji vs Maniben Jagmalbhai (Deceased) Through ... on 3 March, 2022

where there is a dispute that the suit is filed beyond the period of limitation, the plaintiff would have
to aver and prove that the suit is within the period of limitation as prescribed and in the absence of
any averment or proof to show that the suit is within time, it is the plaintiff who would fail. It is
further observed that whenever a document is registered the date of registration becomes the date of
deemed knowledge. It is further observed that in other cases where a fact could be discovered by due
diligence then deemed knowledge would be attributed to the plaintiff because a party cannot be
allowed to extend the period of limitation by merely claiming that he had no knowledge.

8.2 Applying the law laid down by this Court in the aforesaid decision to the facts of the case on
hand, it is noted that the registered sale deed in favour of defendant No.1 is dated 17.06.1975 and
thereafter immediately the name of defendant No.1 – purchaser was mutated in the Revenue record,
which continued till the filing of the suit and the name of defendant No.1 is shown as an owner and
cultivator and even the crop grown is also shown and when the plaintiff claims that she is in
possession and cultivating the land, she would have known the above facts, if she had exercised due
diligence and therefore as observed by this Court, the plaintiff(s) can be said to have deemed
knowledge of the title as well as possession of defendant No.1. It is to be noted that even in the
registered sale deed, it was mentioned that the possession of the entire land in question has been
handed over to defendant No.1 – purchaser. At this stage, it is required to be noted that the
execution of the registered sale deed and the payment of full sale consideration mentioned in the
registered sale deed has been believed and accepted by all the courts below. Therefore, there was no
reason for the trial court not to believe the averments in the registered sale deed of handing over the
possession to the defendant No.1 – purchaser. The relief of permanent injunction sought by the
plaintiff as such was a consequential relief, which shall be discussed herein below.

8.3 Therefore, once the suit is held to be barred by limitation qua the declaratory relief and when the
relief for permanent injunction was a consequential relief, the prayer for permanent injunction,
which was a consequential relief can also be said to be barred by limitation. It is true that under
normal circumstances, the relief of permanent injunction sought is a substantive relief and the
period of limitation would commence from the date on which the possession is sought to be
disturbed so long as the interference in possession continuous. However, in the case of a
consequential relief, when the substantive relief of declaration is held to be barred by limitation, the
said principle shall not be applicable.

9. Even otherwise on merits also, the Courts below have erred in passing the decree of permanent
injunction restraining the defendant No.1 from disturbing the alleged possession of the plaintiff.
Assuming for the sake of argument that the plaintiff is found to be in possession, in that case also,
once the plaintiff has lost so far as the relief of declaration and title is concerned and the defendant
No.1 is held to be the true and absolute owner of the property in question, pursuant to the execution
of the sale deed dated 17.06.1975 in his favour, the true owner cannot be restrained by way of an
injunction against him. In a given case, the plaintiff may succeed in getting the injunction even by
filing a simple suit for permanent injunction in a case where there is a cloud on the title. However,
once the dispute with respect to title is settled and it is held against the plaintiff, in that case, the suit
by the plaintiff for permanent injunction shall not be maintainable against the true owner. In such a
situation, it will not be open for the plaintiff to contend that though he/she has lost the case so far as

7

Padhiyar Prahladji Chenaji vs Maniben Jagmalbhai (Deceased) Through ... on 3 March, 2022

the title dispute is concerned, the defendant – the true owner still be restrained from disturbing
his/her possession and his/her possession be protected. In the present case, as observed
hereinabove and it is not in dispute that the suit filed by the plaintiff for cancellation of the
registered sale deed and declaration has been dismissed and the registered sale deed in favour of the
defendant No.1 has been believed and thereby defendant No.1 is held to be the true and absolute
owner of the suit land in question. The judgment and decree passed by the trial court in so far as
refusing to grant the relief for cancellation of the registered sale deed and declaration has attained
finality. Despite the fact that the plaintiff has lost so far as the title is concerned, still the Courts
below have granted relief of permanent injunction against the defendant No.1 – the absolute owner
of the land in question, which is unsustainable, both, on law as well as on facts. An injunction
cannot be issued against a true owner or title holder and in favour of a trespasser or a person in
unlawful possession. 9.1 At this stage, the decision of this Court in the case of Jharkhand State
Housing Board Vs. Didar Singh and Anr., (2019) 17 SCC 692 is required to be referred to. In the said
decision, it is observed and held by this Court that though a bare suit for injunction in the absence of
declaration relief would be maintainable and in each and every case where the defendant disputes
the title of the plaintiff, it is not necessary that in all those cases, the plaintiff has to seek the relief. It
is further observed and held that, however, when the defendant raises a genuine dispute with regard
to title and when he raises a cloud over the title of the plaintiff, then necessarily in those
circumstances, plaintiff cannot maintain a suit for bare injunction.

9.2 In the present case, once the defendant No.1 was held to be the true and absolute owner
pursuant to the registered sale deed executed in his favour and the plaintiff was unsuccessful so far
as the declaratory relief is concerned, thereafter, it cannot be said that there was a cloud over the
title of the plaintiff and/or even the defendant. Therefore, the only relief which survived before the
trial court was the consideration of relief of permanent injunction and having been unsuccessful in
getting the relief of cancellation of the registered sale deed and the declaration thereof, the relief of
permanent injunction could not have been granted by the trial court as well as by the first Appellate
Court. This aspect of the case has been lost sight of by the High Court in the second appeal. 9.3 In
the case of A. Subramanian Vs. R. Pannerselvam, (2021) 3 SCC 675, it is observed by this Court that
a person in possession of land in the assumed character of owner and exercising peaceably the
ordinary rights of ownership has a perfectly good title against all the world but the rightful owner.
Therefore, the plaintiff is not entitled to any injunction and/or protect his possession against the
rightful owner, more particularly, when he fails to get the declaratory relief and the dispute with
respect to the title comes to an end.

10. Now, so far as the reliance placed upon the decision of this Court in the case of Anathula
Sudhakar (supra) by the learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the original plaintiff in support of
his submission that in a suit for permanent injunction to restrain the defendant to interfere with the
plaintiff’s possession, the only thing the plaintiff will have to establish is that as on the date of the
suit, he was in lawful possession of the suit property and the defendant has tried to interfere or
disturb his possession is concerned, what is observed by this Court in paragraph 15 is the “lawful
possession” of the plaintiff. In the present case the plaintiff, who has failed to get any declaratory
relief and the defendant No.1 is held to be a true and absolute owner on the basis of the registered
sale deed on payment of full sale consideration thereafter the plaintiff’s possession cannot be said to

8

Padhiyar Prahladji Chenaji vs Maniben Jagmalbhai (Deceased) Through ... on 3 March, 2022

be “lawful possession”. Therefore, the plaintiff is not entitled to any permanent injunction against
the true owner in the instant case.

11. From the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court, it appears that the High
Court has not properly appreciated the distinction between a substantive relief and a consequential
relief. The High Court has observed that in the instant case the relief of permanent injunction can be
said to be a substantive relief, which is clearly an erroneous view. It is to be noted that the main
reliefs sought by the plaintiff in the suit were cancellation of the sale deed and declaration and the
prayer of permanent injunction restraining defendant No.1 from disturbing her possession can be
said to be a consequential relief. Therefore, the title to the property was the basis of the relief of
possession. If that be so, in the present case, the relief for permanent injunction can be said to be a
consequential relief and not a substantive relief as observed and held by the High Court. Therefore,
once the plaintiff has failed to get any substantive relief of cancellation of the sale deed and failed to
get any declaratory relief, and as observed hereinabove, relief of injunction can be said to be a
consequential relief. Therefore, the prayer for permanent injunction must fail. In the instant case as
the plaintiff cannot be said to be in lawful possession of the suit land, i.e., the possession of the
plaintiff is “not legal or authorised by the law”, the plaintiff shall not be entitled to any permanent
injunction. 11.1 An injunction is a consequential relief and in a suit for declaration with a
consequential relief of injunction, it is not a suit for declaration simpliciter, it is a suit for declaration
with a further relief. Whether the further relief claimed has, in a particular case as consequential
upon a declaration is adequate must always depend upon the facts and circumstances of each case.
Where once a suit is held not maintainable, no relief of injunction can be granted. Injunction may be
granted even against the true owner of the property, only when the person seeking the relief is in
lawful possession and enjoyment of the property and also legally entitled to be in possession, not to
disposes him, except in due process of law.

12. Now, so far as the submission on behalf of the plaintiff that even if the plaintiff failed to get the
declaratory relief and relief for cancellation of registered sale deed and her suit for the said reliefs
came to be dismissed and the plaintiff is found to be in possession and therefore, the only remedy
available to the defendant No.1 would be to file a substantive suit to get back the possession is
noticed only to be rejected outright. It is the contention on behalf of the plaintiff that once the
plaintiff is found to be in possession, her possession cannot be disturbed except in due process of
law and the defendant No.1 though may be the true owner has to file a substantive suit for recovery
of possession. While considering the aforesaid submission, the decision of this Court in the case of
Maria Margarida Sequeira Fernandes Vs. Erasmo Jack de Sequeira, (2012) 5 SCC 370 is required to
be referred to. What is meant by due process of law has been explained by this court in paragraph
79, which reads as under:-

“79. Due process of law means that nobody ought to be condemned unheard. The due
process of law means a person in settled possession will not be dispossessed except
by due process of law. Due process means an opportunity to the defendant to file
pleadings including written statement and documents before the court of law. It does
not mean the whole trial. Due process of law is satisfied the moment rights of the
parties are adjudicated upon by a competent court.” In the said decision, this Court

9

Padhiyar Prahladji Chenaji vs Maniben Jagmalbhai (Deceased) Through ... on 3 March, 2022

has approved the following findings of the High Court of Delhi in Thomas Cook
(India) Ltd. Vs. Hotel Imperial (2006) 88 DRJ 545 :-

“28. The expressions ‘due process of law’, ‘due course of law’ and ‘recourse to law’
have been interchangeably used in the decisions referred to above which say that the
settled possession of even a person in unlawful possession cannot be disturbed
‘forcibly’ by the true owner taking law in his own hands. All these expressions,
however, mean the same thing—ejectment from settled possession can only be had by
recourse to a court of law. Clearly, ‘due process of law’ or ‘due course of law’, here,
simply mean that a person in settled possession cannot be ejected without a court of
law having adjudicated upon his rights qua the true owner.

Now, this ‘due process’ or ‘due course’ condition is satisfied the moment the rights of
the parties are adjudicated upon by a court of competent jurisdiction. It does not
matter who brought the action to court. It could be the owner in an action for
enforcement of his right to eject the person in unlawful possession. It could be the
person who is sought to be ejected, in an action preventing the owner from ejecting
him. Whether the action is for enforcement of a right (recovery of possession) or
protection of a right (injunction against dispossession), is not of much consequence.
What is important is that in either event it is an action before the court and the court
adjudicates upon it. If that is done then, the ‘bare minimum’ requirement of ‘due
process’ or ‘due course’ of law would stand satisfied as recourse to law would have
been taken. In this context, when a party approaches a court seeking a protective
remedy such as an injunction and it fails in setting up a good case, can it then say that
the other party must now institute an action in a court of law for enforcing his rights
i.e. for taking back something from the first party who holds it unlawfully, and, till
such time, the court hearing the injunction action must grant an injunction anyway? I
would think not. In any event, the ‘recourse to law’ stipulation stands satisfied when a
judicial determination is made with regard to the first party's protective action. Thus,
in the present case, the plaintiff's failure to make out a case for an injunction does not
mean that its consequent cessation of user of the said two rooms would have been
brought about without recourse to law.” 12.1 Applying the law laid down by this Court
in the aforesaid decision to the facts of the case on hand and once the rights of the
parties are adjudicated and the defendant No.1 is held to be the true owner on the
basis of the registered sale deed and on payment of full sale consideration, it can be
said that due process of law has been followed and thereafter the plaintiff is not
entitled to any permanent injunction against the true owner.

13. In view of the above discussion and for the reasons stated above, all the Courts
below have erred in granting permanent injunction in favour of the plaintiff and
against the defendant No.1, who is the true owner. After having held that the plaintiff
had no title and after dismissing the suit qua the cancellation of the registered sale
deed and the declaration, the plaintiff is not entitled to relief of permanent injunction
against defendant No.1 – the true owner.

10

Padhiyar Prahladji Chenaji vs Maniben Jagmalbhai (Deceased) Through ... on 3 March, 2022

14. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, present Appeal Succeeds.
The judgment and decree passed by the trial court confirmed by the First Appellate
Court and the High Court by the impugned judgment and order are hereby quashed
and set aside.

Consequently, the suit filed by the plaintiff for permanent injunction against the defendant No.1
stands dismissed. Meaning thereby, the entire suit filed by the plaintiff stands dismissed.

Present Appeal is accordingly Allowed. However, in the facts and circumstances of the case, there
shall be no order as to costs.

………………………………….J.
[M.R. SHAH]

NEW DELHI;                                 ………………………………….J.
MARCH 03, 2022.                               [B.V. NAGARATHNA]

11