Pawan Kumar vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

Pawan Kumar vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

Author: Ajay Rastogi

Bench: Sanjiv Khanna, Ajay Rastogi

REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NO(s).       3574          OF 2022
(Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) No.6009 of 2016)

PAWAN KUMAR                                                APPELLANT(S)

VERSUS

UNION OF INDIA & ANR.                                      RESPONDENT(S)

JUDGMENT

Rastogi, J.

1. Leave granted.

2. The instant appeal is directed against the judgment and order passed by the Division Bench of the
High Court of Delhi dated 17 th November, 2015, whereby the High Court upheld the order of
discharge dated 24th April, 2015, taking recourse to clause 9(f) of the employment notice no.1/2011
dated 27th February, 2011 read with Rule 67.2 of Railway Protection Force Rules, 1987 (hereinafter
referred to as “the RPF Rules 1987”).

19:05:10 IST Reason:

3. The brief facts of the case culled out from the record are that the employment notice for
appointment to the post of Constable in the Railway Protection Force (RPF), including Railway
Police Special Force (RPSF) came to be published on 27th February, 2011. The appellant being
eligible submitted application form and participated in the selection process and after qualifying the
written examination held on 23rd June, 2013 followed with physical efficiency test held on 12th
June, 2014 and after his final selection was sent for training. While the appellant was undergoing
training, he came to be discharged by an order dated 24 th April, 2015 invoking clause 9(f) of the
employment notice no.1/2011 dated 27 th February, 2011 and Rule 67.2 of the RPF Rules 1987.

4. That became the subject matter of challenge at the instance of the appellant by filing a writ
petition before the High Court of Delhi. It came on record that at one stage FIR no.75 under Sections
148/149/323/506/356 IPC was registered against him on 4 th April, 2011 and after charge−sheet

1

Pawan Kumar vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

came to be filed on 13 th April, 2011, charge was framed on 7th July, 2011. As it was a false case
registered against him, the appellant was honourably acquitted by the competent Court of
jurisdiction by the judgment dated 12 th August, 2011 and this fact, according to the respondent, was
not disclosed by him when he filled the attestation form on 27 th May, 2014 that he was prosecuted
at one stage and this being a case of suppression of information/false declaration in the verification
form, the High Court dismissed the writ petition under judgment impugned dated 17th November,
2015 and that became the subject matter of challenge in appeal before this Court.

5. We have heard learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance perused the material
available on record.

6. The process of selection was initiated by the respondents pursuant to the employment notice
no.1/2011 dated 27 th February, 2011 for filling up the post of Constable in RPF/RPSF. Clause 9(f) of
the RPF Rules 1987, which is relevant for the present purpose is reproduced hereunder:

“9(f) Candidates found to be having adverse report on their antecedents and
character may not be appointed in RPF including RPSF. False declaration is an
offence under the law and will lead to disqualification of the applicant, institution of
criminal case and also dismissal from service, if appointed. Hence, applicants are
advised to be careful while filling in the application.”

7. Indisputedly, on the date when the application form was filled by the appellant pursuant to
employment notice no.1/2011, no such criminal case was either instituted or pending against him
and what was disclosed by him at the time of filling his application form pursuant to employment
notice no.1/2011, there was no suppression of relevant information or submission of false
declaration at that stage. It was unfortunate that a false criminal case of trivial nature came to be
registered against him on 4 th April, 2011 and since it has no legs to stand as much before the
charge− sheet could be filed, the de facto complainant submitted his affidavit on 19th April, 2011
that no such alleged incident on 4 th April, 2011 had taken place and the bag was found beneath the
driver seat itself and under misconception, a complaint was lodged by him. The prosecution witness
has not supported case of the prosecution during the course of trial and for that reason the appellant
was honourably acquitted by the trial Court by judgment dated 12 th August, 2011.

8. Unfortunately, when the appellant filled the attestation form at a later stage on 27th May, 2014,
certain formation were desired to be disclosed by him and in clause 12(a) and 12(b) of the
verification form, according to the respondent, as the appellant mentioned “No”, when he was asked
to disclose as to whether he has ever been arrested or has been prosecuted, in answer to clauses
12(a) and (b), which was considered to be a suppression of relevant information/submission of false
declaration in the verification form as regards to his criminal antecedents. Proceeding on the said
premise, the order of discharge came to be passed on 24th April, 2015. It will be relevant to quote
the extract of the information relevant for the purpose :

“Attestation Form NOTE : THIS ATTESTATION FORM WILL BE UTILISED ONLY
UPON FINAL CONSIDERATION AND ACCEPTANCE OF THE CANDIDATURE

2

Pawan Kumar vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

AFTER VIVA−VOCE AS SELECTED CANDIDATE SUBJECT TO FULFILMENT OF
OTHER PRE CONDITIONS.

WARNING: THE FURNISHING OF FALSE INFORMATION OR SUPPRESSION OF
ANY FACTUAL INFORMATION IN THE ATTESTATION FORM WOULD BE A
DISQUALIFICATION, AND IS LIKELY TO RENDER THE CANDIDATE UNFIT FOR
EMPLOYMENT UNDER THE GOVT.

……………………….

12 (a)     Have you ever been arrested?         Yes/No _/

(b)    Have you ever been prosecuted?       Yes/No _/

……………………….”

9. Under the Railway Protection Force Rules, 1987, at the time of entry into service a
verification of character and antecedents of the incumbent has to take place
according to the procedure prescribed by the Central Government from time to time.
Rule 52 of the Rules 1987 is reproduced herein below:

“Rule 52/VERIFICATION :

52.1 As soon as a recruit is selected but before he is formally appointed to the Force,
his character and antecedents shall be got verified in accordance with the procedure
prescribed by the Central Government from time to time.

52.2 Where after verification, a recruit is not found suitable for the Force, he shall not
be appointed as a member of the Force.”

10. It may be noticed that while a recruit is selected and before he is formally
appointed, his character/antecedents have to be verified and after due verification if
the recruit is found suitable for the post, may be considered for appointment as a
m e m b e r   o f   t h e   f o r c e .   W h a t   i s   r e q u i r e d   t h a t   a f t e r   t h e   v e r i f i c a t i o n   o f
character/antecedents of the recruit has taken place, it presupposes and casts an
obligation on the appointing/competent authority to take into consideration as to
whether the kind of suppression of alleged information/false declaration holds him
suitable for appointment to the force, in terms of Rule 52 of the Rules 1987.

11. This cannot be disputed that the candidate who intends to participate in the
selection process is always required to furnish correct information relating to his
character and antecedents in the verification/attestation form before and after
induction into service.

3

Pawan Kumar vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

It is also equally true that the person who has suppressed the material information or has made false
declaration indeed has no unfettered right of seeking appointment or continuity in service, but at
least has a right not to be dealt with arbitrarily and power has to be judiciously exercised by the
competent authority in a reasonable manner with objectivity having due regard to the facts of the
case on hand. It goes without saying that the yardstick/standard which has to be applied with regard
to adjudging suitability of the incumbent always depends upon the nature of post, nature of duties,
effect of suppression over suitability to be considered by the authority on due diligence of various
aspects but no hard and fast rule of thumb can be laid down in this regard.

12. Earlier, there has been a conflict of opinion in the various decisions of Division Benches of this
Court and at the stage when the Division Bench of the High Court dismissed the writ petition under
the impugned order dated 17 th November, 2015, there were divergent views of this Court and that
came to be later settled by a three Judge Bench of this Court in Avtar Singh v. Union of India and
others.1. While summarizing the conclusion, this Court has laid down broad guidelines which has to
be taken note of by the appointing/competent authority in dealing with the matters where there is a
suppression of material information or disclosure of false information and after reconciling the
earlier judgments succinctly summarized the conclusions as under:

“34. No doubt about it that verification of character and antecedents is one of the
important criteria to assess suitability and it is open to employer to adjudge
antecedents of the incumbent, but ultimate action should be based upon objective
criteria on due consideration of all relevant aspects.

35. Suppression of “material” information presupposes that what is suppressed that
“matters” not every technical or trivial matter. The employer has to act on due
consideration of rules/instructions, if any, in exercise of powers in order to cancel
candidature or for terminating the services of employee. Though a person who has
suppressed the material information cannot claim unfettered right for appointment
or continuity in service but he has a right not to be 1 (2016) 8 SCC 471 dealt with
arbitrarily and exercise of power has to be in reasonable manner with objectivity
having due regard to facts of cases.

36. What yardstick is to be applied has to depend upon the nature of post, higher post
would involve more rigorous criteria for all services, not only to uniformed service.
For lower posts which are not sensitive, nature of duties, impact of suppression on
suitability has to be considered by authorities concerned considering post/nature of
duties/services and power has to be exercised on due consideration of various
aspects.

37. The “McCarthyism” is antithesis to constitutional goal, chance of reformation has
to be afforded to young offenders in suitable cases, interplay of reformative theory
cannot be ruled out in toto nor can be generally applied but is one of the factors to be
taken into consideration while exercising the power for cancelling candidature or
discharging an employee from service.

4

Pawan Kumar vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

38. We have noticed various decisions and tried to explain and reconcile them as far
as possible. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we summarise our conclusion thus:

38.1. Information given to the employer by a candidate as to conviction, acquittal or
arrest, or pendency of a criminal case, whether before or after entering into service
must be true and there should be no suppression or false mention of required
information.

38.2. While passing order of termination of services or cancellation of candidature for
giving false information, the employer may take notice of special circumstances of the
case, if any, while giving such information.

3 8 . 3 .   T h e   e m p l o y e r   s h a l l   t a k e   i n t o   c o n s i d e r a t i o n   t h e   g o v e r n m e n t
orders/instructions/rules, applicable to the employee, at the time of taking the
decision.

38.4. In case there is suppression or false information of involvement in a criminal
case where conviction or acquittal had already been recorded before filling of the
application/verification form and such fact later comes to knowledge of employer,
any of the following recourses appropriate to the case may be adopted:

38.4.1. In a case trivial in nature in which conviction had been recorded, such as
shouting slogans at young age or for a petty offence which if disclosed would not have
rendered an incumbent unfit for post in question, the employer may, in its discretion,
ignore such suppression of fact or false information by condoning the lapse.

38.4.2. Where conviction has been recorded in case which is not trivial in nature,
employer may cancel candidature or terminate services of the employee.

38.4.3. If acquittal had already been recorded in a case involving moral turpitude or
offence of heinous/serious nature, on technical ground and it is not a case of clean
acquittal, or benefit of reasonable doubt has been given, the employer may consider
all relevant facts available as to antecedents, and may take appropriate decision as to
the continuance of the employee.

38.5. In a case where the employee has made declaration truthfully of a concluded
criminal case, the employer still has the right to consider antecedents, and cannot be
compelled to appoint the candidate.

38.6. In case when fact has been truthfully declared in character verification form
regarding pendency of a criminal case of trivial nature, employer, in facts and
circumstances of the case, in its discretion, may appoint the candidate subject to
decision of such case.

5

Pawan Kumar vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

38.7. In a case of deliberate suppression of fact with respect to multiple pending cases
such false information by itself will assume significance and an employer may pass
appropriate order cancelling candidature or terminating services as appointment of a
person against whom multiple criminal cases were pending may not be proper.

38.8. If criminal case was pending but not known to the candidate at the time of
filling the form, still it may have adverse impact and the appointing authority would
take decision after considering the seriousness of the crime.

38.9. In case the employee is confirmed in service, holding departmental enquiry
would be necessary before passing order of termination/removal or dismissal on the
ground of suppression or submitting false information in verification form.

38.10. For determining suppression or false information attestation/verification form
has to be specific, not vague. Only such information which was required to be
specifically mentioned has to be disclosed. If information not asked for but is relevant
comes to knowledge of the employer the same can be considered in an objective
manner while addressing the question of fitness.

However, in such cases action cannot be taken on basis of suppression or submitting false
information as to a fact which was not even asked for.

38.11. Before a person is held guilty of suppressio veri or suggestio falsi, knowledge of the fact must
be attributable to him.”

13. What emerges from the exposition as laid down by this Court is that by mere suppression of
material/false information regardless of the fact whether there is a conviction or acquittal has been
recorded, the employee/recruit is not to be discharged/terminated axiomatically from service just by
a stroke of pen. At the same time, the effect of suppression of material/false information involving in
a criminal case, if any, is left for the employer to consider all the relevant facts and circumstances
available as to antecedents and keeping in view the objective criteria and the relevant service rules
into consideration, while taking appropriate decision regarding continuance/suitability of the
employee into service. What being noticed by this Court is that mere suppression of material/false
information in a given case does not mean that the employer can arbitrarily discharge/terminate the
employee from service.

14. At one stage after the matter being heard, detailed order was passed by this Court on 21st
October, 2021 and taking note of the judgment of Avtar Singh (supra) directed the employer to
review its decision in the light of the decision of this Court. In compliance thereof, the review order
has been passed on 23 rd December, 2021 confirming its earlier decision of discharge dated 24 th
April, 2015. The bare perusal of the review order dated 23 rd December, 2021, itself indicates that
the authority has not applied its mind and just after reproduction of facts, confirmed the order of
discharge dated 24th April, 2015.

6

Pawan Kumar vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

15. It may be further noticed that in para 5(c) of the order, a reference has been made of the affidavit
submitted by the appellant at the time of filling his application form, but on the day when the
application form was filled, the information which he disclosed in terms of clause 9(f) of
employment notice indisputedly, no criminal case on that date was either instituted or pending
against him. It is relevant to note that the employment notice is of 27 th February, 2011 and the
alleged criminal case was instituted on 4 th April, 2011. At the same time, the authority has not even
considered the scope and ambit of Rule 52 of the Rules 1987 that after verification of the
character/antecedents of the incumbent, it will be an obligation upon the authority to examine as to
whether the incumbent/recruit is suitable to become a member of the force and without
appreciation in a mechanical manner confirmed the order of discharge dated 24th April, 2015.

16. The judgment relied upon by the respondent Rajasthan Rajya Vidyut Prasaran Nigam Limited
and another v. Anil Kanwariya2 may not be of any assistance for the reason that it was a case where
the respondent employee before submitting application pursuant to the advertisement inviting
applications was convicted by the competent Court of jurisdiction and this fact was not disclosed by
him while filling his application form and that was the reason favoured upon the Court while
upholding action of the authority in 2 (2021) 10 SCC 136 passing the order of termination which was
impugned in the proceedings. We have already quoted paragraph 38 of the judgment by a three−
Judge Bench of this Court in Avtar Singh (supra) and in the context of the factual background of the
present case applied the said principles. One distinguishing factor, as noticed above, is that the
criminal complaint/FIR in the present case was registered post submission of the application form.
We have also taken into account the nature of the allegations made in the criminal case and that the
matter was of trivial nature not involving moral turpitude. Further, the proceedings had ended in a
clean acquittal. As is clear from paragraph 38 in Avtar Singh (supra), all matters cannot be put in a
straitjacket and a degree of flexibility and discretion vests with the authorities, must be exercised
with care and caution taking all the facts and circumstances into consideration, including the nature
and type of lapse.

17. Adverting to the facts of the instant case, at the time of attestation form filled by the appellant,
the criminal case was already registered against him but it may be noticed that at the very threshold,
the complainant filed his affidavit that the complaint on which FIR came to be registered was due to
misunderstanding and he did not want to pursue his case any further, but still charge− sheet came
to be filed and on the first date of hearing, the alleged victim PW.1 did not support case of the
prosecution and thus the order of clean acquittal came to be passed by the learned Judge of
competent jurisdiction by judgment dated 12th August, 2011.

18. The criminal case indeed was of trivial nature and the nature of post and nature of duties to be
discharged by the recruit has never been looked into by the competent authority while examining
the overall suitability of the incumbent keeping in view Rule 52 of the Rules 1987 to become a
member of the force. Taking into consideration the exposition expressed by this Court in Avtar
Singh (supra), in our considered view the order of discharge passed by the competent authority
dated 24th April, 2015 is not sustainable and in sequel thereto the judgment passed by the Division
Bench of High Court of Delhi does not hold good and deserves to be set aside.

7

Pawan Kumar vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022

19. Consequently, the appeal succeeds and is allowed. The judgment of the Division Bench of the
High Court dated 17 th November, 2015 and the order of discharge dated 24 th April, 2015 and
dated 23rd December, 2021 are hereby quashed and set aside. The Respondents are directed to
reinstate the appellant in service on the post of Constable on which he was selected pursuant to his
participation in reference to employment notice no.1/2011 dated 27th February, 2011. We make it
clear that the appellant will not be entitled for the arrears of salary for the period during which he
has not served the force and at the same time he will be entitled for all notional benefits, including
pay, seniority and other consequential benefits, etc. Necessary orders shall be passed within a period
of one month from today. No costs.

20. All pending application(s) shall stand disposed of.

…………………………….. J.

(Ajay Rastogi) …………………………….. J.

(Sanjiv Khanna) New Delhi.

May 02, 2022.

8