Pillu @ Prahlad vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 7 September, 2022

P i l l u   @   P r a h l a d   v s   T h e   S t a t e   O f   M a d h y a   P r a d e s h   o n   7
September, 2022

Author: Dinesh Maheshwari

Bench: Bela M. Trivedi, Dinesh Maheshwari

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1331 OF 2011

PILLU @ PRAHLAD                                                                Appellant(s)

VERSUS

STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH                                                        Respondent(s)

WITH

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 253 OF 2013

JUDGMENT

These appeals are directed against the judgment and order dated 11.02.2010, as passed by the High
Court of Madhya Pradesh at Jabalpur in Criminal Appeal No. 766 of 2001, whereby the High Court
has dismissed the appeal filed by the present appellants while maintaining their conviction of the
offence under Section 302/34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (‘IPC’) and sentence of life
imprisonment with fine of Rs. 3,000/- each with default stipulations.

In challenge to the concurrent findings of fact, the learned counsel for the appellants has essentially
put forward the submissions that in this case, the principal witnesses of the prosecution, namely,
PW-1 Shankerlal and PW-11 Rameshwar Prasad could not have been relied upon for the reasons that
PW-1 had not Reason: the prosecution case in entirety and was, in fact, declared hostile whereas
PW-11 was introduced in the investigation as an alleged eye-witness after twenty-two days of the
lodging of FIR. In the second limb of submissions, learned counsel has argued that even taking the
prosecution case on its face value, the offence against the appellants would not travel beyond the
offence of culpable homicide not amounting to murder because, the case would be squarely covered
by Exception 4 to Section 300 IPC. He has also referred to and relied upon the following passage in
the decision of this Court in the case of Pulicherla Nagaraju Alias Nagaraja Reddy v. State of A.P.:
(2006) 11 SCC 444: -

1

Pillu @ Prahlad vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 7 September, 2022

“29. Therefore, the court should proceed to decide the pivotal question of intention,
with care and caution, as that will decide whether the case falls under Section 302 or
304 Part I or 304 Part II. Many petty or insignificant matters — plucking of a fruit,
straying of cattle, quarrel of children, utterance of a rude word or even an
objectionable glance, may lead to altercations and group clashes culminating in
deaths. Usual motives like revenge, greed, jealousy or suspicion may be totally absent
in such cases. There may be no intention.

There may be no premeditation. In fact, there may not even be criminality. At the other end of the
spectrum, there may be cases of murder where the accused attempts to avoid the penalty for murder
by attempting to put forth a case that there was no intention to cause death. It is for the courts to
ensure that the cases of murder punishable under Section 302, are not converted into offences
punishable under Section 304 Part I/II, or cases of culpable homicide not amounting to murder, are
treated as murder punishable under Section 302. The intention to cause death can be gathered
generally from a combination of a few or several of the following, among other, circumstances: (i)
nature of the weapon used; (ii) whether the weapon was carried by the accused or was picked up
from the spot; (iii) whether the blow is aimed at a vital part of the body; (iv) the amount of force
employed in causing injury; (v) whether the act was in the course of sudden quarrel or sudden fight
or free for all fight; (vi) whether the incident occurs by chance or whether there was any
premeditation; (vii) whether there was any prior enmity or whether the deceased was a stranger;
(viii) whether there was any grave and sudden provocation, and if so, the cause for such
provocation; (ix) whether it was in the heat of passion; (x) whether the person inflicting the injury
has taken undue advantage or has acted in a cruel and unusual manner; (xi) whether the accused
dealt a single blow or several blows. The above list of circumstances is, of course, not exhaustive and
there may be several other special circumstances with reference to individual cases which may throw
light on the question of intention. Be that as it may.” Learned counsel for the respondent has
opposed the submissions so made and has duly supported the judgment and order impugned, while
referring to the statements of witnesses in their totality. He has also argued that the applicability of
Exception 4 to Section 300 IPC is ruled out in the present case for the reason that it had not been a
matter of sudden fight inasmuch as, per the version of the witnesses, it had not been an incident
where the parties were engaged in fight with each other; and the version had been that the
appellants assaulted the victim after trying to pressurize him to refrain from giving evidence in
another criminal case.

So far as the submissions relating to the evidentiary value of the statements of prosecution witnesses
is concerned, particularly that relating to PW-1 and PW-11, it is noticed that the Trial Court as also
the High Court have thoroughly examined the entire record including the testimony of these two
witnesses, before arriving at the conclusion of the guilt of the appellants. This aspect essentially lies
within the arena of appreciation of evidence and we find no reason to take a different view of the
matter. This is more so because having examined the statements of the said two witnesses, more
particularly that of PW-1 Shankerlal, who had been the first informant of the case and had himself
been injured in this incident, coupled with the other evidence on record, we are satisfied that the
findings as regards involvement of the appellants in the incident leading to the death of the victim
Sanju are cogent findings of fact and no case for interference in that regard is made out.

2

Pillu @ Prahlad vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 7 September, 2022

So far as the contention based on Exception 4 to Section 300 IPC is concerned, its applicability is
directly ruled out in the present case in view of the nature of incident as stated by the witnesses and
then, with reference to the nature of injuries sustained by the deceased, like multiple incise wounds
including that on the left frontal region of the skull as also stab wounds on the left side of the chest.

In view of the aforesaid, these appeals fail and are therefore, stand dismissed.

All pending applications also stand disposed of.

… … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … . . J .   [ D I N E S H   M A H E S H W A R I ]
………………………………………………………………..J. [BELA M. TRIVEDI] NEW DELHI;

SEPTEMBER 07, 2022.

3