Lalita vs Vishwanath on 30 January, 2025

Lalita vs Vishwanath on 30 January, 2025

                                                                                             REPORTABLE

2025 INSC 173
                                             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                            CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                               Criminal Appeal        No.1086 of 2017

        LALITA                                                                           Appellant(s)

                                                                 VERSUS

        VISHWANATH & ORS.                                                                Respondent(s)

                                                           O R D E R

1. This appeal is at the instance of the mother of the deceased (the de facto complainant) seeking to
assail the Judgment and order passed by the High Court of Judicature at Bombay, Bench at
Aurangabad in Criminal Appeal No.125/2013 by which the High Court allowed the Criminal Appeal
filed by the respondent - herein (original accused persons) and thereby acquitting them of the
offence punishable under Sections 306, 498A read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).

2. It is the case of the appellant that the deceased Dev Kanya was married to the Respondent No.1 –
herein namely Vishwanath past 1½ years before the date of incident in question. It is her case that
her daughter committed suicide she was incessantly harassed by her husband, father-in-law,
mother-in- 16:38:04 IST Reason:

law and first wife of the husband.

3. Upon First Information Report being registered by the father of the deceased, the investigation
started. The statements of various witnesses were recorded by the police.

4. The inquest panchnama of the dead body of the deceased was drawn in the presence of panch
witnesses. The dead body was sent for post-mortem. The post-mortem report revealed that the
cause of death was due to drowning. It is the case of the appellant that her daughter committed
suicide by jumping into a well. The clothes and other articles were collected in the course of the
investigation and were sent to the Forensic Science Laboratory for chemical analysis.

5. Upon completion of the investigation, charge-sheet came to be filed against all the four accused

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/26301648/

1

persons.

Lalita vs Vishwanath on 30 January, 2025

6. The case came to be committed to the Court of Sessions under Section 209 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Cr PC).

7. Upon committal, the case crime to be registered as Sessions Case No.12/2012.

8. The Trial Court framed charge vide Exhibit ‘11’ to which all the accused persons pleaded not guilty
and claimed to be tried.

9. The prosecution examined the following witnesses in the course of the trial:-

1. Lalita Dadasaheb Bolke (Exh.27)

2. Rambhau Dhondiram Bolke (Exh.36),

3. Shivaji Bhaiamrao Pawar (Exh.40),

4. Dnyandev Hariram Patole (Exh.42),

5. Sonerao Kondiba Bodkhe (Exh.44),

6. Baasaheb Maruti Patole (Exh.45),

7. Dhondiram Bhanudas Bolke (Exh.46)

8. Dr. Blasahev Bhimrao Sawant (Exh.51) &

9. Brijpalsing Rajpalsing Thakur (Exh.54)

10. The prosecution also led the following documentary evidence in support of its
case:-

1. Copy of sale deed of S. no. 24/2 admeasuring 1 H.2 R. dated 21/11/2009 at Exh. 28.

2. Copy of sale deed of S.o. 24/2 admeasuring 1 H. OR.

Dated 21/11/2009 at Exh. 29.

3. Copy of mutation entry of S. No. 24/2 admeasuring 1 h. 2 r. at Exh.30.

4. Copy of mutation entry of S. No. 24/2 admeasuring 1 H. O. R. at Exh. 31.

5. Copy of mutation entry dated 29/3/2011 at Exh. 32.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/26301648/

2

6. Copy of mutation entry dated 30/4/2011 at Exh. 33.

Lalita vs Vishwanath on 30 January, 2025

8. Complaint dated 29/8/2011 at Exh. 35.

9. Spot Panchanam Dated. 29/8/2011 at Exh. 41

10. Inquest Panchanama dated 29/8/2011 at Exh. 43

11. Provisional cause of death certificate at Exh. 52

13. Chemical Analyzers' report at Exh. 33/1.

14. Copy of affidavit of Devkanya w/o Vishwanath Borade at Article-'A'.

15. Copy of consent deed at Article 'B'

11. Upon closure of the recording of the oral evidence, the further statements of all the accused
persons were recorded by the Trial Court under Section 313 of the Code.

12. Upon appreciation of the oral as well as documentary evidence on record, the Trial Court held all
the four accused persons guilty of the offence enumerated above and sentenced them to undergo 10
years of rigorous imprisonment with fine of Rs.1000/-.

13. The accused persons, being dissatisfied with the Judgment and order of conviction passed by the
Trial Court, went in appeal before the High Court.

14. The High Court upon re-appreciation and re-evaluation of the oral as well as documentary
evidence on record allowed the appeal and acquitted all the four accused persons of the charges
enumerated above.

15. The State did not deem fit to challenge the Judgment and order of acquittal passed by the High
Court.

16. The mother, i.e., the appellant herein is here before this Court with the present appeal.

17. At this stage, it is relevant to note that although the first information report was lodged by father
of the deceased yet before the trial commenced, he passed away.

18. In such circumstances, the mother though fit to come before this Court seeking to challenge the
impugned Judgment and Order of acquittal passed by the High Court.

19. We heard the learned counsel appearing for the appellant, the learned counsel appearing for the
respondent Nos.1 to 4 (original accused persons) and the learned counsel appearing for the State of
Maharashtra.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/26301648/

3

20. We are of the view that no error not to speak of any error of law could be said to have been
committed by the High Court in acquitting all the four accused persons.

Lalita vs Vishwanath on 30 January, 2025

21. There is no cogent or any reliable evidence on the basis of which it could be said that the accused
persons abated the commission of suicide.

22. Mere harassment or cruelty is not sufficient to infer abetement. There has to be some credible
evidence that the accused persons aided or instigated the deceased in some manner to take the
drastic step of putting an end to her life.

23. We do not rule out the possibility of the husband pressurizing the deceased to transfer the land
once again on his name. However, even such instances, by themselves, may not be sufficient to come
to the conclusion that the deceased was left with no alternative but to commit suicide.

24. The learned counsel appearing for the appellant would rely upon Section 113A of the Indian
Evidence Act, 1872 (for short ‘the Evidence Act’).

25. In one of our recent pronouncements in the case of Ram Pyarey v. the State of Uttar Pradesh,
Criminal Appeal No. 1408 of 2015, decided on 09.01.2025, we have explained the true purport of
Section 113A of the Evidence Act, more particularly in what manner it shall be applied. We quote the
relevant observations:-

“It is relevant to note that under Section 113B, the Court shall presume dowry death
unlike Section 113A where the provision says that Court may presume abetment of
suicide. This is the vital difference between the two provisions which raises
presumption as regards abetment of suicide. When the Courts below want to apply
Section 113A of the Evidence Act, the condition precedent is that there has to be first
some cogent evidence as regards cruelty & harassment. In the absence of any cogent
evidence as regards harassment or abetment in any form like aiding or instigating,
the court cannot straightway invoke Section 113A and presume that the accused
abetted the commission of suicide.”

26. Even with the aid of presumption under Section 113A of the Evidence Act, it is difficult to say
that the accused persons abetted the commission of suicide. It is possible that the deceased might
have felt bad because the first wife came back to the matrimonial home and being hyper sensitive
might have taken the extreme step to commit suicide.

27. Before we close this matter, we deem it necessary to explain one very important aspect of the
procedural law so far as it relates to proving the contents of the First Information Report through
the Investigating Officer. In other words, if the first informant has passed away before stepping into
the witness box, then whether the contents of such First Information Report can be proved through
the evidence of the Investigating Officer and read into the evidence.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/26301648/

4

Lalita vs Vishwanath on 30 January, 2025

28. In the case on hand, as noted above, the First Information Report was lodged by the father of the
deceased. However, before the father could step into the witness box, he passed away. In such
circumstances, the Trial Court permitted the Investigating Officer to prove the contents of the First
Information Report Exhibit-35 and read into evidence as per Section 67 of the Evidence Act.

29. The basic purpose of filing a First Information Report is to set the criminal law into motion. A
First Information Report is the initial step in a criminal case recorded by the police and contains the
basic knowledge of the crime committed, place of commission, time of commission, who was the
victim, etc. The term ‘First Information Report’ has been explained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 by virtue of Section 154, which lays down that:

“Every information relating to the commission of a cog- nizable offence, if given
orally to an officer in charge of a police station, shall be reduced to writing by him or
under his direction, and be read over to the infor- mant and every such information,
whether given in writ- ing or reduced to writing as aforesaid, shall be signed by the
person giving it, and the substance thereof shall be entered in a book to be kept by
such officer in such form as the State Government may prescribe in this be- half.

30. F.I.Rs. can be registered by a victim, a witness or some- one else with the knowledge of the
crime. The police can record three different kinds of statements. The first kind of state- ment is one
which can be recorded as an F.I.R., the second kind of statement is one which can be recorded by the
police during the investigation, and the third kind of statement is any kind of statement which
would not fall under any of the two cate- gories mentioned above. Evidence is the matter of
testimony manifesting the fact on a particular precision or circum- stances. The First Information
Report is not by itself a sub- stantial piece of evidence and the statement made therein can- not be
considered as evidence unless it falls within the purview of Section 32 of the Evidence Act. It is an
admitted fact that the original first informant because of the injuries caused by the applicants. The
relative importance of a First Information Report is far greater than any other statement recorded
by the police during the course of the investigation. It is the foremost information the police gets
about the com- mission of an offence and which can be used to corroborate the story put-forward by
the first informant under Section 157 of the Evidence Act or to contradict his version by facts under
Section 145 of the Evidence Act in case he is summoned as a witness in the case by the Court. It may
happen that the infor- mant is the accused himself. In such cases, the First Informa- tion Report
lodged by him cannot be used as an evidence against him because it is embodied in the basic
structure of our Con- stitution that a person cannot be compelled to be a witness against himself.

31. In certain cases, the First Information Report can be used under Section 32(1) of the Evidence
Act or under Section 8 of the Evidence Act as to the cause of informant's death or as a part of the
informant's conduct. Section 32 of the Evidence Act reads as under:-

“32. Cases in which statement of relevant fact by person who is dead or cannot be
found, etc., is relevant.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/26301648/

5

Lalita vs Vishwanath on 30 January, 2025

Statements, written or verbal, of facts in issue or rel- evant facts made by a person
who is dead, or who cannot be found, or who has become incapable of giving evid-
ence, or whose presence cannot be procured without an amount of delay or expense
which, under the circum- stances of the case, the court considers unreasonable, or
who is kept out of the way by the adverse party, are themselves relevant facts in the
following cases:” (1) When it relates to cause of death:- When the state-

ment is made by a person as to the cause of his death, or as to any of the circumstances of the
transaction which resulted in his death, in cases in which the cause of that person's death comes into
question. Such state- ments are relevant whether the person who made them was or was not, at the
time when they were made, under ex- pectation of death, and whatever may be the nature of the
proceeding in which the cause of his death comes into question.

(2) Or is made in course of business:- When the state- ment was made by such a person in the
ordinary course of business and, in particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing provisions of this clause, when it consists of any entry or memorandum made by him in
books kept in the ordinary course of business. (2A) Or is made in discharge of professional duty
etc.:-

When the statement consists of an entry or memorandum made by such person in
the discharge of professional duty or of an acknowledgement written or signed by
such person in respect of the receipt of money, goods, secur- ities or property of any
kind, or of a document used in commerce, written or signed by him or of the date of a
letter or other document usually dated, written or signed by him.

(3) Or against interest of maker:- When the statement is against the pecuniary or
proprietary interest of the person making it, or when, if true, it would expose him or
would have exposed him to a criminal prosecution or to a suit for damages.

Explanation: A recital as regards boundaries of immov- able property in document containing such
statements, as to the nature or ownership or possession of the land of the maker of the statement or
of adjoining lands belong- ing to third persons, which are against the interests of the maker of the
statement, are relevant and it is not necessary that the parties to the document must be the same as
the parties to the proceedings or their privies.” (4) Or gives opinion as to public right or custom, or
matters of general interest:- When the statement gives the opinion of any such person as to the
existence of any public right or custom or matter of public or gen- eral interest, of the existence of
which, if it existed, he would have been likely to be aware, and when such statement was made
before any controversy as to such right, custom or matter had arisen.

(5) Or relates to existence of relationship:- When the statement relates to the existence of any
relationship by blood, marriage or adoption between persons as to whose relationship a [by blood,
marriage or adoption] the person making the statement had special means of knowledge, and when
the statement was made before the question in dispute was raised.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/26301648/

6

Lalita vs Vishwanath on 30 January, 2025

(6) Or is made in will or deed relating to family af- fairs:- When the statement relates to the
existence of any relationship by blood, marriage or adoption between persons deceased and is made
in any will or deed relat- ing to the affairs of the family to which any such de- ceased person
belonged, or in any family pedigree, or upon any tombstone, family portrait or other thing on which
such statements are usually made, and when such statement was made before the question in
dispute was raised.

(7) Or in documents relating to transactions mentioned in section 13, clause (a): When the
statement is con- tained in any deed, will or other document, being a deed, will or other document
which relates to any trans- action by which a right or custom was created, claimed, modified,
recognized, asserted or denied or which was inconsistent with its existence, as mentioned in clause

(a) of section 13.

Explanation I:- Such statement is relevant where the question in the proceeding now before the
court is as to the existence of the right or custom or if such state- ment related to facts collateral to
the proceeding and it is not necessary that the parties to the document must be the same as the
parties to the proceeding or their privies.

Explanation II:- A recital as regards boundaries of im- movable property in a document containing
such state- ment, as to the nature or ownership or possession of the land of the maker of the
statement or of adjoining lands belonging to third persons, shall be relevant and it is not necessary
that the parties to the document must be the same as the parties to the proceeding or their privies.”
(8) Or is made by several persons and expresses feelings relevant to matter in question.-

When the statement was made by a number of persons, and expressed feelings or impressions on
their part relevant to the matter in question.

Illustrations

(a) The question is whether A was murdered by B: or

(b) A dies of injuries received in a transaction in the course of which she was ravished. The question
is whether she was ravished by B: or The question is, whether A was killed by B under such
circumstances that a suit would lie against B by As widow.

Statements made by A as to the cause of his or her death, referring respectively to the murder, the
rape and the actionable were under consideration, are relev- ant facts.

(b) The question is as to the date of As birth. An entry in the diary of a deceased surgeon regularly
kept in the course of business, stating that, on a given day he attended A's mother and delivered her
of a son, is a relevant fact.

(c) The question is, whether A was in Calcutta on a given day.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/26301648/

7

Lalita vs Vishwanath on 30 January, 2025

A statement in the diary of a deceased solicitor, regu- larly kept in the course of business, that, on a
given day, the solicitor attended A at a place mentioned in Calcutta, for the purpose of conferring
with him upon specified business, is a relevant fact.

(d) The question is, whether a ship sailed from Bombay harbour on a given day.

A letter written by a deceased member of a merchant's firm by which she was chartered to their
correspondents in London, to whom the cargo was consigned, stating that the ship sailed on a given
day from Bombay harbour, is a relevant fact.

(e) The question is, whether rent was paid to A for cer- tain land.

A letter from A's deceased agent to A, saying that he had received the rent on A's account and held it
at As orders, is a relevant fact.

(f) The question is, whether A and B were legally mar- ried.

The statement of a deceased clergyman that he married them under such circumstances that the
celebration would be a crime, is relevant.

(g) The question is, whether A, a person who cannot be found, wrote a letter on a certain day. The
fact that a letter written by him is dated on that day, is relevant.

(h) The question is, what was the cause of the wreck of a ship.

A protest made by the Captain, whose attendance cannot be procured, is a relevant fact.”

32. If the informant dies, the First Information Report can be, unquestionably, used as a substantive
evidence. A prerequisite condition must be fulfilled before the F.I.R. is taken as a substantive piece
of evidence i.e. the death of the informant must have nexus with the F.I.R. filed or somehow having
some link with any evidence regarding the F.I.R. This is what has been explained by this Court in the
case of Damodar Prasad v. State of U.P. [(1975) 3 SCC 851 : AIR 1975 SC 757].

33. There are plethora of decisions taking the view that an F.I.R. can be a dying declaration if the
informant dies of his injuries after lodging the same. [See Munna Raja v. State of M.P. ((1976) 3 SCC
104 : AIR 1976 SC 2199)].

34. Another important thing is that for an F.I.R. lodged by a deceased person to be treated as
substantial, its contents must be proved. It has to be corroborated and proved for there to be any
value of the same in the case. The F.I.R. can be used by the defence to impeach the credit of the
person who lodged the F.I.R. under Section 154(3) of the Evidence Act. In case the death of the
informant has no nexus with the complaint lodged i.e. he died a natural death and did not succumb
to the injur- ies inflicted on him in relation to a matter, the contents of the F.I.R. would not be
admissible in evidence. In such circum- stances, the contents cannot be proved through the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/26301648/

8

Lalita vs Vishwanath on 30 January, 2025

Investigat- ing Officer. The Investigating Officer, in the course of his deposition, should not be
permitted to depose the exact con- tents of the F.I.R. so as to make them admissible in evidence. All
that is permissible in law is that the Investigating Of- ficer can, in his deposition, identify the
signature of the first informant and that of his own on the First Information Report and he can
depose about the factum of the F.I.R. being registered by him on a particular date on a particular
police station.

35. It is absolutely incorrect on the part of the Trial Court and the High Court to say that in the
absence of the first in- formant, the police officer can prove the contents of the F.I.R. as per Section
67 of the Evidence Act.

36. In the case of Harkirat Singh v. State of Punjab [(1997) 11 SCC 215 : AIR 1997 SC 3231], this
Court observed as under:-

“In our considered view, the High Court was not justi- fied in treating the statement
allegedly made by Kharaiti Ram during inquest proceedings as substantive evidence
in view of the embargo of Section 162, Cr. P.C. Equally unjustified was the High
Courts reliance upon the contents of the FIR lodged by Walaiti Ram who, as stated
earlier, could not be examined during the trial as he had died in the meantime. The
contents of the FIR could have been used for the purpose of corroborating or
contradicting Walaiti Ram if he had been examined but under no circumstances as a
substantive piece of evi- dence.”

37. In the case of Hazarilal v. State (Delhi Administra- tion) [(1980) 2 SCC 390 : AIR 1980 SC 873],
this Court, in para 7, observed as under:-

“The learned counsel was right in his submission about the free use made by the
Courts below of statements of witnesses recorded during the course of investigation.
Section 162 of the Code of Criminal Procedure imposes a bar on the use of any
statement made by any person to a Police Officer in the course of investigation at any
en-

quiry or trial in respect of any offence under investig-

ation at the time when such statement was made, except for the purpose of
contradicting the witness in the man- ner provided by S. 145 of the Indian Evidence
Act. Where any part of such statement is so used any part thereof may also be used in
the re-examination of the witness for the limited purpose of explaining any matter re-
ferred to in his cross-examination. The only other ex- ception to this embargo on the
use of statements made in the course of an investigation relates to the statements
falling within the provisions of S. 32 (1) of the Indian Evidence Act or permitted to be
proved under Section 27 of the Indian Evidence Act. Section 145 of the Evidence Act
provides that a witness may be cross-examined as to previous statements made by
him in writing and reduced into writing and relevant to matters in question, without

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/26301648/

9

Lalita vs Vishwanath on 30 January, 2025

such writing being shown to him or being proved but, that if it is intended to
contradict him by the writing, his attention must, before the writing can be proved,
be called to those parts of it which are to be used for the purpose of contradicting
him. The Courts below were clearly wrong in using as substantive evid- ence
statements made by witnesses in the course of in- vestigation. Shri. H.S. Marwah,
learned counsel for the Delhi Administration amazed us by advancing the argument
that the earlier statements with which witnesses were confronted for the purpose of
contradiction could be taken into consideration by the Court in view of the definition
of “proved” in Section 3 of the Evidence Act which is, “a fact is said to be proved
when, after con- sidering the matters before it, the Court either be- lieves it to exist or
considers its existence so prob- able that a prudent man, ought, in the circumstances
of the particular case to act upon the supposition that it exists”. We need say no more
on the submission of Shri. Marwah except that the definition of proved does not en-
able a Court to take into consideration matters, includ- ing statements, whose use is
statutorily barred.”

38. We have to our benefit a very lucid and erudite judgment of the Madhya Pradesh High Court in
the case of Umrao Singh v. State of M.P. [1961 Criminal L.J. 270]. In this case, the petitioners
Umrao Singh and Kunwarlal were convicted of the offence punishable under Section 323 of the
Penal Code and sen- tenced to two months rigorous imprisonment. The case of the prosecution was
that on 27th August 1959, the petitioners named above belaboured Barelal who had gone out to
graze his cattle, and who was blamed by the accused to have caused damage to their crops. Barelal,
however, died a natural death after six months of the occurrence, but before he could be examined
as a witness. It was contended that the F.I.R. lodged by Bare- lal could not be considered by the
Courts below and that the evidence of the solitary witness, Pannala was unreliable, as he was not
mentioned in the list of witnesses filed by the prosec- ution. In this set of facts, the Court observed
as under:-

“4. It is true that the first information report is not by itself a substantive piece of
evidence and the state- ment made therein cannot be considered as evidence un- less
it falls within the purview of S. 32 of the Evid- ence Act. It is an admitted fact that
Barelal did not die because of the injuries caused by the petitioners. Section 32 was
inapplicable.

5. It is true that in the list of witnesses Pannalal's name has been mis-spelt as
‘Dhannalal’, but this doubt is removed when the first information report is looked
into. There, Pannalal's name is mentioned. Shri. Dey contends that it is not
permissible to look at the F.I. R. at all. In my opinion this argument cannot be accep-

ted. It is proved by Ram Ratan P.W. 6 that he recorded the report which was lodged by Barelal There
is a dis- tinction between factum and truth of a statement. It has been aptly pointed out by Lord
Parker C.J. in R. v. Wil- lis (1960) 1 W.L.R. 55 that evidence of a statement made to a witness by a
person who is not himself called as witness may or may not be hearsay.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/26301648/

10

Lalita vs Vishwanath on 30 January, 2025

It is hearsay and inadmissible when the object of the evidence is to establish what is contained in the
state- ment; it is not hearsay and is admissible when it is proposed to establish by the evidence not
the truth of the statement but the fact that it was made. According to Ram Ratan, Barelal mentioned
Pannalal's name to him. Applying the above dictum, Ramratan's evidence is inad- missible to prove
that Pannalal was in fact present at the time of the occurrence; but Ram Ratan's statement is
admissible to prove that Barelal had mentioned the name of Pannalal to the witness.”

39. In the overall view of the matter, we are convinced that no case is made out for interference.

40. In the result, this Appeal fails and is hereby dismissed.

… … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … J   ( J . B .   P A R D I W A L A )   … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … J   ( R .
MAHADEVAN) NEW DELHI 30TH JANUARY, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/26301648/

11

