Pr. Commissioner Of Income Tax 1 vs M/S Abc Papers Limited on 18 August, 2022

Pr. Commissioner Of Income Tax 1 vs M/S Abc Papers Limited
on 18 August, 2022

Author: Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha

Bench: Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha, S. Ravindra Bhat, Uday Umesh Lalit

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4252 OF 2022
ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NO. 23352 OF 2019

PR. COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX – I, CHANDIGARH ...APPELLANT

VERSUS

M/S. ABC PAPERS LIMITED                                              ...RESPONDENT

WITH
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4253 OF 2022
ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NO. 25541/2019

WITH
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3480 OF 2022
ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NO. 8146/2022

JUDGMENT

PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA, J.

1. These appeals give rise to an important question concerning appellate jurisdiction of the High
Courts under Section 260A of the Income Tax Act, 19611 against judgments of Income Tax Appellate
Tribunals2. As Benches of the ITAT are constituted to exercise jurisdiction over more than one state,
each state having a separate High Court, question arose as to which of the High Court is the
appropriate Court for filing appeals under Section 260A. The question arose hereinafter referred to
as ‘the Act’.

hereinafter referred to as ‘ITAT’ / ‘Tribunals’.

because Section 260A is open-textual and does not specify the High Court before which an appeal
would lie in cases where Tribunals operated for plurality of States. This question came to be
conclusively answered by the High Court of Delhi in the case of Seth Banarsi Dass Gupta v.
Commissioner of Income Tax3, wherein it was held that the appropriate High Court would be the

1

Pr. Commissioner Of Income Tax 1 vs M/S Abc Papers Limited on 18 August, 2022

one where the Assessing Authority is situated. This judgment continuous to hold the field.

2. In these appeals, a further question that arise for consideration is the jurisdiction of the High
Court consequent upon administrative order of transfer of a ‘case’ under Section 127 of the Act from
one Assessing Authority to another Assessing Officer located in a different State. The Punjab &
Haryana High Court took the view that such a transfer would not change the principle laid down in
Seth Banarasi Dass Gupta. However, the Delhi High Court in CIT v. Sahara India Financial
Corporation Ltd.4 and CIT v. Aar Bee Industries Ltd.5 has taken a different view. The Delhi High
Court held that an administrative order of transfer of cases will also have the consequence of
transferring even the jurisdiction of the High Court. As there is a difference of opinion between the
High Court of Punjab & Haryana on the one hand and the High Court of Delhi on the other, we are
called upon to determine and declare the appropriate High Court for filing an appeal in such cases.

(1978) 113 ITR 817 (Del).

(2007) 294 ITR 363 (Del).

(2013) 357 ITR 542 (Del).

3. Having considered the matter in detail, and while reversing the judgments of the Delhi High
Court in Sahara and Aar Bee, we have also held that the appellate jurisdiction of the High Court
stands on its own foundation and cannot be subject to the exercise of executive power to transfer a
‘case’ from one Assessing Officer to another Assessing Officer.

Facts of the case:

4. The Appellant herein, M/s. ABC Papers Ltd.6 is a company engaged in the manufacture of writing
and printing paper. For the assessment year 2008-09, the Assessee filed its income tax returns
before the Assessing Officer, New Delhi, on 30.09.2008. The Deputy Commissioner of Income Tax,
Circle-1(1), New Delhi, issued a notice under Section 143 (2) of the Act and followed it up by an
order of assessment dated 30.12.2010. Aggrieved by that order, the Assessee preferred an appeal to
the Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) - IV, New Delhi, and by his order dated 16.02.2012, the
Commissioner allowed the appeal. Against this appellate order, the Revenue carried the matter to
ITAT, New Delhi. The ITAT, New Delhi, by its order dated 11.05.2017, upheld the order of the CIT
(Appeals) - IV, New Delhi, and dismissed the appeal filed by the Revenue. Against this order of the
ITAT, the Revenue filed ITA No. 517 of 2017 before the High Court of Punjab & Haryana.

hereinafter referred to as ‘the Assessee’.

5. It is important to note certain events that overtook the above-referred proceedings. While the
matter was pending appeal before the CIT (Appeals) - IV, New Delhi, as indicated above, a search
operation under Section 132(1) of the Act was carried out on 04.05.2011 at the office and factory of
the Assessee in Chandigarh and certain places in the State of Punjab, by the Directorate of Income
Tax (Investigation), Ludhiana. Yet another development that took place after the search operation

2

Pr. Commissioner Of Income Tax 1 vs M/S Abc Papers Limited on 18 August, 2022

was that, by an order dated 26.06.2013 passed under Section 127 of the Act, the Commissioner of
Income Tax (Central), Ludhiana, centralized the cases of the Assessee for the assessment years
2006-07 to 2013-14 and transferred the same to Central Circle, Ghaziabad.

6. In view of the above transfer under Section 127, the Deputy Commissioner of Income Tax, Central
Circle, Ghaziabad, proceeded further and passed an assessment order on 31.03.2015. Aggrieved by
that order, the Assessee filed an appeal which came to be allowed by the Commissioner of Income
Tax (Appeals) – IV, Kanpur, on 20.12.2016. Against this appellate order, the Revenue preferred an
appeal to ITAT, New Delhi. As the decision of the ITAT dated 11.05.2017 in the case of the Assessee
with respect to an earlier assessment year was already available, the ITAT, New Delhi, followed the
said judgment and dismissed the appeal filed by the Revenue by its order dated 01.09.2017. It is
against this order that the Revenue filed ITA No. 130 of 2018 before the High Court of Punjab &
Haryana.

7. In fact, before the Revenue could file an appeal against the orders of the ITAT dated 11.05.2017
(arising out of the original proceedings) and 01.09.2017 (arising out of proceedings after transfer
under Section 127), the cases of the Assessee were re-transferred under Section 127 of the Act to the
Deputy Commissioner of Income Tax, Circle-1(1), Chandigarh, w.e.f. 13.07.2017. Though this order
is not on record and has also not been referred to in any of the proceedings, a reference to the said
order has been made in the written submissions filed before us. Perhaps it is on the basis of the said
transfer that the Revenue took a decision to file appeals, being ITA No. 517 of 2017 (against the
order of the ITAT dated 11.05.2017) and ITA No. 130 of 2018 (against the order of the ITAT dated
01.09.2017) before the High Court of Punjab & Haryana.

8. The High Court of Punjab & Haryana by its judgment dated 07.02.2019, disposed of ITA No. 130
of 2018 by holding that, notwithstanding the order under Section 127 of the Act which transferred
the cases of the Assessee to Chandigarh, the High Court of Punjab & Haryana would not have
jurisdiction as the Assessing Officer who passed the initial assessment order is situated outside the
jurisdiction of the High Court. For arriving at this conclusion, the High Court followed the decision
in the case of Commissioner of Income Tax v. Motorola India Ltd.7 and Commissioner of Income
Tax (Central), Gurgaon v. M/s Parabolic Drugs Limited8. With this view of the matter, the High
Court dismissed the appeal as not (2010) 326 ITR 156 (P&H).

ITA No. 49 of 2012 (P&H).

maintainable. By the same judgment, the High Court also disposed of ITA No. 517 of 2017 filed by
the Revenue against the decision of the ITAT, New Delhi, dated 11.05.2017, by adopting the same
logic. Aggrieved by the decision of the High Court of Punjab & Haryana refusing to entertain the
appeals against the orders of the ITAT dated 11.05.2017 and 01.09.2017, the Revenue filed the
present appeals, being Civil Appeal No. 4252 of 2022 (against the order of the High Court of Punjab
& Haryana in ITA No. 517 of 2017) and Civil Appeal No. 4253 of 2022 (against the order of the High
Court of Punjab & Haryana in ITA No. 130 of 2018) before this Court.

3

Pr. Commissioner Of Income Tax 1 vs M/S Abc Papers Limited on 18 August, 2022

9. It is also important to mention here that against the very same order of the ITAT, New Delhi,
dated 11.05.2017, the Revenue also filed an appeal, being ITA No. 515 of 2019 before the High Court
of Delhi. The High Court of Delhi having noted the decision of the High Court of Punjab & Haryana
dated 07.02.2019 holding that it does not have jurisdiction, nevertheless, dismissed the appeal by its
order dated 21.05.2019 on the ground of lack of territorial jurisdiction of the High Court of Delhi.
For arriving at the conclusion that the High Court of Delhi would not have territorial jurisdiction,
the decision of its own Court in the case of Sahara9 and Aar Bee10 were relied upon. In those two
decisions, the High Court of Delhi had taken a view that when an order of transfer under Section 127
of the Act is passed, the jurisdiction gets transferred to the High Court within whose supra (note 4)
supra (note 5) jurisdiction the situs of the transferee officer is located. Aggrieved by the decision of
the High Court of Delhi, the Revenue preferred appeal to this Court being, Civil Appeal No. 3480 of
2022.

10. The above referred facts clearly evidence that in the case of the very same Assessee, the High
Court of Punjab & Haryana as well as the High Court of Delhi have refused to entertain the appeals
on the ground that they lack territorial jurisdiction. Both the High Court relied on decisions of their
own Courts which have taken diametrically opposite perspectives. We are thus tasked to resolve the
issue as to which High Court would have the jurisdiction to entertain an appeal against a decision of
a Bench of the ITAT exercising jurisdiction over more than one state, particularly when case(s) of
same assessment year are transferred under Section 127 of the Act.

Contention of the Parties and the issue arising for consideration: 11.1 Though the Revenue is the
Appellant in these batch of matters, Shri N. Venkatraman, learned Additional Solicitor General
representing the Union of India, graciously consented to the learned counsel for the Assessee Sh.
Rohit Jain to open the case. Sh. N. Venkatraman also observed that Mr. Jain had copiously prepared
a compilation of all the judgments on the subject and a note for assisting the Court. Further, and
more importantly, Sh. N. Venkatraman has also supported the legal submission advanced by Sh.
Rohit Jain in so far as the issue of jurisdiction is concerned. We appreciate the approach adopted by
the learned Law Officer, as precious time of the Court could be saved by avoiding repetition of
arguments. We were greatly benefited by the compilation of the precedents on the subject and the
written note of Shri Rohit Jain and his team. We place on record the valuable assistance rendered by
them.

11.2 There is another aspect. As the High Courts have not pronounced upon the merits of the matter,
we will not be entering into the merits of the dispute and our enquiry will be confined to the
question as to which is the appropriate High Court for filing an appeal under Section 260A of the
Act against a decision of the ITAT. Our enquiry will also extend to determining the appropriate High
Court for appeals against order of ITAT where an order of transfer of case(s) from one Assessing
Officer to another Assessing Officer even with respect to the same assessment year, has been passed
under Section 127 of the Act. 11.3 Section 260A of the Act provides for a statutory appeal to the High
Court against every order of the ITAT. As certain Benches of the ITAT exercise jurisdiction over
more than one state, the primary question is before which High Court would an appeal lie? Should it
be the High Court of the State in which the ITAT is physically located or the High Court of the State
in which the Assessee is residing and/or doing its business or the High Court where the Assessing

4

Pr. Commissioner Of Income Tax 1 vs M/S Abc Papers Limited on 18 August, 2022

Officer who assessed the assessee is located.

11.4 For making the correct interpretative choice, it is necessary to refer to certain provisions of the
Act.

Legal Framework:

12. Chapter XIII of the Act deals with Income Tax Authorities. Section 116, occurring in this Chapter
enlists the classes of Income Tax Authorities who would be administering the provisions of the Act.
Section 120, which deals with the Jurisdiction of the Income Tax Authorities provides that the
Authorities shall exercise the powers and functions conferred or assigned to them under the Act.
Section 124 is important. It relates to the jurisdiction of Assessing Officers in particular. It is a
departure from the previous regime under the 1922 Act in Section 64, as per which the place of
assessment was the place where the assessee carries on business, profession or vocation. Section 124
inverts the position, and instead empowers an Assessing Officer to exercise jurisdiction over any
area that has been entrusted to him/her under Section 120 of the Act. The Assessing Officer will,
therefore, have the power and jurisdiction with respect to any person carrying on a business or
profession in that area. Another provision that we need to take note of is Section 127, which
empowers senior income tax authorities to transfer any ‘case’ from one or more Assessing Officer to
any other Assessing Officer. Sub-section (4) of Section 127 provides that the transfer can be made at
any stage. Explanation to Sub-section (4), which is reproduced hereunder, for ready reference
explains the expression ‘case’ used in the Section: -

“Section 127(4)- The transfer of a case under sub- section (1) or sub- section (2) may
be made at any stage of the proceedings, and shall not render necessary the re- issue
of any notice already issued by the Assessing Officer or Assessing Officers from whom
the case is transferred.

Explanation. - In section 120 and this section, the word "case", in relation to any
person whose name is specified in any order or direction issued thereunder, means
all proceedings under this Act in respect of any year which may be pending on the
date of such order or direction or which may have been completed on or before such
date, and includes also all proceedings under this Act which may be commenced after
the date of such order or direction in respect of any year.”

13.1 Another set of provisions relating to the judicial remedies provided under the Act are equally
important for us to note. Chapter XX deals with Appeals and Revision. Part A of this Chapter
provides for appeals against assessment orders to Deputy Commissioner (Appeals) and
Commissioner (Appeals). Part B comprises of provision relating to appeals to the ITAT. ITAT is
constituted by the Central Government under Section 25211 of the Act. Section 25512 of the Act
provides that the President of the ITAT may constitute Benches for exercising and discharging the
powers and functions of the ITAT. Under Sub-Section (5) of Section 255, the ITAT, through its
President, is empowered to regulate the procedure of the Benches, including the places at which the
Benches shall hold their sittings.

5

Pr. Commissioner Of Income Tax 1 vs M/S Abc Papers Limited on 18 August, 2022

Section 252. Appellate Tribunal

(i) The Central Government shall constitute an Appellate Tribunal consisting of as many judicial and
accountant members as it thinks fit to exercise the powers and discharge the functions conferred on
the Appellate Tribunal by this Act.

Section 255. Procedure of Appellate Tribunal

(i) The powers and functions of the Appellate Tribunal may be exercised and discharged by Benches
constituted by the President of the Appellate Tribunal from among the members thereof. 13.2 In
exercise of power under sub-Section (5) of Section 255, the ITAT notified the Income Tax (Appellate
Tribunal), Rules 1963. As per Rule 313, a Bench shall hold its sittings at its headquarters or at such
other place as authorized by the President. Under Rule 414, a Bench shall hear and determine such
appeals as the President may by order direct.

13.3 ITAT is a unified forum functioning in the form of Benches at the administrative discretion of
the President. Jurisdiction exercised by the Benches of the ITAT do not follow the structure
contemplated in Article 1 of the Constitution, which divides the Union into States and Union
Territories. Instead, Benches are sometimes constituted in a way that their jurisdiction encompasses
territories of more than one state. For example, the Allahabad Bench include parts of Uttarakhand.
The Amritsar Bench has within its jurisdiction the entire State of Jammu & Kashmir. Delhi Bench
includes parts of Haryana and U.P. The Guwahati Bench comprises of Arunachal Pradesh,
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Assam, Manipur, Nagaland and Tripura. Further, the Bangalore Bench
excludes large parts of Karnataka such as Belgaum, Mangalore, Karwar and North Kanara, and
these excluded districts form part of the Panaji Bench which includes Goa. Therefore, Benches are
not State or U.T. centric, but are based on the administrative discretion of the President of the ITAT.
This Court in Ajay Gandhi Rule-3. Sittings of Bench A bench shall hold its sittings at its
headquarters or at such other place or places as may be authorized by the President.

Rule-4. Powers of Bench (1) A Bench shall hear and determine such appeals and applications made
under the Act as the President may be general or special order direct.

v. B Singh15 and the Madras High Court in The President, Income Tax Appellate Tribunal v. A
Kalyanasundaram16 have upheld the powers of the President with respect to posting and transfer of
members and also the power to decide the constitution of Benches and the places of sitting of the
members.

14. In so far as appeal to a High Court is concerned, it is Section 260A which provides that an appeal
shall lie from every order of the ITAT. Section 260A, to the extent relevant is as under:

“260A. Appeal to High Court. (1) An appeal shall lie to the High Court from every
order passed in appeal by the Appellate Tribunal before the date of establishment of
the National Tax Tribunal, if the High Court is satisfied that the case involves a
substantial question of law.”

6

Pr. Commissioner Of Income Tax 1 vs M/S Abc Papers Limited on 18 August, 2022

15. As is evident from the above, Section 260A is open textual and does not specify the High Court
before which an appeal under Section 260A of the Act would lie. Even Section 26917 which defines
‘High Court’ merely relates the High Court in any State with the High Court for that State and
further prescribes specific High Courts for each of the U.T. It is this uncertainty about identification
(2004) 2 SCC 120.

(2005) 279 ITR 305 (Mad).

269. Definition of "High Court”. — In this Chapter, — “High Court” means—

(i) in relation to any State, the High Court for that State;

(ii) in relation to the Union territory of Delhi, the High Court of Delhi; 2 [* * * * *] 3 [* * * * * ]

(iv) in relation to the Union territory of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, the High Court at
Calcutta;

(v) in relation to the Union territory of [Lakshadweep], the High Court of Kerala; [(va) in relation to
the Union territory of Chandigarh, the High Court of Punjab and Haryana;] [(vi) in relation to the
Union territories of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and *** Daman and Diu, the High Court at Bombay;
and

(vii) in relation to the Union territory of Pondicherry, the High Court at Madras.] of the appropriate
High Court for filing an appeal against an order of the ITAT exercising jurisdiction over more than
one state that, we are called upon to decipher and declare.

16. A judicial remedy must be effective, independent and at the same time certain. Certainty of
forum would involve unequivocal vesting of jurisdiction to adjudicate and determine the dispute in a
named forum.

17. Keeping the above principle in mind, we will now return to the inquiry into the appropriate High
Court for filing an appeal against an order of a bench of the ITAT exercising jurisdiction over more
than one state. We notice that the issue has already fallen for consideration before a Division Bench
of the High Court of Delhi way back in 1978 in the case of Seth Banarsi Dass Gupta. Having
considered the matter in detail, the High Court of Delhi held that the “most appropriate” High Court
for filing an appeal would be the one where the Assessing Officer is located. The decision was
followed in Suresh Desai (supra) by Justice Lahoti (as he then was) and provided additional reasons
in support of the same view. The interpretative choices are based on the following reasons, which we
have reformulated as under:

(I) As benches of the ITAT exercise jurisdiction over more than one state,
Explanation to Standing Order No. 1 of 1954 and Standing Order No. 1 of 1967 issued
under the Rules prescribe that, the jurisdiction of the ITAT should be based on the
location of the Assessing Officer. The same principle should apply for determining

7

Pr. Commissioner Of Income Tax 1 vs M/S Abc Papers Limited on 18 August, 2022

the jurisdiction of the High Court for an appeal against the decision of the ITAT.

(II) It would be appropriate for the ITAT to refer a question of law to the High Court within whose
jurisdiction the Assessing Officer or the CIT which has decided the case is located, as these
authorities would be bound to follow the decision of the concerned High Court.

(III) This interpretation will also be in consonance with the expression “in relation with any State,
the High Court of that State” provided in the definition of the “High Court” in Section 66(8) (under
the present 1961 Act, it is Section 269).

(IV) The appeals and references cannot be made to a High Court only on the basis that a bench of
the ITAT is located within the jurisdiction of the said High Court, as it will create an anomalous
situation for that as well as other High Courts.

(V) In view of the doctrine of precedents and the rule of binding efficacy of law laid down by a High
Court within its territorial jurisdiction, a question of law arsing for decision in a reference should be
determined by the High Court which exercises territorial jurisdiction over the situs of the Assessing
Officer (Suresh Desai).

18. The principle laid in Seth Banarasi Dass is followed in Suresh Desai & Associates v.
Commissioner of Income Tax18, Birla Cotton Spinning and Weaving Mills Ltd. v. Commissioner of
Income Tax19, Commissioner of Income Tax v. Digvijay Chemicals Ltd.20 and Commissioner of
Income Tax v. Motorola India Ltd.21 It is interesting to note that this basic principle is accepted and
abided as a precedent even in the two subsequent judgments of the High Court of Delhi in (1998)
230 ITR 912 (Del).

(1980) 123 ITR 354 (Del).

(2007) 294 ITR 359 (Del).

supra (note 7) Sahara and Aar Bee. Thus, it is well-settled that the appellate jurisdiction of a High
Court under Section 260A is exercisable by a High Court within whose territorial jurisdiction the
assessing officer is located.

19. However, our enquiry does not stop here. A further question that arises in these batch of appeals
is in the context of an order of transfer under Section 127 of the Act, whereby the case of an assessee
gets transferred from an Assessing Officer in one State to another Assessing Officer, situated in
another state under the jurisdiction of a different High Court. The real question is whether the
jurisdiction of a High Court would also change following an order of transfer under Section 127. For
example, in this very case, where the assessment order was passed by the Assessing Officer in
Ghaziabad, the appeal therefrom was decided by the CIT (Appeals) IV, Kanpur and the appeal to the
Tribunal was decided by ITAT, New Delhi, should the Lucknow Bench of the Allahabad High Court
have jurisdiction or should the jurisdiction vest with the Punjab & Haryana High Court in whose
territorial limits the transferee Assessing Officer is located.

8

Pr. Commissioner Of Income Tax 1 vs M/S Abc Papers Limited on 18 August, 2022

20. In Suresh Desai, the question relating to the consequences upon an order of transfer under
Section 127 did arise for consideration. Apart from holding that the transfer order did not involve
the assessment year with respect to which the appeals are concerned, the High Court of Delhi made
an important observation that “it is not that the jurisdiction to make assessment in respect of
matters arising at Bombay have been conferred or transferred to Delhi by a reference to territory or
persons or class of persons or incomes or class of income or cases or class of cases as contemplated
by Section 120 of the Act”. This view is also in consonance with the four principles laid down in Seth
Banarasi Dass and it is further strengthened by the additional reasoning given by Justice Lahoti in
Suresh Desai case. The same approach was adopted by the High Court of Delhi in Digvijay
Chemicals where despite an order of transfer from Assessing Officer, Bulandshahar, to Assessing
Officer, New Delhi, the High Court of Delhi held that it does not have the jurisdiction as the
Assessing Officer was situated in Bulandshahar. Pertinently, even in Digvijay Chemicals, the
transfer order related to a different assessment year.

21. In Motorola India Ltd., a case decided by the High Court of Punjab & Haryana, the assessment
year which was the subject of appeal was also the subject of a transfer order passed under Section
127 of the Act. In that case, the assessment took place in Bangalore, the appeal therefrom came to be
decided in Bangalore and a further appeal was also decided by the ITAT in Bangalore. At this stage,
the case was transferred under Section 127 of the Act from Assessing Officer, Bangalore, to
Assessing Officer, Gurgaon. It is in this context that the assessee objected to the appeal filed by the
Revenue before the High Court of Punjab & Haryana and the High Court accepted the contention
and dismissed the appeal on the ground that Punjab & Haryana High Court has no jurisdiction. It
was held that even if it is the same assessment year, the appropriate High Court would be the High
Court of Karnataka. Unlike Suresh Desai and Digvijay Chemicals, in this case, the records of the
same assessment years were transferred. The revenue relied on the Explanation to Section 127 of the
Act to argue that the expression “cases” in the explanation shall cover proceedings filed/to be filed
before a High Court as well. The High Court of Punjab & Haryana negatived this contention by
holding that:

“12. … The reliance of the Revenue on the Explanation to section 127 of the Act with
regard to the meaning of the expression “case” is wholly misplaced and is liable to be
rejected because section 120 of the Act does not deal with jurisdiction of the Tribunal
or the High Court….

13. A conjoint reading of the aforementioned provisions makes it evident that the
Director General or Chief Commissioner or Commissioner is empowered to transfer
any case from one or more accessing officers subordinate to him to any other
Assessing Officer. It also deals with the procedure when the case is transferred from
one Accessing Officer subordinate to a Director General or Chief Commissioner or
Commissioner to an Assessing Officer who is not subordinate to the same Director
General, Chief Commissioner or Commissioner. The aforementioned situation and
the definition of the expression “case” in relation to jurisdiction of an Assessing
Officer is quite understandable but it has got nothing to do with the territorial
jurisdiction of the Tribunal or High Courts merely because section 127 of the Act

9

Pr. Commissioner Of Income Tax 1 vs M/S Abc Papers Limited on 18 August, 2022

dealing with transfer has been incorporated in the same Chapter. Therefore, the
argument raised is completely devoid of substance and we have no hesitation to reject
the same.”

22. We will now refer to the decision of the High Court of Delhi in the case of Sahara, where the
Court has taken a view that upon an order of transfer under Section 127 of the Act, the case of the
assessee would get transferred “lock, stock and barrel” including the High Court. As per this
decision, the High Court having jurisdiction over the situs of the transferee Assessing Officer alone
would have jurisdiction.

23. The facts involved the case of Sahara are that the assessment order was passed by Assessing
Officer, Lucknow. Appeal against that order was decided by CIT (Appeals), Lucknow, and a further
appeal was decided by ITAT, Lucknow. Pursuant to the ITAT order, an appeal was filed before the
Lucknow Bench of the Allahabad High Court. During the pendency of this appeal, the records of the
assessee came to be transferred from Lucknow to New Delhi. Hence, an appeal came to be filed
before the High Court of Delhi as well. A preliminary objection was raised that the High Court of
Delhi lacks jurisdiction as the Assessing Officer was situated in Lucknow. Departing from the
long-standing decisions from Seth Banarasi Dass onwards, the Court rejected the contention and
held that the High Court of Delhi had the jurisdiction to entertain the appeal. The relevant portion
of the judgment is as under:-

“13. The order passed under Section 127(2) of the Act clearly relates to the “case” of
the assessee mentioned in the schedule, and by virtue of the Explanation, all future
proceedings that may be taken under the Act (obviously including an appeal under
section 260A thereof) would now have to be in harmony with the order passed under
section 127(2) of the Act. Consequently, the jurisdiction in respect of the “case” and
the assessee having been shifted from Lucknow to Delhi, the Revenue could file the
appeal under section 260A of the Act only in Delhi and it could not have filed an
appeal in the Lucknow Bench of the Allahabad High Court.

…..

17. …. the effect of the transfer of jurisdiction from Lucknow to Delhi specifically
arises in the present case and we are of the view that the jurisdiction in respect of the
assessee having been transferred to Delhi lock, stock and barrel and all the records of
the assessee also having been transferred from Lucknow to Delhi, it is only the High
Court in Delhi that can entertain an appeal under section 260A of the Act directed
against the order passed by the Tribunal on July 22, 2005. Our conclusion follows
from a plain reading of the Explanation to section 127(4) of the Act as well as from
the effect of the order dated July 29, 2005, passed by the Commissioner of
Income-tax (Central), Kanpur, under section 127(2) of the Act. Consequently, with
effect from September 29, 2005, (the date from which the order passed under section
127(2) of the Act is enforced) the jurisdiction in respect of the assessee for future
proceedings under section 260A of the Act is with the Delhi High Court. Admittedly,

10

Pr. Commissioner Of Income Tax 1 vs M/S Abc Papers Limited on 18 August, 2022

the present appeals have been filed after September 29, 2005, and so they would be
maintainable in this court and no other High Court.”

24. The decision in the case of Sahara is followed by a subsequent Bench of the High Court of Delhi
in Aar Bee. In this case, the assessment order was passed in Jammu, an appeal against that order
was decided by CIT (Appeals), Jammu, and thereafter, an appeal came to be decided by ITAT,
Amritsar. Immediately after the ITAT order, the records of the assessee came to be transferred from
Jammu to New Delhi by an order under Section 127 of the Act. Hence, an appeal against the ITAT
order was filed before the High Court of Delhi. When the matter came up before the High Court of
Delhi, it was contended that the High Court of Delhi did not have jurisdiction to entertain the appeal
in as much as the situs of the Assessing Officer was in Jammu. In support, the decision of the High
Court of Punjab & Haryana in Motorola, was relied upon. Rejecting the contention, differing with
Motorola and following the judgment of its own Court in Sahara, it was held as under: -

“15. We are afraid and with respect we say so that we are unable to agree with the
views expressed by the Punjab & Haryana High Court and are bound to follow the
decision of this court in Sahara India (supra). We are not inclined to accept the view
taken by the High Punjab & Haryana High Court, because while it is true that the
reference to the case is with regard to the jurisdiction of an income-tax authority, it is
also true that the jurisdiction of the High Court is determined by the situs of the
Assessing Officer. When the Assessing Officer itself has been changed from one place
to another, the High Court exercising jurisdiction in respect of the territory covered
by the transferee Assessing Officer would be the one which would have jurisdiction to
hear the appeal under Section 260-A. ...” Analysis:

25. The reasoning adopted by the High Court of Delhi in Sahara is based only on the meaning that it
attributed to the expression ‘cases’ in the Explanation to Section 127(4) of the Act. The High Court of
Delhi was of the view that ‘cases’ must include within its sweep, not only the cases pending before
the Authorities enlisted under Section 116 of the Act, but also the proceedings before the ITAT as
well as a High Court. We are of the opinion that the High Court of Delhi has misread the scope and
ambit of Section 127.

26. We will explain this in detail. Section 127 occurs in Chapter XIII of the Act which relates to
Income Tax Authorities. In the same chapter, Section 116 enlists the Income Tax Authorities and
Section 120 specifies the jurisdiction of such Authorities. While Section 124 specifically speaks of the
jurisdiction of Assessing Officers, Section 127 enables a higher authority to transfer a ‘case’ from one
Assessing Officer to another Assessing Officer. All these provisions in Chapter XIII only relate to the
executive or administrative powers of Income Tax Authorities. We have no hesitation in our mind
that the vesting of appellate jurisdiction has no bearing on judicial remedies provided in Chapter XX
of the Act before the ITAT and the High Court. The mistake committed by the High Court was in
assuming that the expression “case” in the Explanation to Sub- Section 4 of Section 127 has an
overarching effect and would include the proceedings pending before the ITAT as well as a High
Court. This fundamental error has led the Division Bench of the High Court of Delhi to come to a
conclusion that an order of transfer made under Section 127 would have the effect of transferring the

11

Pr. Commissioner Of Income Tax 1 vs M/S Abc Papers Limited on 18 August, 2022

case “lock, stock and barrel” not only from the jurisdiction of the ITAT, but also from that of the
High Court in which the Assessing Officer was located, and vest it in the High Court having
jurisdiction over the transferee Assessing Officer. This erroneous interpretation was in fact
advanced before other High Courts as well, but they were rejected straightaway. One instant
example is the case of CIT v. Parke Davis (India) Ltd.22, where the Andhra Pradesh High Court
held: -

“…The interpretation sought to be placed on the Explanation to section 127 leads to
incongruous results quite contrary to the scheme of the Act and has the effect of
investing the prescribed authorities with (1999) 239 ITR 820 (AP).

the power to virtually interfere with the territorial jurisdiction of the concerned High Court. …”

27. With a slight digression from the main issue, we may note that the Assessee as well as the
Revenue are on the same page in these appeals, taking the view that the decision of the High Court
of Delhi in Sahara is not correctly decided. They may be right. However, as there was no serious
contest at the bar, the principle suggested by the Assessee as accepted by the Revenue did not suffer
strict scrutiny as is always the case in any contested case, and therefore, the Court is left to imagine
the contrary proposition in support of the view taken in Sahara. We had no difficulty in
conceptualising that, since every judge had once been a lawyer. We have raised and dealt with them
in the following paragraphs.

28. Returning to the analyses in the decision in Sahara, we have noticed that the Division Bench of
the High Court of Delhi sought to distinguish the two decisions of the very same High Court in
Suresh Desai and Digvijay Chemicals on the ground that those cases did not involve the transfer of
cases of the very same assessment year. We will reformulate this as a proposition of law. If it is the
accepted principle to determine the jurisdiction of a High Court under Section 260A of the Act on
the basis of the location of the Assessing Officer who assessed the case, then, by the strength of the
very same logic, upon transfer of a case to another Assessing Officer under Section 127, the
jurisdiction under Section 260A must be with the High Court in whose jurisdiction the new
Assessing Officer is located. A logical extension of this argument is that, once the case is transferred
to an Assessing Officer situated outside the jurisdiction of the existing High Court, the entire files
relating to the case should now be in the possession and custody of the new Assessing Officer. It
could be argued that the Assessing Officer who exercised the jurisdiction before its transfer will not
be in a position to assist the High Court, further, he cannot implement the decision of that High
Court, after it decides the question of law as he is no more the Assessing Officer. We will now
proceed to deal with these arguments.

29. The binding nature of decisions of an appellate court established under a statute on subordinate
courts and tribunals within the territorial jurisdiction of the State, is a larger principle involving
consistency, certainty and judicial discipline, and it has a direct bearing on the rule of law. This
‘need for order’ and consistency in decision making must inform our interpretation of judicial
remedies. An important reason adopted in the case of Seth Banarasi Dass Gupta, further highlighted
by Justice Lahoti in Suresh Desai, is that a decision of a High Court is binding on subordinate courts

12

Pr. Commissioner Of Income Tax 1 vs M/S Abc Papers Limited on 18 August, 2022

as well as tribunals operating within its territorial jurisdiction. It is for this very reason that the
Assessing Officer, Commissioner of Appeals and the ITAT operate under the concerned High Court
as one unit, for consistency and systematic development of the law. It is also important to note that
the decisions of the High Court in whose jurisdiction the transferee Assessing Officer is situated do
not bind the Authorities or the ITAT which had passed orders before the transfer of the case has
taken place. This creates an anomalous situation, as the erroneous principle adopted by the
authority or the ITAT, even if corrected by the High Court outside its jurisdiction, would not be
binding on them.

30. The legal structure under the Income Tax Act commencing with Assessing Officer, the
Commissioner of Appeals, ITAT and finally the High Court under Section 260A must be seen as a
lineal progression of judicial remedies. Culmination of all these proceedings in question of law
jurisdiction of the High Court under Section 260A of the Act is of special significance as it depicts
the overarching judicial superintendence of the High Court over Tribunals and other Authorities
operating within its territorial jurisdiction.

31. The power of transfer exercisable under Section 127 is relatable only to the jurisdiction of the
Income Tax Authorities. It has no bearing on the ITAT, much less on a High Court. If we accept the
submission, it will have the effect of the executive having the power to determine the jurisdiction of
a High Court. This can never be the intention of the Parliament. The jurisdiction of a High Court
stands on its own footing by virtue of Section 260A read with Section 269 of the Act. While
interpreting a judicial remedy, a Constitutional Court should not adopt an approach where the
identity of the appellate forum would be contingent upon or vacillates subject to the exercise of
some other power. Such an interpretation will clearly be against the interest of justice. Under
Section 127, the authorities have the power to transfer a case either upon the request of an assessee
or for their own reasons. Though the decision under Section 127 is subject to judicial review or even
an appellate scrutiny, this Court for larger reasons would avoid an interpretation that would render
the appellate jurisdiction of a High Court dependent upon the executive power. As a matter of
principle, transfer of a case from one judicial forum to another judicial forum, without the
intervention of a Court of law is against the independence of judiciary. This is true, particularly,
when such a transfer can occur in exercise of pure executive power. This is a yet another reason for
rejecting the interpretation adopted in the case of Sahara.

32. For the reasons stated above, we hold that the decision of the High Court of Delhi in Sahara and
Aar Bee do not lay down the correct law and therefore, we overrule these judgments.

33. In conclusion, we hold that appeals against every decision of the ITAT shall lie only before the
High Court within whose jurisdiction the Assessing Officer who passed the assessment order is
situated. Even if the case or cases of an assessee are transferred in exercise of power under Section
127 of the Act, the High Court within whose jurisdiction the Assessing Officer has passed the order,
shall continue to exercise the jurisdiction of appeal. This principle is applicable even if the transfer is
under Section 127 for the same assessment year(s).

13

Pr. Commissioner Of Income Tax 1 vs M/S Abc Papers Limited on 18 August, 2022

34. We will now deal with the decisions of certain High Court which have taken a view that the
jurisdiction of the High Court must be based on the location of the ITAT. These judgments are CIT v.
Parke Davis (India) Ltd.23, CIT v. A.B.C. ibid.

India Ltd.24, CIT v. J.L. Marrison (India) Ltd.25, CIT v. Akzo Nobel India Ltd.26, Pr. CIT v.
Sungard Solutions (I) Pvt. Ltd.27 and CIT v. Shree Ganapati Rolling Mills (P) Ltd.28 We have
examined these cases in detail and found that the Assessing Officers in each of these cases were in
fact not located within the territorial jurisdiction of these High Courts. For this reason, the aforesaid
decisions are correct to the extent of these High Courts not exercising jurisdiction. However, while
returning the files to be represented in the appropriate court, certain observations were made
stating that the appeals could be filed in the High Court which exercises territorial jurisdiction over
the concerned ITAT. These observations are only obiter. In any event they did not preclude the party
from filing the appeal before the appropriate High Court where the Assessing Officers exercised
jurisdiction. However, we are reiterating for clarity and certainty that the jurisdiction of a High
Court is not dependent on the location of the ITAT, as sometimes a Bench of the ITAT exercises
jurisdiction over plurality of states. 35.1 For the reasons and principles that we have laid down, we
dispose of these Civil Appeals with the following directions.

35.2 We will first deal with the order passed by the Assessing Officer, Delhi dated 30.12.2010,
against which an appeal was decided by CIT (Appeals) – IV, New Delhi on 16.02.2012, against which
the ITAT, New Delhi disposed of an (2003) 126 Taxman 18 (Cal).

(2005) 272 ITR 321 (Cal).

(2014) 47 Taxmann.com 372 (Cal).

(2019) 415 ITR 294 (Bom).

(2013) 356 ITR 586 (Gau).

appeal on 11.05.2017, against which an appeal was filed in the High Court of Punjab & Haryana
which it disposed of by order dated 07.02.2019, against which Civil Appeal No. 4252 of 2022 was
filed before this Court. The said Civil Appeal is dismissed by upholding the order dated 07.02.2019
passed by the High Court of Punjab & Haryana, with a direction that the appropriate High Court for
disposal of the appeal would be the High Court of Delhi as the case was assessed by the Assessing
Officer, Delhi.

35.3 The other Civil Appeal arises out of an order passed by the Assessing Officer, Ghaziabad dated
31.03.2015, against which an appeal was decided by CIT (Appeals) – IV, Kanpur on 20.12.2016,
against which the ITAT, New Delhi disposed of an appeal on 01.09.2017, against which an appeal
was filed in the High Court of Punjab & Haryana which it disposed of by order dated 07.02.2019,
against which Civil Appeal No. 4253 of 2022 was filed before this Court. The said Civil Appeal is
dismissed by upholding the order dated 07.02.2019 passed by the High Court of Punjab and
Haryana with a direction that the correct High Court to dispose of the appeal would be the Lucknow

14

Pr. Commissioner Of Income Tax 1 vs M/S Abc Papers Limited on 18 August, 2022

Bench of the Allahabad High Court.

35.4 Against the decision of the ITAT, New Delhi dated 11.05.2017, the Revenue had filed an appeal
before the High Court of Delhi which was disposed of by the High Court of Delhi on 21.05.2019,
against which Civil Appeal No. 3480 of 2022 has been filed before this Court. We allow the said Civil
Appeal by setting aside the order dated 21.05.2019 passed by the High Court of Delhi refusing to
exercise jurisdiction and direct the High Court of Delhi to entertain the appeal and dispose of the
appeal as per law.

36. Parties shall bear their own costs.

……………………………….J. [UDAY UMESH LALIT] ……………………………….J. [S. RAVINDRA BHAT]
……………………………….J. [PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA] NEW DELHI;

AUGUST 18, 2022

15