Pr. Commissioner Of Income Tax 6 vs Khyati Realtors Pvt. Ltd. on 25 August, 2022

Pr. Commissioner Of Income Tax 6 vs Khyati Realtors Pvt. Ltd.
on 25 August, 2022

Author: S. Ravindra Bhat

Bench: Sudhanshu Dhulia, S. Ravindra Bhat, Uday Umesh Lalit

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NO._________OF 2022
(@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 672 OF 2020)

PR. COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX 6                                   ...APPELLANT(S)

VERSUS

KHYATI REALTORS PVT. LTD.                                         ...RESPONDENT(S)

JUDGMENT

S. RAVINDRA BHAT, J.

1. Special leave granted. With consent of the counsels for the parties, the appeal was heard finally.
The Revenue has appealed a decision of the Bombay High Court1 which affirmed an order2 of the
Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (hereinafter, “ITAT”) which had upheld a claim by the respondent
(hereinafter, “assessee”) for writing off (cid:130) 10 crores as a bad debt.

2. The assessee carries on real estate development business, trading in transferable development
rights (TDR) and finance. In respect of its return for the assessment year 2009-2010, the
Assessment Officer (hereinafter, “AO”) issued a In ITA No. 291 of 2017, decided on 30.04.2019.

In ITA No.129/Mum/2014, decided on 04.03.2016.

notice under Section 143(2) of the Income Tax Act 1961 (hereinafter “Act” or “IT Act”) on
18.08.2010, and also under Section 142(1) of the Act, calling for various details. The assessee filed its
response thereto. The scrutiny assessment was completed by the AO under Section 143(3) on
30.12.2011, determining the total income of the assessee at (cid:130) 87,880/-. The assessee contended that
an amount of (cid:130) 10 crores was deposited with one M/s C. Bhansali Developers Pvt. Ltd. towards

1

Pr. Commissioner Of Income Tax 6 vs Khyati Realtors Pvt. Ltd. on 25 August, 2022

acquisition of commercial premises two years prior to the assessment year in question (i.e., in
2007). It was contended that the project did not appear to make any progress, and consequently, the
assessee sought return of the amounts from the builder. However, the latter did not respond. As a
result, the assessee’s Board of Directors resolved to write off the amount as a bad debt in 2009. It
was also contended that the amount could also be construed as a loan, since the assessee had
‘financing’ as one of its objects. In a letter dated 26.12.2011 to the AO, the assessee inter alia
contended as follows:

“We submit that as per provisions of Section 36(2), in respect of monies advanced in
the ordinary course of business, the same allowable as bad debts even if the amount
has not been taken into account in computing the total income. This is well accepted
position in respect of write off of advances given in the lending business. The present
case fully falls within the provisions of sec. 36(2) hence the write off of advances is
allowable u/s. 36(1)(vii).”

3. The AO disallowed the sum of (cid:130) 10 crores claimed as a bad debt in determining its income under
“Profits and Gains of Business or Profession”. Aggrieved, the assessee appealed. Before the appellate
Commissioner (hereinafter, “CIT (A)”) the assessee reiterated the contents of a letter dated
05.12.2011 written to the AO as follows:

“As part of our regular business activity, the company in order to purchase certain
commercial premises had made reservation by way of bookings in the upcoming
project at Old Mumbai Pune Highway, Khapoli, which was to be developed by M/s C.
Bhansali Developers Pvt Ltd. In order to confirm the reservation/booking of said
commercial premises, builder insisted for advance of Rs 10 crores. Accordingly, the
company had advanced Rs 10 crores on 06.03.2007 towards reserving/booking of the
commercial premises in the said project ... Since the said advance was for purchase of
commercial property, there was no question of charging interest thereon...However,
further development about the said project of the builder is that the builder after
taking advances from us did not proceed in this matter and possibly siphoned the
money for other purposes. On coming to know about their non-proceeding in the
development of the said project, we had a number of meetings with the directors of
M/s C. Bhansali Developers Pvt Ltd. They did not listen to our request for returning
the money…”

4. The CIT(A) confirmed the disallowance on account of bad debts and interest. A further appeal
was preferred to the ITAT, which allowed the assessee’s plea. The Revenue sought an appeal to the
Bombay High Court under Section 260A of the IT Act. The Bombay High Court ruled that no
question of law requiring a decision arose in the appeal and consequently declined to entertain the
Revenue’s plea.

5. The Revenue contended that Section 36(1)(vii) of the Act gives benefit to the assessee to claim a
deduction on any bad debt or part thereof, which is written off as irrecoverable in the accounts of
the assessee for the previous year. This benefit is subject to Section 36(2) of the Act. It is obligatory

2

Pr. Commissioner Of Income Tax 6 vs Khyati Realtors Pvt. Ltd. on 25 August, 2022

upon the assessee to prove to the AO that the case satisfies the ingredients of both Section 36(1)(vii)
and Section 36(2) of the Act. It was urged that the ITAT and the High Court erred in accepting the
assessee’s contentions, which were not supported by any material or document. It was submitted
that the assessee’s claim of giving (cid:130) 10 crores to M/s C. Bhansali Developers Pvt. Ltd. for the alleged
project was not substantiated by any material. Additionally, the assessee had also pleaded that the
amount was given as a ‘loan’ to the developer, which was a different plea altogether. This plea was
bereft of any material as to the terms of the loan, or the conditions of repayment, including interest.
It was submitted that by virtue of Section 36(2) of the Act, the AO has to be satisfied that the action
of writing off is on sound and reasonable basis, and not a device. Reliance was placed on Catholic
Syrian Bank Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income Tax, Thrissur3 to urge that the assessee is obligated to
prove to the AO that the claim satisfies the ingredients of both Section 36(1)(vii) on the one hand
and Section 36(2) of the Act as well.

6. The Revenue further argued that the assessee’s submission that the amount could alternatively be
deducted as an expenditure exclusively laid out for commercial purposes under Section 37 of the Act
was belated, and raised for the first time only after the order of the CIT(A).

7. Ms. Kavita Jha, learned counsel for the assessee urged this court not to interfere with the findings
of the ITAT and the High Court. She highlighted that the following facts and circumstances were not
in dispute:

i) The assessee was engaged in the business of real estate and financing.

ii) The objects clause of the Memorandum of Association of the assessee company
reflected the business of contractors, erectors, constructors of buildings, etc., as well
as receiving or lending money as its objects.

iii) (cid:130) 10 crores was advanced on 06.03.2007 to M/s C. Bhansali Developers Pvt. Ltd.
to acquire certain commercial premises and for reservation by way of bookings in
their upcoming project on the Old Mumbai-Pune Highway in Khopoli.

iv) The said (cid:130)10 crores was written off during assessment year 2009-10.

v) The (cid:130) 10 crores advanced to M/s C. Bhansali on 06.03.2007 was in the ordinary
course of its business.

8. It was contended that since the builder/borrower defaulted in repaying the amount, the
respondent assessee decided to write off the same as a bad debt under (2012) 3 SCC 784.

Section 36(1)(vii) read with Section 36(2) of the Act. It was contended that after the amendment of
Section 36 of the Act in 1989, there was virtually no scope for the AO to scrutinize in detail a
decision to write off the debt. Counsel relied on the decision of this court in T.R.F. Limited v.
Commissioner of Income Tax, Ranchi4.

3

Pr. Commissioner Of Income Tax 6 vs Khyati Realtors Pvt. Ltd. on 25 August, 2022

9. Ms. Jha further contended that there was nothing in the Act which barred an assessee from
claiming the benefit of Section 37 of the Act in a case where the expenditure was laid out or incurred
exclusively for business or commercial purposes, where it might not be successful to establish its
claim for deduction under any other head.

10. The learned counsel also relied on the judgment of this court in Commissioner of Income Tax v.
Mysore Sugar Co. Ltd.5 As well as other judgments of High Courts, such as Mohan Meakin Ltd. v.
Commissioner of Income Tax6; Harshad J. Choksi v. Commissioner of Income Tax7 and IBM World
Trade Corporation v. Commissioner of Income Tax8 to buttress her submissions.

Analysis and Conclusions

11. Section 36 of the Act occurs under the heading ‘other deductions’, and its relevant extract, for the
purpose of this case, is as follows:

“36. (1) The deductions provided for in the following clauses shall be allowed in
respect of the matters dealt with therein, in computing the income referred to in
section 28— *** (2010) 13 SCC 532.

1963 (2) SCR 976.

2012 (348) ITR 109 (Del).

349 ITR 250 (Bom).

1990 (186) ITR 412 (Bom).

(vii) subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), the amount of any bad debt or part thereof which is
written off as irrecoverable in the accounts of the assessee for the previous year:

Provided that in the case of an assessee to which clause (viia) applies, the amount of
the deduction relating to any such debt or part thereof shall be limited to the amount
by which such debt or part thereof exceeds the credit balance in the provision for bad
and doubtful debts account made under that clause:

Provided further that where the amount of such debt or part thereof has been taken
into account in computing the income of the assessee of the previous year in which
the amount of such debt or part thereof becomes irrecoverable or of an earlier
previous year on the basis of income computation and disclosure standards notified
under sub-section (2) of Section 145 without recording the same in the accounts,
then, such debt or part thereof shall be allowed in the previous year in which such
debt or part thereof becomes irrecoverable and it shall be deemed that such debt or
part thereof has been written off as irrecoverable in the accounts for the purposes of
this clause.

4

Pr. Commissioner Of Income Tax 6 vs Khyati Realtors Pvt. Ltd. on 25 August, 2022

Explanation 1.—For the purposes of this clause, any bad debt or part thereof written
off as irrecoverable in the accounts of the assessee shall not include any provision for
bad and doubtful debts made in the accounts of the assessee. Explanation 2.—For the
removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that for the purposes of the proviso to clause
(vii) of this sub-section and clause (v) of sub- section (2), the account referred to
therein shall be only one account in respect of provision for bad and doubtful debts
under clause (viia) and such account shall relate to all types of advances, including
advances made by rural branches;…. *** (2) In making any deduction for a bad debt
or part thereof, the following provisions shall apply—

(i) no such deduction shall be allowed unless such debt or part thereof has been taken
into account in computing the income of the assessee of the previous year in which
the amount of such debt or part thereof is written off or of an earlier previous year, or
represents money lent in the ordinary course of the business of banking or
money-lending which is carried on by the assessee;

(ii) if the amount ultimately recovered on any such debt or part of debt is less than
the difference between the debt or part and the amount so deducted, the deficiency
shall be deductible in the previous year in which the ultimate recovery is made;

(iii) any such debt or part of debt may be deducted if it has already been written off as
irrecoverable in the accounts of an earlier previous year (being a previous year
relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1988, or any
earlier assessment year), but the Assessing Officer had not allowed it to be deducted
on the ground that it had not been established to have become a bad debt in that
year;

(iv) where any such debt or part of debt is written off as irrecoverable in the accounts
of the previous year (being a previous year relevant to the assessment year
commencing on the 1st day of April, 1988, or any earlier assessment year) and the
Assessing Officer is satisfied that such debt or part became a bad debt in any earlier
previous year not falling beyond a period of four previous years immediately
preceding the previous year in which such debt or part is written off, the provisions of
sub-section (6) of Section 155 shall apply;

(v) where such debt or part of debt relates to advances made by an assessee to which
clause (viia) of sub-section (1) applies, no such deduction shall be allowed unless the
assessee has debited the amount of such debt or part of debt in that previous year to
the provision for bad and doubtful debts account made under that clause.” Section 37
reads as follows:

“37. (1) Any expenditure (not being expenditure of the nature described in sections
30 to 36 and not being in the nature of capital expenditure or personal expenses of
the assessee), laid out or expended wholly and exclusively for the purposes of the

5

Pr. Commissioner Of Income Tax 6 vs Khyati Realtors Pvt. Ltd. on 25 August, 2022

business or profession shall be allowed in computing the income chargeable under
the head "Profits and gains of business or profession".

Explanation 1.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that any expenditure incurred by an
assessee for any purpose which is an offence or which is prohibited by law shall not be deemed to
have been incurred for the purpose of business or profession and no deduction or allowance shall be
made in respect of such expenditure.”

12. The income of every assessee has to be assessed according to the statutory framework laid out
Chapter IV, Part D of the Act. That chapter deals with heads of income. Section 28 of the Act deals
with the chargeability of income to tax under the head ‘Profits and Gains of Business or Profession’.
The other deductions that an assessee can claim are elaborated under Section 36 of the Act, which
opens with the phrase “the deductions provided for in the following clauses shall be allowed in
respect of the matters dealt with therein, in computing the income referred to in Section 28”. For the
purposes of computing income chargeable to tax, therefore, besides specific deductions, ‘other
deductions’ enumerated in different clauses of Section 36 can be allowed by the AO. Each of the
deductions must relate to the business carried out by the assessee. If the assessee carries on a
business and writes off a debt relating to the business as irrecoverable, it would without doubt be
entitled to a corresponding deduction under clause (vii) of sub-section (1) of Section 36 subject to
the fulfilment of the conditions set forth in sub-section (2) of Section 36 of the IT Act.

13. Before the amendment in 1989, the law was that even in cases where the assessee had made only
a provision in its accounts for bad debts and interest thereon, without the amount actually being
debited from the assessee’s Profit and Loss account, the assessee could still claim deduction under
Section 36(1)(vii) of the Act. With effect from 1 April 1989, with the insertion of the new Explanation
under Section 36(1)(vii), any bad debt written-off as irrecoverable in the account of the assessee
would not include any ‘provision’ for bad and doubtful debt made in the accounts of the assessee. In
other words, before this date, even a provision could be treated as a write off. However, after this
date, the Explanation to Section 36(1)(vii) brought about a change. As a result, a mere provision for
bad debt per se was not entitled to deduction under Section 36(1)(vii). This position in law was
recognized by this court in Southern Technologies Ltd. v. Joint Commissioner of Income Tax,
Coimbatore9:

“25. [B]y insertion (w.e.f. 1.4.1989) of a new Explanation in Section 36(1)(vii), it has
been clarified that any bad debt written off as irrecoverable in the account of the
assessee will not include any provision for bad and doubtful debt made in the
accounts of the assessee. The said amendment indicates that before 1.4.1989, even a
provision could be treated as a write off. However, after 1.4.1989, a distinct
dichotomy is brought in by way of the said Explanation to Section 36(1)(vii).
Consequently, after 1.4.1989, a mere provision for bad debt would not be entitled to
deduction under Section 36(1)(vii). To understand the above dichotomy, one must
understand “how to write off”. If an assessee debits an amount of doubtful debt to the
P&L Account and credits the asset account like sundry debtor’s Account, it would
constitute a write off of an actual debt. However, if an assessee debits “provision for

6

Pr. Commissioner Of Income Tax 6 vs Khyati Realtors Pvt. Ltd. on 25 August, 2022

doubtful debt” to the P&L Account and makes a corresponding credit to the “current
liabilities and provisions” on the Liabilities side of the balance sheet, then it would
constitute a provision for doubtful debt. In the latter case, assessee would not be
entitled to deduction after 1.4.1989.

38. The point to be noted is that the IT Act is a tax on “real income”, i.e., the profits
arrived at on commercial principles subject to the provisions of the IT Act.

Therefore, if by Explanation to Section 36(1)(vii) a provision for doubtful debt is kept out of the
ambit of the bad debt which is written off then, one has to take into (2010) 2 SCR 380.

account the said Explanation in computation of total income under the IT Act failing which one
cannot ascertain the real profits. This is where the concept of “add back” comes in. In our view, a
provision for NPA debited to P&L Account under the 1998 Directions is only a notional expense and,
therefore, there would be add back to that extent in the computation of total income under the IT
Act.

39. One of the contentions raised on behalf of NBFC before us was that in this case there is no scope
for “add back” of the Provision against NPA to the taxable income of the assessee. We find no merit
in this contention. Under the IT Act, the charge is on Profits and Gains, not on gross receipts (which,
however, has Profits embedded in it). Therefore, subject to the requirements of the IT Act, profits to
be assessed under the IT Act have got to be Real Profits which have to be computed on ordinary
principles of commercial accounting. In other words, profits have got to be computed after
deducting Losses/ Expenses incurred for business, even though such losses/ expenses may not be
admissible under Sections 30 to 43D of the IT Act, unless such Losses/ Expenses are expressly or by
necessary implication disallowed by the Act. Therefore, even applying the theory of Real Income, a
debit which is expressly disallowed by Explanation to Section 36(1)(vii), if claimed, has got to be
added back to the total income of the assessee because the said Act seeks to tax the “real income”
which is income computed according to ordinary commercial principles but subject to the
provisions of the IT Act. Under Section 36(1)(vii) read with the Explanation, a “write off” is a
condition for allowance.”

14. It is thus evident that merely stating a bad and doubtful debt as an irrecoverable write off
without the appropriate treatment in the accounts, as well as non-compliance with the conditions in
Section 36(1)(vii), 36(2), and Explanation to Section 36(1)(vii) would not entitle the assessee to
claim a deduction. This position was reiterated again in Catholic Syrian Bank (supra):

“5. The language of Section 36(1)(vii) of the Act is unambiguous and does not admit
of two interpretations. It applies to all banks, commercial or rural, scheduled or
unscheduled. It gives a benefit to the Assessee to claim a deduction on any bad debt
or part thereof, which is written off as irrecoverable in the accounts of the Assessee
for the previous year. This benefit is subject only to Section 36(2) of the Act. It is
obligatory upon the Assessee to prove to the assessing officer that the case satisfies
the ingredients of Section 36(1)(vii) on the one hand and that it satisfies the

7

Pr. Commissioner Of Income Tax 6 vs Khyati Realtors Pvt. Ltd. on 25 August, 2022

requirements stated in Section 36(2) of the Act on the other. The proviso to Section
36(1)(vii) does not, in absolute terms, control the application of this provision as it
comes into operation only when the case of the Assessee is one which falls squarely
under Section 36(1)(viia) of the Act. We may also notice that the explanation to
Section 36(1)(vii), introduced by the Finance Act, 2001, has to be examined in
conjunction with the principal section. The explanation specifically excluded any
provision for bad and doubtful debts made in the account of the Assessee from the
ambit and scope of 'any bad debt, or part thereof, written off as irrecoverable in the
accounts of the Assessee'. Thus, the concept of making a provision for bad and
doubtful debts will fall outside the scope of Section 36(1)(vii) simplicitor. The
proviso, as already noticed, will have to be read with the provisions of Section 36(1)
(viia) of the Act.”

15. The assessee had relied on the ruling in T.R.F. Limited (supra). In that judgment, this court had
inter alia, observed that:

“4. This position in law is well-settled. After 1st April, 1989, it is not necessary for the
assessee to establish that the debt, in fact, has become irrecoverable. It is enough if
the bad debt is written off as irrecoverable in the accounts of the assessee. However,
in the present case, the Assessing Officer has not examined whether the debt has, in
fact, been written off in accounts of the assessee. When bad debt occurs, the bad debt
account is debited and the customer’s account is credited, thus, closing the account of
the customer. In the case of Companies, the provision is deducted from Sundry
Debtors. As stated above, the Assessing Officer has not examined whether, in fact, the
bad debt or part thereof is written off in the accounts of the assessee. This exercise
has not been undertaken by the Assessing Officer. Hence, the matter is remitted to
the Assessing Officer for de novo consideration of the above-mentioned aspect only
and that too only to the extent of the write off.”

16. This court did not examine the impact of Section 36(2) and the condition of write off, in the
accounts of the assessee during the previous year, in T.R.F Ltd. (supra). However, the judgments in
Southern Technologies (supra), and Catholic Syrian Bank (supra) spelt out the conditions subject to
which an assessee could write off a bad and doubtful debt. Interestingly, Kapadia, C.J was a party to
T.R.F and Catholic Syrian Bank; he in fact authored the judgment in Southern Technologies.
Furthermore, Catholic Syrian Bank (supra) is by a bench of three judges, whereas the other
decisions are by benches of two Judges. In the circumstances, this Court has to accord primacy to
Southern Technologies (supra).

17. It is evident from the above rulings of this court, that:

(i) The amount of any bad debt or part thereof has to be written-off as irrecoverable
in the accounts of the assessee for the previous year;

8

Pr. Commissioner Of Income Tax 6 vs Khyati Realtors Pvt. Ltd. on 25 August, 2022

(ii) Such bad debt or part of it written-off as irrecoverable in the accounts of the
assessee cannot include any provision for bad and doubtful debts made in the
accounts of the assessee;

(iii) No deduction is allowable unless the debt or part of it “has been taken into
account in computing the income of the assessee of the previous year in which the
amount of such debt or part thereof is written off or of an earlier previous year”, or
represents money lent in the ordinary course of the business of banking or
money-lending which is carried on by the assessee;

(iv) The assessee is obliged to prove to the AO that the case satisfies the ingredients of
Section 36(1)(vii) as well as Section 36(2) of the Act.

18. In the present case, the record shows that the accounts of the assessee nowhere showed that the
advance was made by it to M/s C. Bhansali Developers Pvt. Ltd. in the ordinary course of business.
Its primary argument was that the amount of (cid:130) 10 crores was given for the purpose of purchasing
constructed premises. However, the amount was written-off on 28.03.2009. As noted by the CIT(A),
there was no material to substantiate this submission, in respect of payment of the amount, the time
by which the constructed unit was to be given to it, the area agreed to be purchased, etc. Equally, in
support of its other argument that the amount was given as a loan, the assessee nowhere established
the duration of the advance, the terms and conditions applicable to it, interest payable, etc. The
assessee conceded that it had received interest income for the relevant assessment year. However, it
could not establish that any interest was paid (or shown to be payable in its accounts) for the sum of
(cid:130) 10 crores. Furthermore, there is nothing on record to suggest that the requirement of the law that
the bad debt was written-off as irrecoverable in the assessee’s accounts for the previous year had
been satisfied. Another reason why the amount could not have been written-off, is that the
assessee’s claim was that it was given to M/s Bhansali Developers Pvt. Ltd. for acquiring immovable
property – it therefore, was in the nature of a capital expenditure. It could not have been treated as a
business expenditure. In A.V. Thomas and Co. Ltd., Alleppey v. The Commissioner of Income Tax,
(Bangalore) Kerala10 this court held as follows:

“16. Now, a question under s. 10(2)(xi) can only arise if there is a bad or doubtful
debt. Before a debt can become bad or doubtful it must first be a debt. What is meant
by debt in this connection was laid down by Rowlatt J., in Curtis v. J. & G. Oldfield
Ltd., (1925) 9 TC 319 as follows :-

“When the Rule speaks of a bad debt it means a debt which is a debt that would have
come into the balance sheet as a trading debt in the trade that is in question and that
it is bad. It does not really mean any bad debt which, when it was a good debt, would
not have come in to swell the profits.”

17. A debt in such cases is an outstanding which if recovered would have swelled the
profits. It is not money handed over to someone for purchasing a thing which that
person has failed to return even though no purchase was made. In the section a debt

9

Pr. Commissioner Of Income Tax 6 vs Khyati Realtors Pvt. Ltd. on 25 August, 2022

means something more than a mere advance. It means something which is related to
business or results from it. To be claimable as a bad or doubtful debt it must first be
shown as a proper debt…”

19. In view of the above discussion, it is held that the assessee’s claim for deduction of (cid:130) 10 crore as a
bad and doubtful debt could not have been allowed. The findings of the ITAT and the High Court, to
the contrary, are therefore, insubstantial and have to be set aside.

20. The second issue relates to the admissibility of an expenditure as a deduction, which does not
fall within the provisions of Sections 28 to 43, and is not capital in nature, but is laid out or spent
exclusively for the purpose of business, under Section 37 of the Act. A similar provision existed
under the old Income Tax Act, 1922 as in the case of provision for bad debts, by Section 10(2)11.
This aspect was considered [1963] Supp (1) SCR 776.

Section 10(2): [S]uch profits or gains shall be computed after making the following allowances,
namely :-

by this court in The Commissioner of Income Tax v. The Mysore Sugar Co., Ltd.12
The assessee there was engaged in production of sugar. It used to advance monies to
cane growers in consideration of supply of sugarcane. Due to drought, the cane
growers could not repay amounts advanced. The assessee claimed the outstanding to
be bad debts, and sought to write them off. This was not allowed; the Income Tax
Officer held the expenditure to be capital in nature. The High Court however, set
aside that determination. This court confirmed the view of the High Court. However,
the court also examined the argument whether in such eventualities, the expenditure
could be claimed to be exclusively laid out for the purpose of business (under the
provision corresponding to Section 37(1) of the Act). This court held as follows:

“7. The tax under the head “Business” is payable under s. 10 of the Income-tax Act.
That section provides by sub-s. (1) that the tax shall be payable by an assessee under
the head “profits and gains of business, etc.” in respect of the profits or gains of any
business, etc. carried on by him. Under sub-s. (2), these profits or gains are computed
after making certain allowances. Clause (xi) allows deduction of bad and doubtful
business debts. It provides that when the assessee’s accounts in respect of any part of
his business are not kept on the cash basis, such sum, in respect of bad and doubtful
debts, due to the assessee in respect of that part of the his business is deductible but
not exceeding the amount actually written off as irrecoverable in the books of the
assessee. Clause (xv) allows any expenditure not included in cls. (i) to

(xiv), which is not in the nature of capital expenditure or personal expenses of the
assessee, to be deducted, if laid out or expanded wholly and exclusively for the
purpose of such business, etc. The clauses expressly provided what can be deducted;
but the general scheme of the section is that profits or gains must be calculated after
deducting outgoings reasonably attributable as business expenditure but so as not to

10

Pr. Commissioner Of Income Tax 6 vs Khyati Realtors Pvt. Ltd. on 25 August, 2022

deduct any portion of an expenditure of a capital nature. If an expenditure comes
within any of the enumerated classes of allowances, the case can be considered under
the appropriate class; but there may be an ***

(xi) When the assessee's accounts in respect of any part of his business, profession or
vocation are not kept on the cash basis, such sum, in respect of bad and doubtful
debts, due to the assessee in respect of that part of his business, profession or
vocation, and in the case of an assessee carrying on a banking or money lending
business such sum in respect of loans made in the ordinary course of such business as
the Income-tax Officer may estimate to be irrecoverable but not exceeding the
amount actually written off as irrecoverable in the books of the assessee : ***

(xv) any expenditure (not being an allowance of the nature described in any of the
clauses (i) to (xiv) inclusive, and not being in the nature of capital expenditure or
personal expenses) laid out or expended wholly and exclusively for the purpose of
such business, profession or vocations".

1963 (2) SCR 976 expenditure which, though not exactly covered by any of the enumerated classes,
may have to be considered in finding out the true assessable profits or gains. This was laid down by
the Privy Council in Commissioner of Income-tax v. Chitnavis I.L.R. (1932) IndAp 290 and has been
accepted by this Court. In other words, s. 10(2) does not deal exhaustively with the deductions,
which must be made to arrive at the true profits and gains.

8. To find out whether an expenditure is on the capital account or on revenue, one must consider the
expenditure in relation to the business. Since all payments reduce capital in the ultimate analysis,
one is apt to consider a loss as amounting to a loss capital. But this is not true of all losses, because
losses in the running of the business cannot be said to be of capital. The questions to consider in this
connection are : for that was the money laid out? Was it to acquire an asset of an enduring nature
for the benefit of the business, or was it an outgoing in the doing of the business? If money be lost in
the first circumstances, it is a loss of capital, but if lost in the second circumstances, it is a revenue
loss. In the first, it bears the character of an investment, but in the second, to use a commonly
understood phrase, it bears the character of current expenses.

21. It is apparent that this court was satisfied that the disallowance of the amount, on account of bad
and doubtful debt, did not preclude a claim for deduction, on the ground that the expenditure was
exclusively laid out for the purpose of business. The court applied the test of whether the expense
was incurred for business, or whether it fell into the capital stream. In the facts of the case, the tests
were satisfied – the expenditure was for the purpose of business, and did not fall in the capital
stream.

22. The assessee had relied on a few High Court judgments which have ruled that even if a claim for
deduction under Section 36(1) is not allowed, the possibility of its exclusion under Section 37 cannot
be ruled out. This court is of the opinion that as a proposition of law, that enunciation is
unexceptional, since the heads of expenditure that can be claimed as deduction are not exhaustive –

11

Pr. Commissioner Of Income Tax 6 vs Khyati Realtors Pvt. Ltd. on 25 August, 2022

which is the precise reason for the existence of Section 37. Therefore, in a given case, if the
expenditure relates to business, and the claim for its treatment under other provisions are
unsuccessful, application of Section 37 is per se not excluded.

23. This court is of the opinion however, that in the facts of this case, the judgment in Southern
Technologies (supra) on this issue (where the claim of bad and doubtful debt was disallowed) is
appropriate, and applicable. The relevant extract of the said judgment is as follows:

“44. As stated above, Section 36(1)(vii) after 1.4.1989 draws a distinction between
write off and provision for doubtful debt. The IT Act deals only with doubtful debt. It
is for the assessee to establish that the provision is made as the loan is irrecoverable.
However, in view of Explanation which keeps such a provision outside the scope of
“written off” bad debt, Section 37 cannot come in. If an item falls under Sections 30
to 36, but is excluded by an Explanation to Section 36 (1)

(vii) then Section 37 cannot come in. Section 37 applies only to items which do not
fall in Section 30 to 36. If a provision for doubtful debt is expressly excluded from
Section 36 (1) (vii) then such a provision cannot claim deduction under Section 37 of
the IT Act even on the basis of “real income theory” as explained above.”

24. In view of the foregoing discussion, the Revenue’s appeal has to succeed. The impugned
judgment of the High Court and the order of ITAT are hereby set aside. The appeal is allowed, in the
above terms, without order on costs.

.....................................................J. [UDAY UMESH LALIT] .....................................................J. [S.
RAVINDRA BHAT] .....................................................J. [SUDHANSHU DHULIA] New Delhi, August
25, 2022

12