Lavanya C vs Vittal Gurudas Pai Since Deceased By Lrs ... on 5 March, 2025

Lavanya C vs Vittal Gurudas Pai Since Deceased By Lrs ... on 5
March, 2025

Author: Sanjay Karol

Bench: Sanjay Karol, Pankaj Mithal

2025 INSC 325

                                                                 REPORTABLE

                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                             CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 13999 OF 2024
                           (Arising out of SLP(C) No.13875 OF 2021)

                SMT. LAVANYA C & ANR.                     … APPELLANT(S)

                                            VERSUS

                VITTAL GURUDAS PAI
                SINCE DESEASED BY LRS.
                & ORS.                                    … RESPONDENT(S)

                                       JUDGMENT

SANJAY KAROL J.

1. This appeal arises out of judgment and order dated 23rd February 2021/16th March, 2021 passed
in Miscellaneous First Appeal No.7055/2013(CPC) by the High Court of Karnataka at Bengaluru,
whereby the respondents before the High Court, appellants herein (defendants in Trial Court), were
held guilty of disobedience of their undertaking before the Trial Court of not alienating the property,
subject matter of the suit.

The original defendants in the Trial Court through their counsel gave an undertaking which was
allegedly disobeyed. The plaintiffs aggrieved thereby filed the case, which was dismissed, and they
appealed to the High Court, ultimately resulting in a favourable order. The original defendants now
aggrieved by being held in contempt, are appellants herein.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/54909522/

1

Lavanya C vs Vittal Gurudas Pai Since Deceased By Lrs ... on 5 March, 2025

2. A brief resume of facts leading to the appeal are :

2.1 The respondents herein were the original plaintiffs in Original Suit No.4191 of
2007 seeking a declaration to the effect that agreement between the parties dated
30th April 2004, i.e., ‘Joint Development Agreement’1 to be “revoked rescinded and
terminated.” The JDA was entered into regarding the construction of residential
apartments within a period of 24 months, on a turnkey basis. 2.2 Said construction
was to be completed by 31st October 2006. However, the same could not be done.

Legal notice intimating the cancellation of the JDA was issued on 23rd March 2007, and eventually,
the subject Original Suit came to be filed.

2.3 The learned Trial Court eventually concluded vide judgment and order dated 2nd January 2017
that the plaintiffs could not prove that the construction made was in violation of the JDA and
instead, the defendants proved that the ‘JDA’, for short construction made by them was in
accordance thereof. It was held that the plaintiffs were not entitled to the declaration and
permanent injunction, as prayed for. 2.4 In the pendency of the above proceedings, record reveals
that the counsel for the defendants undertook, on two occasions, i.e., 11th July 2007 and 13th
August 2007 that they will not alienate the subject property to any third person. Allegedly, however,
such undertaking was not abided by, which led to the filing of Interlocutory Application No.3 that
came to be registered as Civil Misc. Application No.38 of 2011 under Order XXXIX Rule 2A of the
Civil Procedure Code, 19082.

2.5 The concerned Court framed the following issues :

“1) Whether the petitioners have made out a case of breach or willful disobedience by
the respondents of order passed by this court in pursuance of undertaking given by
the defendant and order of injunction dated 17.11.2007 beyond all reasonable
doubts?

2) What order?” 2.6 The Court considered the jurisdiction which has been agitated, observing that
the said power is punitive in nature and akin to imposing punishment for civil contempt under the
Contempt of Courts Act, 1971. It was concluded as under :

Hereafter ‘CPC’ “38. It is significant to note that advocate for petitioners have
produced 10 photos of suit property, which depict that suit property is still vacant
and foundation is lying. But, here in this case, the petitioners have contended that the
flats were sold by the respondents inspite of Court Order. Moreover,, the description
o f   t h e   s u i t   p r o p e r t y   i s   i n c o m p l e t e   a n d   a m b i g u o u s .   T h e r e f o r e ,   t h e
averment/contention of the petitioners is not believable.

39. In view of aforesaid reasons and observations made, I can safely conclude that the
petitioners are failed to prove their case beyond all reasonable doubt that the
respondents are knowingly and willfully disobeyed the injunction order of this Court.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/54909522/

2

Lavanya C vs Vittal Gurudas Pai Since Deceased By Lrs ... on 5 March, 2025

: There is no sufficient and satisfactory materials on record to come to conclusion
that the respondents have knowingly and willfully disobeyed and committed the
breach of order of this Court. Hence, respondents are entitled for benefit of doubt.
Therefore, I answer aforesaid point No.1 in Negative.

40. Point No.2 : For the foregoing reasons and in view of my findings and
discussions, I proceed to pas the following :

ORDER In the result, therefore this Civil Misc. petition (I.A. No.3) filed by the
petitioners U/o XXXIX Rule 2A and U/s.151 of CPC against the respondents is liable
to be rejected. Accordingly, it is dismissed.

Parties shall bear their own costs.” 2.7 Aggrieved by this order, the High Court was
approached by way of Misc. First Appeal No.7055 of 2013 (CPC) under Order XLIII
Rule 1(r) read with 104(i) of CPC.

The question to be considered was whether the lower Court’s order is sustainable in law.

Impugned Judgment

3. A question of maintainability of the application under Order XXXIX Rule 2A was raised. With
reference to Samee Khan v. Bindu Khan3, it was held that even if the injunction order was
subsequently set aside, the disobedience thereof is not erased. The subsequent dismissal of a suit
does not absolve the party of liability of breach of injunction order. That apart, it was observed that
an appeal against the Trial Court’s dismissal of the Original Suit was also pending before the High
Court bearing R.F.A.No.592/2017.

3.1 The substance of the dispute is that on 11 th July 2007, the counsel for the appellants herein filed
memo as follows :

“The undersigned counsel undertake that the defendants have not alienate the suit
schedule property to any third person” 3.2 Subsequently, on two dates 13th August
and 17th November, 2007 the proceedings of the Trial Court have been taken note of
by the Trial Court in paras 26 to 28, which read as follows :

(1998) 7 SCC 59 “26. Then the matter was adjourned to 13.08.2007. On 13.08.2007,
the advocate for the defendants filed another memo which reads as follows :

“The undersigned counsel undertake that they have not alienate the suit schedule
property in the above case.”

27. Then the trial Court ordered to list the matter on 17.11.2007. On 17.11.2007, the
defendants’ Counsel failed to appear before the Court. The plaintiffs’ Counsel
submitted to the Court about the undertaking given by the defendants’ Counsel.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/54909522/

3

Lavanya C vs Vittal Gurudas Pai Since Deceased By Lrs ... on 5 March, 2025

Under such circumstances, the trial Court passed the following order:

“Parties to the suit called out. Absent. Learned Counsel for the plaintiff is present.
Learned Counsel for the defendant is absent. On the last date the learned Counsel for
the defendants had undertaken that the defendants will not alienate suit property.
Today neither defendants nor learned Counsel for the defendants are present. I.A. I &
II cannot be heard as the defendants and learned Counsel for defendant Nos.1 to 3
are absent. Hence, it is hereby ordered that defendants 1 to 3 shall not alienate the
suit property till next date. For hearing of IA I & II and to call the parties under
Section 89 of CPC. Call on 08.12.2007.”

28. That order was extended from time to time.

Subsequent to 17.11.2007, the defendants executed the sale deeds under Exs.P3 to P5, Ex.P7 to P13,
the dates of which are as follows :

Ex.P3–19.11.2007 Ex.P4-03.12.2008 Ex.P5–01.07.2008 Ex.P7-15.06.2009
Ex.P8–06.08.2008 Ex.P9-13.12.2011 Ex.P10–19.11.2007Ex.P11-01.07.2008
Ex.P12-03.12.2008 Ex.P13-15.06.2009” 3.3 The Court citing various judicial
pronouncements observed that there was no merit in the contention that injunction
order is invalid. The order of the lower Court was set aside, and the appellants herein
were held guilty of disobedience of their undertaking made before the Trial Court.

3.4 Vide order dated 16th March 2021 the appellants were held guilty of contempt of
Court. Contemnor No.3, namely, Chalsani R.B. who is the second appellant herein,
was directed to be detained in a civil prison for a period of three months and his
property, subject matter of suit, to be attached for a period of one year. Contemnor
No.2, namely, Smt. Lavanya C., the first appellant herein, qua her it was directed that
the subject matter property be attached for a period of one year. It was further
directed that both the contemnors shall pay a sum of Rs.10 lakhs within four weeks,
as compensation for the hardship caused to the respondents herein. The part of the
order directing attachment was stayed for a period of 60 days.

Our Consideration

4. It is this order of the High Court which is sought to be challenged in this appeal. By way of the
special leave petition, it has been urged, inter alia :

a) In the prayers made in the application under Order XXXIX Rule 1 and 2, no
specific prayer, restraining the parties from creating third party rights, has been
made. The Trial Court has observed that the description of property is ambiguous,
incomplete and that no satisfactory material has been brought on record to show
wilful disobedience on the part of the appellants, hence, they are entitled to the
benefit of doubt.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/54909522/

4

Lavanya C vs Vittal Gurudas Pai Since Deceased By Lrs ... on 5 March, 2025

b) There has been deliberate suppression of facts on the part of the respondents
herein regarding construction of apartments and selling off a part thereof, even prior
to filing of the original Suit.

c) An unconditional apology has been tendered before the Court and the appellants
herein have no intent or desire to disrespect any order passed by a competent Court.

d) The sentence imposed, in the attending facts and circumstances, is unjustified
given that the second appellant is a person of advanced years and suffers from
various ailments.

5. We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record. The question to be
considered is whether the High Court was correct in setting aside the order of the Court below,
holding the appellants herein not guilty of wilful disobedience of their undertaking given to the
Court.

6. A few dates require immediate recall. The undertaking subject matter of controversy was given by
the counsel on 11 th July 2007 and reiterated on 13th August 2007. The Trial Court made such an
undertaking into an order of the Court on 17th November 2007. The same was extended at regular
intervals. The application for violation of the undertaking/order of the Court under Order XXXIX
Rule 2A was made in 2011. An order was made dismissing the application on 2nd August 2013.
Immediately thereafter, an appeal was filed before the High Court. In the pendency of this appeal,
the Original Suit came to be decided on 2nd January 2017. An appeal against such dismissal of the
Original Suit was pending before the High Court on the date that the impugned judgment came to
be passed.

7. Although of primary concern, in this appeal is the sentence of imprisonment and compensation to
be paid by the appellants herein, it would be apposite to take note of the contours of Order XXXIX
Rule 1, Rule 2 and Rule 2A.

7.1 A Three-Judge Bench in Wander Limited & Anr. v. Antox India Pvt. Ltd.4 observed as follows :

“9. .....

“...is to protect the plaintiff against injury by violation of his rights for which he could
not adequately be compensated in damages recoverable in the action if the
uncertainty were resolved in his favour at the trial. The need for 1990 (Suppl) SCC
727 such protection must be weighed against the corresponding need of the
defendant to be protected against injury resulting from his having been prevented
from exercising his own legal rights for which he could not be adequately
compensated. The court must weigh one need against another and determine where
the ‘balance of convenience’ lies.” x x x x

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/54909522/

5

Lavanya C vs Vittal Gurudas Pai Since Deceased By Lrs ... on 5 March, 2025

14. The appeals before the Division Bench were against the exercise of discretion by
the Single Judge. In such appeals, the appellate court will not interfere with the
exercise of discretion of the court of first instance and substitute its own discretion
except where the discretion has been shown to have been exercised arbitrarily, or
capriciously or perversely or where the court had ignored the settled principles of law
regulating grant or refusal of interlocutory injunctions. An appeal against exercise of
discretion is said to be an appeal on principle. Appellate court will not reassess the
material and seek to reach a conclusion different from the one reached by the court
below if the one reached by that court was reasonably possible on the material. The
appellate court would normally not be justified in interfering with the exercise of
discretion under appeal solely on the ground that if it had considered the matter at
the trial stage it would have come to a contrary conclusion. If the discretion has been
exercised by the trial court reasonably and in a judicial manner the fact that the
appellate court would have taken a different view may not justify interference with
the trial court's exercise of discretion. After referring to these principles
Gajendragadkar, J. in Printers (Mysore) Private Ltd. v. Pothan Joseph [(1960) 3 SCR
713 : AIR 1960 SC 1156] : (SCR 721) “... These principles are well established, but as
has been observed by Viscount Simon in Charles Osenton & Co. v. Jhanaton [1942 AC
130] ‘...the law as to the reversal by a court of appeal of an order made by a judge
below in the exercise of his discretion is well established, and any difficulty that arises
is due only to the application of well settled principles in an individual case’.” The
appellate judgment does not seem to defer to this principle.” (Emphasis supplied) 7.2
A recent judgment of this Court in Ramakant Ambalal Choksi v. Harish Ambalal
Choksi5, referring to Dalpat Kumar v. Prahlad Singh6 has reiterated the principles
governing the grant of temporary injunction.

7.3 The aspect of disobedience of an order of temporary injunction has been
discussed in detail in Kanwar Singh Saini v. High Court of Delhi7, in the following
terms :

“17. Application under Order 39 Rule 2-A CPC lies only where disobedience/breach of
an injunction granted or order complained of was one that is granted by the court
under Order 39 Rules 1 and 2 CPC, which is naturally to enure during the pendency
of the suit. However, once a suit is decreed, the interim order, if any, merges into the
final order. No litigant can derive any benefit from mere pendency of case in a court
of law, as the interim order always merges in the final order to be passed in the case
and if the case is ultimately dismissed, the interim order stands nullified
automatically. (Vide A.R. Sircar v. State of U.P. [1993 Supp (2) SCC 734 : 1993 SCC
(L&S) 896 : (1993) 24 ATC 832], Shiv Shanker v. U.P. SRTC [1995 Supp (2) SCC 726 :
1995 SCC (L&S) 1018 : (1995) 30 ATC 317], Arya Nagar Inter College v. Sree Kumar
Tiwary [(1997) 4 SCC 388 : 1997 SCC (L&S) 967 : AIR 1997 SC 3071], GTC 2024 SCC
OnLine 3538 (1992) 1 SCC 719 (2012) 4 SCC 307 Industries Ltd. v. Union of India
[(1998) 3 SCC 376 :

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/54909522/

6

Lavanya C vs Vittal Gurudas Pai Since Deceased By Lrs ... on 5 March, 2025

AIR 1998 SC 1566] and Jaipur Municipal Corpn. v. C.L. Mishra [(2005) 8 SCC 423] .)

18. In case there is a grievance of non-compliance with the terms of the decree passed
in the civil suit, the remedy available to the aggrieved person is to approach the
execution court under Order 21 Rule 32 CPC which provides for elaborate
proceedings in which the parties can adduce their evidence and can examine and
cross-

examine the witnesses as opposed to the proceedings in contempt which are summary in nature.
Application under Order 39 Rule 2-A CPC is not maintainable once the suit stood decreed. Law does
not permit to skip the remedies available under Order 21 Rule 32 CPC and resort to the contempt
proceedings for the reason that the court has to exercise its discretion under the 1971 Act when an
effective and alternative remedy is not available to the person concerned. Thus, when the matter
relates to the infringement of a decree or decretal order embodies rights, as between the parties, it is
not expedient to invoke and exercise contempt jurisdiction, in essence, as a mode of executing the
decree or merely because other remedies may take time or are more circumlocutory in character.
Thus, the violation of permanent injunction can be set right in executing the proceedings and not
the contempt proceedings. There is a complete fallacy in the argument that the provisions of Order
39 Rule 2-A CPC would also include the case of violation or breach of permanent injunction granted
at the time of passing of the decree.” 7.4 In Samee Khan (supra), it was observed that :

“12. But the position under Rule 2-A of Order 39 is different. Even if the injunction
order was subsequently set aside, the disobedience does not get erased. It may be a
different matter that the rigour of such disobedience may be toned down if the order
is subsequently set aside. For what purpose is the property to be attached in the case
of disobedience of the order of injunction? Sub-rule (2) provides that if the
disobedience or breach continues beyond one year from the date of attachment, the
court is empowered to sell the property under attachment and compensate the
affected party from such sale proceeds.”

8. There is no question as to the maintainability of the application before this Court. It is also true
that the order, in the challenge against which the impugned judgment was passed, was made in the
pendency of the original suit and, therefore, it is saved from that bar as well. No error, therefore, can
be found on the exercise of such jurisdiction.

9. The next point which needs consideration is the relationship between an advocate and his client.
The appellants have cast certain aspersions on their counsel to the effect that he, allegedly, gave the
undertaking, germane to the instant controversy, without express authorization. This Court has,
time and again, taken note of the fiduciary relationship between an advocate and his client. We may
notice a few decisions as follows:

9.1 In Kokkanda B. Poondacha v. K.D. Ganapathi8, it was held :

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/54909522/

7

Lavanya C vs Vittal Gurudas Pai Since Deceased By Lrs ... on 5 March, 2025

“12. At this stage, we may also advert to the nature of relationship between a lawyer
and his client, which is solely founded on trust and confidence. A lawyer cannot pass
on the confidential information to anyone else. This is so because he is a fiduciary of
his client, who reposes trust and confidence in the lawyer. Therefore, he has a duty to
fulfil all his obligations towards his client with (2011) 12 SCC 600 care and act in
good faith. Since the client entrusts the whole obligation of handling legal
proceedings to an advocate, he has to act according to the principles of uberrima fides
i.e. the utmost good faith, integrity, fairness and loyalty.

x x x

14. An analysis of the above reproduced Rules shows that one of the most important
duties imposed upon an advocate is to uphold the interest of the client fearlessly by
all fair and honourable means. An advocate cannot ordinarily withdraw from
engagement without sufficient cause and without giving reasonable and sufficient
notice to the client. If he has reason to believe that he will be a witness in the case, the
advocate should not accept a brief or appear in the case.” 9.2 The nature of the
profession was highlighted by a Bench of this Court in State of U.P. v. U.P. State Law
Officers' Assn.9, in the following terms :

“14. Legal profession is essentially a service-oriented profession. The ancestor of
today's lawyer was no more than a spokesman who rendered his services to the needy
members of the society by articulating their case before the authorities that be. The
services were rendered without regard to the remuneration received or to be received.
With the growth of litigation, lawyering became a full-time occupation and most of
the lawyers came to depend upon it as the sole source of livelihood. The nature of the
service rendered by the lawyers was private till the Government and the public bodies
started engaging them to conduct cases on their behalf. The Government and the
public bodies engaged the services of the lawyers purely on a contractual basis either
for a specified case or for a specified or an unspecified period. Although the contract
in some cases prohibited the lawyers from accepting private briefs, the nature of the
contract did not alter from one of professional engagement to that of employment.
The lawyer of the 1994 (2) SCC 204 Government or a public body was not its
employee but was a professional practitioner engaged to do the specified work. This
is so even today, though the lawyers on the full-time rolls of the Government and the
public bodies are described as their law officers. It is precisely for this reason that in
the case of such law officers, the saving clause of Rule 49 of the Bar Council of India
Rules waives the prohibition imposed by the said rule against the acceptance by a
lawyer of a full-time employment.

15. The relationship between the lawyer and his client is one of trust and confidence.
The client engages a lawyer for personal reasons and is at liberty to leave him also, for
the same reasons. He is under no obligation to give reasons for withdrawing his brief
from his lawyer. The lawyer in turn is not an agent of his client but his dignified,

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/54909522/

8

Lavanya C vs Vittal Gurudas Pai Since Deceased By Lrs ... on 5 March, 2025

responsible spokesman. He is not bound to tell the court every fact or urge every
proposition of law which his client wants him to do, however irrelevant it may be. He
is essentially an adviser to his client and is rightly called a counsel in some
jurisdictions. Once acquainted with the facts of the case, it is the lawyer's discretion
to choose the facts and the points of law which he would advance. Being a responsible
officer of the court and an important adjunct of the administration of justice, the
lawyer also owes a duty to the court as well as to the opposite side. He has to be fair
to ensure that justice is done. He demeans himself if he acts merely as a mouthpiece
of his client. This relationship between the lawyer and the private client is equally
valid between him and the public bodies.” 9.3 Observations made in Himalayan
Coop. Group Housing Society v. Balwan Singh10, by a Bench of three Judges are also
instructive for our purposes presently :

“22. Apart from the above, in our view lawyers are perceived to be their client's
agents. The law of agency (2015) 7 SCC 373 may not strictly apply to the
client-lawyer's relationship as lawyers or agents, lawyers have certain authority and
certain duties. Because lawyers are also fiduciaries, their duties will sometimes be
more demanding than those imposed on other agents. The authority-agency status
affords the lawyers to act for the client on the subject-

matter of the retainer. One of the most basic principles of the lawyer-client relationship is that
lawyers owe fiduciary duties to their clients. As part of those duties, lawyers assume all the
traditional duties that agents owe to their principals and, thus, have to respect the client's autonomy
to make decisions at a minimum, as to the objectives of the representation. Thus, according to
generally accepted notions of professional responsibility, lawyers should follow the client's
instructions rather than substitute their judgment for that of the client. The law is now well settled
that a lawyer must be specifically authorised to settle and compromise a claim, that merely on the
basis of his employment he has no implied or ostensible authority to bind his client to a
compromise/settlement. To put it alternatively that a lawyer by virtue of retention, has the authority
to choose the means for achieving the client's legal goal, while the client has the right to decide on
what the goal will be. If the decision in question falls within those that clearly belong to the client,
the lawyer's conduct in failing to consult the client or in making the decision for the client, is more
likely to constitute ineffective assistance of counsel.

x x x

30. The Privy Council in Sourendra Nath Mitra v. Tarubala Dasi [(1929-30) 57 IA 133 : (1930) 31 LW
803 : AIR 1930 PC 158] , has made the following two observations which hold relevance to the
present discussion : (IA pp. 140-41) “Two observations may be added. First, the implied authority of
counsel is not an appendage of office, a dignity added by the courts to the status of barrister or
advocate at law. It is implied in the interests of the client, to give the fullest beneficial effect to his
employment of the advocate. Secondly, the implied authority can always be countermanded by the
express directions of the client. No advocate has actual authority to settle a case against the express
instructions of his client. If he considers such express instructions contrary to the interests of his

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/54909522/

9

Lavanya C vs Vittal Gurudas Pai Since Deceased By Lrs ... on 5 March, 2025

client, his remedy is to return his brief.” (See: Jamilabai Abdul Kadar v. Shankarlal Gulabchand
[(1975) 2 SCC 609] and Svenska Handelsbanken v. Indian Charge Chrome Ltd. [(1994) 2 SCC 155] )

31. Therefore, it is the solemn duty of an advocate not to transgress the authority conferred on him
by the client. It is always better to seek appropriate instructions from the client or his authorised
agent before making any concession which may, directly or remotely, affect the rightful legal right of
the client. The advocate represents the client before the court and conducts proceedings on behalf of
the client. He is the only link between the court and the client. Therefore his responsibility is
onerous. He is expected to follow the instructions of his client rather than substitute his judgment.

32. Generally, admissions of fact made by a counsel are binding upon their principals as long as they
are unequivocal; where, however, doubt exists as to a purported admission, the court should be wary
to accept such admissions until and unless the counsel or the advocate is authorised by his principal
to make such admissions. Furthermore, a client is not bound by a statement or admission which he
or his lawyer was not authorised to make. A lawyer generally has no implied or apparent authority to
make an admission or statement which would directly surrender or conclude the substantial legal
rights of the client unless such an admission or statement is clearly a proper step in accomplishing
the purpose for which the lawyer was employed. We hasten to add neither the client nor the court is
bound by the lawyer's statements or admissions as to matters of law or legal conclusions. Thus,
according to generally accepted notions of professional responsibility, lawyers should follow the
client's instructions rather than substitute their judgment for that of the client. We may add that in
some cases, lawyers can make decisions without consulting the client. While in others, the decision
is reserved for the client. It is often said that the lawyer can make decisions as to tactics without
consulting the client, while the client has a right to make decisions that can affect his rights.”
(Emphasis supplied) 9.4 Recently, a coordinate Bench of this Court in Bar of Indian Lawyers v.
National Institute of Communicable Diseases11, which also comprised one of us (Mithal J.) speaking
through Trivedi J., observed :

“51. When we examine the relationship between an advocate and his client from this
point of view, the following unique attributes become clear:

51.1. Advocates are generally perceived to be their client's agents and owe fiduciary
duties to their clients. 51.2. Advocates are fastened with all the traditional duties that
agents owe to their principals. For example, advocates have to respect the client's
autonomy to make decisions at a minimum, as to the objectives of the representation.

51.3. Advocates are not entitled to make concessions or give any undertaking to the
court without express instructions from the client.

51.4. It is the solemn duty of an advocate not to transgress the authority conferred on
him by his client. 51.5. An advocate is bound to seek appropriate instructions from
the client or his authorised agent before taking any action or making any statement
or concession (2024) 8 SCC 430 which may, directly or remotely, affect the legal
rights of the client.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/54909522/

10

Lavanya C vs Vittal Gurudas Pai Since Deceased By Lrs ... on 5 March, 2025

51.6. The Advocate represents the client before the court and conducts proceedings on behalf of the
client. He is the only link between the court and the client. Therefore, his responsibility is onerous.
He is expected to follow the instructions of his client rather than substitute his judgment.”
(Emphasis supplied)

10. The above judgments make clear that a lawyer-client relationship is fiduciary in nature and the
former is cast in terms of agency of the latter. It is also clear that the lawyer is to respect the
decision-making right of the client. It flows from this that any undertaking given to a Court cannot
be without requisite authority from the client.

11. The appellants herein would have us believe that the undertaking to not alienate the subject
matter property, which, undoubtedly, has far-reaching implications, extending over a large period of
time. We find such a situation difficult to accept. The undertaking, subject matter of controversy,
was given in July 2007 and the miscellaneous application was filed in the year 2011, i.e., after a
period of four and a half years. Had the situation been that the said undertaking was without
requisite authority, the clients were perfectly within their rights to seek discharge of that order,
however, no such step was taken.

12. The same undertaking was re-emphasized a month later, on 13th August 2007 and was later
made into an order of the Court which, as already observed supra, was extended from time to time.
Alienation of the subject matter property despite express orders of the Court, in our view, entirely
justify the stand taken by the High Court in punishing the appellants for contempt of Court.

13. The powers of contempt of Court have been provided for the purposes of ensuring that the
dignity and majesty of law is always maintained. Such purpose is aptly captured in the words of the
Constitution Bench in Supreme Court Bar Assn. v. Union of India12, as follows:

“42. The contempt of court is a special jurisdiction to be exercised sparingly and with
caution whenever an act adversely affects the administration of justice or which tends
to impede its course or tends to shake public confidence in the judicial institutions.
This jurisdiction may also be exercised when the act complained of adversely affects
the majesty of law or dignity of the courts. The purpose of contempt jurisdiction is to
uphold the majesty and dignity of the courts of law. It is an unusual type of
jurisdiction combining “the jury, the judge and the hangman” and it is so because the
court is not adjudicating upon any claim between litigating parties. This jurisdiction
is not exercised to protect the dignity of an individual judge but to protect the
administration of justice from being maligned. In the general interest of the
community it is imperative that the authority of courts should not be imperilled and
there should be no unjustifiable interference in the (1998) 4 SCC 409 administration
of justice. It is a matter between the court and the contemner and third parties
cannot intervene. It is exercised in a summary manner in aid of the administration of
justice, the majesty of law and the dignity of the courts. No such act can be permitted
which may have the tendency to shake the public confidence in the fairness and
impartiality of the administration of justice.” When there has been an express

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/54909522/

11

Lavanya C vs Vittal Gurudas Pai Since Deceased By Lrs ... on 5 March, 2025

violation of an order of a Court, as is in the present case, the exercise of contempt
jurisdiction cannot be faulted with. The judgment of the High Court is, therefore,
confirmed.

14. In the attending facts and circumstances, keeping in view the fact that at the time of filing of this
appeal, the appellant No.1 herein, who was the contemnor No.3 before the High Court, was 63 years
of age and today must approximately be of 68 years of age, we modify the impugned order to the
extent that the three months confinement in civil prison shall stand deleted. The rest of the order
regarding attachment of property remains undisturbed. Additionally, the amount of compensation
payable by the appellants herein shall stand enhanced from a sum of Rs.10 lakhs to Rs.13 lakhs.

15. The appeal is partly allowed and disposed of with the above modification to the impugned order.
The amount of compensation shall also carry simple interest @6% from the date of the judgment of
the lower Court, i.e., 2nd August 2013.

Pending application, if any, shall stand disposed of.

..................................J. (PANKAJ MITHAL) .................................J. (SANJAY KAROL) New Delhi;

March 5, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/54909522/

12

