Rajaram vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 16 December, 2022

Rajaram vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 16 December, 2022

Author: S. Ravindra Bhat

Bench: Sudhanshu Dhulia, S. Ravindra Bhat

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). 2311 OF 2022
[@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRL.) NO(S). 6762 of 2022]

RAJARAM                                                                …APPELLANT(S)
VERSUS

STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH & ORS.                                        …RESPONDENT(S)

JUDGMENT

S. RAVINDRA BHAT, J.

1. Special leave granted. The appellant (husband of the deceased) is aggrieved by his conviction
under Section 498A of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and the sentence imposed on him. His appeal,
against the conviction and sentence in respect of that offence, was dismissed by the impugned
judgment of the Madhya Pradesh High Court.

2. The prosecution alleged that on 23-04-2009 at 10:00 A.M., information was received from the
hospital that a woman had been brought there by her husband (the appellant) in a burnt condition.
At the request of Police Station Ashok Nagar District Ashoknagar, Guna, M.P, the medico legal
certificate (MLC) of the injured Pushpa was issued. Her dying declaration was recorded.

Reason:

3. On 23-04-2009, some burnt clothes smelling of kerosene oil, one chimani, one broken
mangalsutra smelling of kerosene oil, a match box with “Anand” containing 3-4 match sticks were
seized. A spot map too, was prepared. Statements of witnesses were recorded. The injured Pushpa
succumbed to her injuries on 10-05-2009 in the district hospital, Guna. A post-mortem was
conducted. The seized articles were sent for FSL. Police, after completing the investigation filed the
charge sheet against the Appellants for offence under Sections 302, 307, 304B, 498A/34 of Indian
Penal Code (IPC) and under Section 3 and 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act. The trial court, by order
dated 30-9-2009, framed charges under Sections 498A, 302 or in the alternative 304B of IPC

1

Rajaram vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 16 December, 2022

against the Santi Bai, whereas framed charges under Sections 498A, 304B of IPC against remaining
accused, namely the appellant, Ramdayal, Ram Singh, Kamla Bai and Susheela Bai @ Halki. The
accused pleaded not guilty. The prosecution examined 15 witnesses. Susheela Bai @ Halki had
initially appeared before the trial court and thereafter absented herself; she was declared
absconding and a perpetual warrant of arrest was issued. The trial court, by the impugned
judgments, convicted and sentenced Santi Bai for the offence under Section 302 IPC and the
appellant and other accused for the offence under Section 498A IPC.

4. The appellant and the other accused challenged their conviction and sentence. The High Court, by
the impugned order, rejected their appeals. Consequently, the appellant’s conviction and sentence
under Section 498A IPC was affirmed.

5. Mr. Divyakant Lahoti, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant Rajaram, urged that
the courts below fell into error in relying on the dying declaration by the deceased, his wife. It was
argued that where a statement is made by a person as to the cause of her death or as to any of the
circumstances of the transaction resulting in death, that statement would be admissible. It was
argued that hence, allegations made by the deceased against the accused, i.e., the appellant Rajaram,
in her dying declaration would be inadmissible as they were not of the circumstances of the
transaction which resulted in her death.

6. It was next submitted that Dashrath Raikwar (P.W.1), the deceased’s brother; Phool Chandra
(P.W.2), the deceased’s father; Mayabai (P.W.3), the deceased’s sister; and Ramcharan (P.W.4) the
deceased’s brother-in-law did not support the prosecution version about cruelty inflicted upon her.
In the circumstances, the appellant’s conviction is unsustainable.

7. Learned counsel also urged that the courts below fell into error in not giving weight to the
significant contradictions between the so-called dying declarations, Ex. P-11 and Ex. P-26. It was
submitted that the testimonies of PW-7, who recorded Ex. P-11 and PW-10, the doctor, are
inconsistent and improbable with respect to the time attributable to the document. Furthermore,
the later declaration Ex. P-26 is suspicious; it was not recorded by securing clearance from any
doctor about the conscious state of the late Pushpa. Given the fact that all material witnesses who
could have alleged cruelty, relating to dowry demands, except the appellant, were named in Ex. P-11,
the inclusion of the appellant, in the later dying declaration (Ex. P-26) is untrustworthy. The
absence of the doctor when the statement was recorded and the fact that the appellant was not
named for the first dying declaration, but in the second declaration renders both the dying
declarations unbelievable. It was submitted that the High Court, in fact, discarded the second dying
declaration.

8. It was lastly urged on behalf of the appellant that since the prosecution could not prove the charge
on the count under Section 304B, he could not have been convicted on the basis of the dying
declaration, because Section 32 of the Evidence Act renders relevant only statements relating to the
circumstances surrounding the death of the person making it and that in the present case, the only
dying declaration, Ex. P-11 nowhere mentions any act of cruelty attributable to the appellant.

2

Rajaram vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 16 December, 2022

9. On behalf of the state, it was argued by Mr. Yashraj Singh Bundela, learned counsel, that no
interference with the concurrent findings of the courts below is called for and that the appeal
involves appreciation of evidence. As there is nothing that can be termed as perverse or
unreasonable as regards these findings, which are based on the evidence led, this court should not
exercise its discretionary jurisdiction to upset or interfere with the findings.

10. It was submitted that the fact that the witnesses turned hostile may no doubt be a relevant
aspect. Yet, this has to be weighed in with other factors, the most important being the dying
declaration recorded as Ex. P-26. Counsel submitted that the first dying declaration, i.e., Ex. P-11
listed the actual perpetrators of the crime, which is those responsible for dousing the deceased with
kerosene and setting her on fire, whereas Ex. P-26 contained details of the cruelty meted out to her
since she had a disability and had a girl child. These and the people who treated her cruelly, taunted
her, and demanded dowry were all named. They included the appellant, her husband. There was
close proximity between the first and second statements. It was submitted that the absence of any
endorsement by a doctor about the mental condition, or fitness to record the statement, or that it
was recorded by a policeman cannot ipso facto result in its being ruled out.

Analysis and Findings

11. As can be gathered from the factual discussion, the incident, i.e., setting of the deceased on fire,
her subsequently being moved to the hospital, where two statements were recorded, one by the Naib
Tehsildar, certified by the doctor, and the other, a statement recorded by the police, are crucial for
consideration in this case. In the dying declaration, Ex. P-11 recorded by PW-7, after the victim was
examined by the doctor, the deceased mentioned the circumstances surrounding the Incident, i.e.,
how she was burnt:

“I was sitting in the courtyard in the morning. Fighting was taking place. My both
elder sisters-in-law (Jethani) were fighting. There was big adi, had poured kerosene
oil one from it. My sisters-in-law (Jethani) Kiran and Shanti poured kerosene oil
upon me and set me on fire from the match stick. My elder mother-in law was seeing
by standing just there. My mother-in-law as not at home. My husband was out of the
house.” Later, during the course of recording of the declaration, she also stated:

“There are two Jeth, actually they are three Jeth, there are two mothers-in-law, the
name of third Jethani is Sushila. She was not at home at that time. She used to fight
and beat up me. My younger son is 6-7 months old. All used to beat. Mother-in law
also used to beat up me. All the three Jeths used to fight with me. They called me
lame. They used to demand dowry from me.”

12. The recording of Ex. P-11 started at 10:35 and ended at 10:50. The appellant sought to make out
a contradiction between the statement of witnesses. However, this court is unpersuaded that such
contradiction is material. From the evidence, it appears that the second statement Ex. P-26 was
recorded later by PW-15, the Officer in charge. After stating the circumstances under which the
incident occurred- which were consistent with the contents of Ex. P-11, the deceased further stated:

3

Rajaram vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 16 December, 2022

“…. I started burning and cried for saving me then they both fled away by leaving me
burnt, then Dukra, my elder father-in-law by coming saved me, he died out the fire by
throwing water on me. I have burnt up completely. Full clothes on my body have
burnt. My face, breast, thigh, legs, hands have completely burnt. I am feeling very
much pain. Then my husband and neighbouring persons have brought me to Ashok
nagar for treatment. I had become unconscious at that time. My in-laws, husband,
elder brothers-in-law Beeran, Halle alias Ramsingh, Praansingh alias Ramdayal,
elder sisters-in-law Sushila, Kiranbai, Shantibai and mother in- law Kamlabai often
by taunting for dowry used to beat up me for dowry demand. They used to tease me
by calling lame. They used to demand rupees, motorcycle in dowry. These people had
beaten up me last night also which I had told to my younger sister Mayabai over
phone and that my condition is bad.”

13. Section 32 of the Evidence Act, which is material for the purposes of this appeal, reads as under:

“32. Cases in which statement of relevant fact by person who is dead or cannot be
found, etc., is relevant. -- Statements, written or verbal, of relevant facts made by a
person who is dead, or who cannot be found, or who has become incapable of giving
evidence, or whose attendance cannot be procured without an amount of delay or
expense which under the circumstances of the case appears to the Court
unreasonable, are themselves relevant facts in the following cases: --

(1) When it relates to cause of death. --When the statement is made by a person as to
the cause of his death, or as to any of the circumstances of the transaction which
resulted in his death, in cases in which the cause of that person's death comes into
question.

Such statements are relevant whether the person who made them was or was not, at the time when
they were made, under expectation of death, and whatever may be the nature of the proceeding in
which the cause of his death comes into question.

(2) Or is made in course of business.--When the statement was made by such person in the ordinary
course of business, and in particular when it consists of any entry or memorandum made by him in
books kept in the ordinary course of business, or in the discharge of professional duty; or of an
acknowledgment written or signed by him of the receipt of money, goods, securities or property of
any kind; or of a document used in commerce written or signed by him; or of the date of a letter or
other document usually dated, written or signed by him.

(3) Or against interest of maker.--When the statement is against the pecuniary or proprietary
interest of the person making it, or when, if true, it would expose him or would have exposed him to
a criminal prosecution or to a suit for damages.

(4) Or gives opinion as to public right or custom, or matters of general interest.--When the
statement gives the opinion of any such person, as to the existence of any public right or custom or

4

Rajaram vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 16 December, 2022

matter of public or general interest, of the existence of which, if it existed, he would have been likely
to be aware, and when such statement was made before any controversy as to such right, custom or
matter had arisen.

(5) Or relates to existence of relationship.--When the statement relates to the existence of any
relationship [by blood, marriage or adoption] between persons as to whose relationship [by blood,
marriage or adoption] the person making the statement had special means of knowledge, and when
the statement was made before the question in dispute was raised.

(6) Or is made in will or deed relating to family affairs. --When the statement relates to the existence
of any relationship [by blood, marriage or adoption] between persons deceased, and is made in any
will or deed relating to the affairs of the family to which any such deceased person belonged, or in
any family pedigree, or upon any tombstone, family portrait or other thing on which such
statements are usually made, and when such statement was made before the question in dispute was
raised.

(7) Or in document relating to transaction mentioned in Section 13, clause

(a).--When the statement is contained in any deed, will or other document which relates to any such
transaction as is mentioned in Section 13, clause (a). (8) Or is made by several persons and
expresses feelings relevant to matter in question.--When the statement was made by a number of
persons, and expressed feelings or impressions on their part relevant to the matter in question.”

14. This court has considered the above provision in numerous decisions and held that the weight
and utility of a dying declaration depend upon the surrounding circumstances and the credibility
which the court attaches to it, having regard to the evidence led before it. Therefore, whether it is
essential to have medical certification before the statement is recorded, who records it, etc. are all
fact dependent, and no stereotypical approach can be adopted by courts. In Laxman vs. State of
Maharashtra1 a five-member Bench of this court explained the position, in law, as follows:

“A dying declaration can be oral or in writing and in any adequate method of
communication whether by words or by signs or otherwise will suffice provided the
indication is positive and definite.

12002 (SUPP1) SCR 697 In most cases, however, such statements are made orally
before death ensues and is reduced to writing by someone like a magistrate or a
doctor or a police officer. When it is recorded, no oath is necessary nor is the
presence of a magistrate is absolutely necessary, although to assure authenticity it is
usual to call a magistrate, if available for recording the statement of a man about to
die.

There is no requirement of law that a dying declaration must necessarily be made to a
magistrate and when such statement is recorded by a magistrate there is no specified
statutory form for such recording. Consequently, what evidential value or weight has

5

Rajaram vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 16 December, 2022

to be attached to such statement necessarily depends on the facts and circumstances
of each particular case. What is essentially required is that the person who records a
dying declaration must be satisfied that the deceased was in a fit state of mind.

Where it is proved by the testimony of the magistrate that the declarant was fit to
make the statement even without examination by the doctor the declaration can be
acted upon provided the court ultimately holds the same to be voluntary and truthful.
A certification by the doctor is essentially a rule of caution and therefore the
voluntary and truthful nature of the declaration can be established otherwise.”

15. In a decision, Lakhan v. State of Madhya Pradesh,2 this court considered and indicated the
approach which may be adopted, where the evidence includes multiple dying declarations, that may
contain inconsistent facts:

“In view of the above, the law on the issue of dying declaration can be summarised to
the effect that in case the court comes to the conclusion that the dying declaration is
true and reliable, has been recorded by a person at a time when the deceased was fit
physically and mentally to make the declaration and it has not been made under any
tutoring/duress/prompting; it can be the sole basis for recording conviction. In such
an eventuality no corroboration is required. In case there are multiple dying
declarations and there are inconsistencies between them, generally, the dying
declaration recorded by the higher officer like a Magistrate can be relied upon,
provided that there is no circumstance giving rise to any suspicion about its
truthfulness. In case there are circumstances wherein the declaration had been made,
not voluntarily and even otherwise, it is not supported by the other evidence, the
court has to scrutinise the facts of an individual case very carefully and take a
decision as to which of the declarations is worth reliance.”

16. Recently, in Jagbir Singh v State of NCT Delhi,3 this court reviewed several previous decisions
involving multiple dying declarations and re-stated the law in these terms:

22010 (9) SCR 705 3 (2019) 8 SCC 779 “30. A survey of the decisions would show
that the principles can be culled out as follows:

a. Conviction of a person can be made solely on the basis of a dying declaration which
inspires confidence of the court;

b. If there is nothing suspicious about the declaration, no corroboration may be
necessary;

c. No doubt, the court must be satisfied that there is no tutoring or prompting; d. The
court must also analyse and come to the conclusion that imagination of the deceased
was not at play in making the declaration. In this regard, the court must look to the
entirety of the language of the dying declaration; e. Considering material before it,

6

Rajaram vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 16 December, 2022

both in the form of oral and documentary evidence, the court must be satisfied that
the version is compatible with the reality and the truth as can be gleaned from the
facts established; f. However, there may be cases where there are more than one
dying declaration. If there are more than one dying declaration, the dying
declarations may entirely agree with one another. There may be dying declarations
where inconsistencies between the declarations emerge. The extent of the
inconsistencies would then have to be considered by the court. The inconsistencies
may turn out to be reconciliable.

g. In such cases, where the inconsistencies go to some matter of detail or description
but is incriminatory in nature as far as the Accused is concerned, the court would
look to the material on record to conclude as to which dying declaration is to be relied
on unless it be shown that they are unreliable; h. The third category of cases is that
where there are more than one dying declaration and inconsistencies between the
declarations are absolute and the dying declarations are irreconcilable being
repugnant to one another. In a dying declaration, the Accused may not be blamed at
all and the cause of death may be placed at the doorstep of an unfortunate accident.
This may be followed up by another dying declaration which is diametrically opposed
to the first dying declaration. In fact, in that scenario, it may not be a question of an
inconsistent dying declaration but a dying declaration which is completely opposed to
the dying declaration which is given earlier. There may be more than two.” i. In the
third scenario, what is the duty of the court? Should the court, without looking into
anything else, conclude that in view of complete inconsistency, the second or the
third dying declaration which is relied on by the prosecution is demolished by the
earlier dying declaration or dying declarations or is it the duty of the court to
carefully attend to not only the dying declarations but examine the rest of the
materials in the form of evidence placed before the court and still conclude that the
incriminatory dying declaration is capable of being relied upon?”

17. In light of the above principles, it is necessary to consider the evidentiary value of the dying
declaration, which was relied on by the prosecution to convict the appellant.

18. The trial court had relied upon the circumstances such as the presence of kerosene, the nature of
burn injuries on the deceased, the articles such as match box which smelt of kerosene, and a broken
mangalsutra, apart from two dying declarations (Ex. P-11 and Ex. P-26). The testimonies of the
deceased’s relatives were not of much consequence as none of them supported the prosecution. The
High Court, in its impugned judgment, accepted and relied upon the dying declaration recorded by
PW-7 (Ex. P-11), Naib Tehsildar Yasha Rai. However, the High Court held that the second dying
declaration recorded by the Officer-in-Charge, PW-15 – in the form of a statement, could not be
relied upon. The court was of the opinion that even though PW-15 was not required to obtain fitness
certificate from the doctor, yet in view of the last line in the dying statement that her condition was
bad, it was unsafe to rely on such a police statement. The High Court’s findings on this aspect are as
follows:

7

Rajaram vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 16 December, 2022

“39. Before considering the submissions made by the Counsel for the Appellants, this
Court would like to consider as to whether the police statement of the injured
Pushpa, Ex. P.26 is reliable or not?

40. As already pointed out, S.K. Chaturvedi (P.W. 15), who had recorded Police
Statement of injured Pushpa, was not examined after the re-arrest of Appellant
Susheela Bai @ Halki, and as evidence of S.K. Chaturvedi (P.W.15) was recorded in
absence of Susheela Bai @ Halki, therefore, his evidence cannot be read either in
favor or against the Appellant Susheela Bai @ Halki.

Thus, there is only one dying declaration, Ex. P.11 against the Appellant Susheela Bai @ Halki.

41. S.K. Chaturvedi (P.W.15) has stated that he had recorded the statements of the witnesses
including that of injured/deceased Pushpa. If the police statement of injured/deceased Pushpa is
considered then at the end of the statement, it is mentioned that her condition is very bad.
Therefore, it is not clear as to whether the injured/deceased Pushpa was in a fit state of mind or not.
Even otherwise, this witness has not clarified that on what date he had recorded the statement of
injured/deceased Pushpa. It is true that while recording the police statement under Section 161 of
Cr.P.C., this witness was not required to obtain the fitness certificate from the Doctor, but in view of
the last line of her statement, that " her condition is very bad", this Court is of the considered
opinion, that it would not be safe to rely on the Police Statement of the injured/deceased Pushpa,
Ex. P.26.

42. Accordingly, the Police Statement of the injured/deceased Pushpa Bai, Ex. P.26 is hereby
disbelieved.”

19. The principles enunciated by the decision of this court, especially Laxman and the decisions
dealing with multiple dying declarations, adduced in the course of a criminal trial, especially where
the deceased had been a victim of burns and had succumbed to burn injuries and had prior to death
made more than one dying declaration have indicated that test of credibility having regard to the
overall facts on record, has to be adopted.

20. This court notices that the present is a case where the second dying declaration has been
rejected completely by the High Court. In these circumstances, the cumulative weight of evidence
relied upon by the High Court needs to be examined to ascertain whether the appellant is guilty of
the offence he stands convicted for, i.e., Section 498A IPC. Ex. P-26, the second dying declaration is
the only piece of evidence which names the appellant as one of the perpetrators of cruelty on the
deceased along with the other accused. Both the courts below have noticed that in Ex. P-11, the first
dying declaration, the appellant has not been named; rather he along with his father took the
deceased in a critically injured state to the hospital. Undoubtedly, the focus of the first dying
declaration is only upon the incident involving pouring of kerosene and setting the deceased on fire.
The second dying declaration, Ex. P-26 alone elaborates acts of cruelty. That is the only piece of
incriminating evidence against the accused. As far as the recovery of articles and the smell of
kerosene in the report considered by the court are concerned, they are circumstances relating to the

8

Rajaram vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 16 December, 2022

incident of setting the deceased on fire. They do not further the prosecution’s case under Section
498A as against the appellant.

21. Having regard to the above circumstances, especially the fact that the only evidence against the
appellant, i.e., Ex. P-26 was discredited by the High Court, there is no other material to sustain his
conviction. For these reasons, the impugned judgment and the appellant’s conviction and sentence
are hereby set aside. . The appeal is allowed but without any order as to costs.

.............................................J. [S. RAVINDRA BHAT] .............................................J. [SUDHANSHU
DHULIA] New Delhi, December 16, 2022.

9