Rajratan Babulal Agarwal vs Solartex India Pvt. Ltd. on 13 October, 2022

Rajratan Babulal Agarwal vs Solartex India Pvt. Ltd. on 13
October, 2022

Author: K. M. Joseph

Bench: Hrishikesh Roy, K.M. Joseph

‘REPORTABLE’

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2199 OF 2021

RAJRATAN BABULAL AGARWAL                                             ...APPELLANT(S)

VERSUS

SOLARTEX INDIA PVT. LTD. & ORS.                                      ...RESPONDENT(S)

JUDGMENT

K. M. JOSEPH, J.

1. By the impugned order, the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as
‘NCLAT’ for brevity) has dismissed the appeal filed by the appellant challenging the order passed by
the National Company Law Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as ‘NCLT’ for brevity) dated
28.05.2020. By the said order, the NCLT admitted an application filed by the first respondent under
Section 9 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (hereinafter referred to as ‘IBC’) Date:
2022.10.13 15:20:37 IST Reason:

against the second respondent. The third respondent was appointed as the Interim
Resolution Professional and a moratorium followed. The appellant is an ex-director
of the second respondent.

2. The question which falls for decision is whether the appellant has raised a dispute which can be
described as ‘a pre-existing dispute’ as understood by this Court in the decision in Mobilox
Innovations Private Limited v. Kirusa Software Private Limited1. NCLT has rejected the version of
the appellant that there exists a pre-existing dispute which stands affirmed by the NCLAT.

3. The facts necessary for resolution of the lis can be stated as follows:

1

Rajratan Babulal Agarwal vs Solartex India Pvt. Ltd. on 13 October, 2022

On 24.09.2016, there were two High Seas Sale Agreements. One was between
respondent No. 2 and one Rawalwasia Textile Industries Private Limited. The other
High Seas Sale agreement was between the same seller and one company, the name
of which is shortened as STDPL.

4. STDPL, according to the appellant, is a sister concern of the second respondent. This
arrangement, which 1 (2018) 1 SCC 353 was essentially made on the representation of one Mr.
Sameer Agrawal, was not honoured. Mr. Sameer Agrawal offered to supply 500 Metric Tonnes of
coal each to the second respondent and its sister concern through the first respondent. The purchase
order in respect of STDPL was dated 11.10.2016. The purchase order in respect of second respondent
is dated 27.10.2016. The purchase order contemplated Gross Calorific Value of 5400. The total
moisture content was put as less than 40% +/- 2%. Out of 500 Metric Tonnes, the second
respondent was supplied 412 Metric Tonnes. The supply began from 28.10.2016 and ended on
02.11.2016. According to the appellant, the coal was to be used in boilers which manufactures starch
and allied products. The coal is placed over the boilers in silos which are nearly 15 feet in height and
hold upwards of 200 metric tonnes of coal at once. The appellant lays stress on certain lab reports of
tests, which were actually conducted allegedly at its own labs indicating that the quality of coal did
not conform to what was promised and what was more, allegedly it led to the malfunctioning of the
boiler. On 30.10.2016, an e-mail was sent to the first respondent. It reads as follows:

“Dear sir, With reference to 5400 gcv imp coal supply to (stdpl) dhule and (Hdpl)
jammer, following issues are to be shared.

For dhule plant: high moisture and powder percentage is to be found, already discussed to you.

For jammer plant: recently supply include high level of powder percentage and moisture too. Kindly
consider the issues and please make us assure about quality of coal should not be down the level.
Pics attached for your reference.” Hdpl referred to in the communication is the second respondent.

5. The next correspondence to notice is e-mail dated 03.11.2016. It is addressed to the first
respondent by the second respondent. It reads as follows:

“M/s. Sortex India Pvt. Ltd.

105, Raghuvir Textile Mall, Aai Mata Chowk, Dumbhal Parvat Patiya, SURAT .
395010 Kind Attn: Mr. Samirji Sub: Inferior/poor quality of Indonesian Coal.

Dear Sir, We have placed an order for 500 MT Indonesian Coal to you vide our P.O.
No. HDPL/2016-17/586 dated 27.10.2016 for 5400 GCV and Moisture condition is
38-40%. But, on receiving the coal we found that GCV less than 4000 and size of coal
is 0mm 50% and maximum size is 5mm to 6 mm only and moisture is 48-50%. It
seems if we receive such type of coal we are facing the cleaning problem of boiler and
due to that nozzle bent and boiler become damaged. This will occur heavy production
losses. Hence, please stop delivery of the material/coal and advise us what to do this

2

Rajratan Babulal Agarwal vs Solartex India Pvt. Ltd. on 13 October, 2022

loss. If any more losses occurred due to poor/inferior quality of coal, we may debit
the same amount in your account, which may please be noted.

Thanking you, Yours faithfully, For Honest Derivativeds Pvt. Ltd.

Ravi Jajodia Vice President (Operation)”

6. The first respondent responded to the communication dated 03.11.2016 by its
email dated 04.11.2016. It reads as follows:

“Dear Sir, It is not possible that the coal is off 4000 gcv, secondly from port it is
possible that moisture can go upto 42 percent but not above that also because at port
they are putting water on the coal as per GPCB guidelines of pollution.

So please take a note regarding this. We have immediately stopped the delivery, but
please inform your transporter.

Regards, Samir Agarwal Rawalwasia Group 104, Raghuvir Textile Mall, Bh. DR
world, 1 mata chock Poona Khumbhariya Road, Surat-India-395010 M -
+91-9824102989, +91-9374538264 O - +91-261-2705000”

7. Pursuant to the same, further supply was stopped.

The first respondent, on 03.02.2018 issued the requisite notice under the IBC and raised a claim for
Rs.1573279 + 30 per cent interest totaling to Rs. 21,57,700.38. The second respondent furnished a
reply on 17.02.2018. Under the reply, it demanded a total amount of Rs.4.44 crores consequent on
the coal not being of the quality promised. Respondent No. 2 also has filed two civil suits, one
against Rawalwasia Textile Industries Private Limited and the other, against the first respondent
claiming damages. It is pointed out that court fee of Rs. 3 lakhs was deposited. After exchange of the
notices as mentioned in the IBC, an application under Section 9 was filed on 30.04.2018 by
respondent No. 1 against respondent No. 2. A reply was filed by respondent No. 2 pointing out that
there was a pre-existing dispute and seeking dismissal of the application under Section 9. The
judgment was reserved on 20.11.2019. The application came to be admitted as already noted by the
order passed on 28.05.2020. The constitution of Committee was stayed by the NCLAT. With the
filing of the appeal against the order passed by the NCLAT an order of status quo was passed.

8. We have heard Mr. Kavin Gulati, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant. We
further heard Shri Manoj Harit, learned Counsel appearing on behalf of respondent No. 1. We also
have heard Mr. Nakul Dewan, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the IRP.

9. Shri Kavin Gulati, learned Senior Counsel would draw our attention to the following paragraph in
the impugned order:

3

Rajratan Babulal Agarwal vs Solartex India Pvt. Ltd. on 13 October, 2022

“19. With the above admission in the affidavit, it is apparent that on 30.10.2016,
STDPL, a sister concern of the Corporate Debtor has sent an e-mail to Group Concern
of the Operational Creditor in regard to the Purchase Order dated 11.01.2016
whereas, the present claim is in regard to the Purchase Order dated 27.10.2016. It is
also to be seen that there is no reference of this e-mail in the reply to the statutory
notice. In the said e-mail it is not mentioned that it is in relation to the Purchase
Order dated 27.10.2016. In the subsequent e-mail dated 03.11.2016, there is no
reference to the earlier e-mail dated 30.10.2016. In such circumstances, we are of the
view that the e-

mail dated 30.10.2016 is not related to the transaction in question.“

10. He would complain that NCLAT committed a clear mistake. The error lies in proceeding on the
basis that in the email dated 30.10.2016 sent by STDPL – sister concern of the corporate debtor,
there is mention only of purchase order dated 27.10.2016. It is pointed out with reference to the
email that the said email indeed contains reference to the supply of coal to HDPL-the second
respondent-the corporate debtor in this case. Still further he drew our attention to para 22. Para 22
reads as follows:

“Upon a bare reading of e-mail dated 03.11.2016, it is clear that the Corporate Debtor
stated that the supplied coal is not as per specification and due to that nozzle bent
and boiler has become damages which would led to heavy production losses. Hence,
it was requested that delivery of the coal be stopped. It is also mentioned that if more
losses occurred due to poor/inferior quality of coal they may debit the same amount
in the account of the Operational Creditor. The Operation Creditor has sent a reply
through e-mail dated 04.11.2016 and immediately stopped the delivery of coal.
Thereafter, Corporate Debtor has neither issued any debit note nor has returned the
supplied coal but consumed the same. It means that after receiving the e-mail dated
04.11.2016 the Corporate Debtor was satisfied and kept quiet for about 15 months. It
is only when they received a statutory notice that they filed a Civil Suit against the
Operational Creditor.”

11. It is on the basis of the said discussion that the NCLAT found that there was no dispute in regard
to the transaction in question and that it was to avoid the liability that corporate debtor through its
reply to the notice tried to impress that there was a pre-existing dispute. He next drew our attention
to the purchase order.

12. He would point out therefrom that under the terms and conditions with statutory details, Note 1
provided that a certificate of analysis is required along with the material.

13. He drew our attention to Section 12 of the Sales of Goods Act, 1930 (hereinafter referred to as
‘Act’). He would contend that under the said provision in a contract of sale of goods, a term may be a
condition or a warranty. He would proceed on the basis that this case involves the appellant having
elected to treat the condition relating to the quality of the goods as a warranty. The goods in

4

question are raw materials. The goods were supplied in between 28.10.2016 to 03.11.2016.

Rajratan Babulal Agarwal vs Solartex India Pvt. Ltd. on 13 October, 2022

14. He drew our attention to Section 41 of the Act and contended that a buyer must have the right to
examine the goods. He next drew our attention to Section 42 of the Act.

15. Immediately upon discovery of the fact that the goods delivered were not in conformity with the
terms of the purchase order, the appellant had registered its protest as it were on 30.10.2016. This
was again taken up on 03.11.2016 and the communication which is addressed by the first
respondent on 04.11.2016 also would fortify appellant’s case that the complaint of the appellant was
not a spurious one. The first respondent is found making an attempt at justifying the moisture
content of coal not being in terms of the purchase order. He would contend that Section 59 of the
Act declares the remedies open to a buyer who has elected to treat the breach of a condition as a
warranty and the said provision contemplates a suit for damages and what is more, even setting up
the extinction of the price.

16. He would point out that suits were filed within the period of limitation even if it may be that the
filing of the suits may strictly not be a circumstance which is relevant in the scheme of the IBC.
Nonetheless, it goes a long way to establish the case of the appellant that there was a dispute which
was pre-existing and the institution of the suits following which in fact, a huge amount of Rs. 3 lakhs
was paid as court fees would only point to the dispute not being a spurious adventure. He would also
point out with reference to what happened in the NCLT that contrary to the mandate of Rule 150 of
the NCLT Rules, 2016 which sets a time limit of 30 days from final hearing to pronounce the order,
that the said rule being observed in its breach has resulted in patent mistakes creeping into the
order and non-advertence to the vital issues which were agitated before the Tribunal.

17. Shri Manoj Harit, learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the first respondent, on the other
hand, would point out that the only materials that existed prior to the date of the notice under the
IBC even as per the case of the appellant are the three emails. The emails are dated 30.10.2016,
03.11.2016 and 04.11.2016. He would contend that the documents do not show that there is a
dispute. Admittedly, there is no suit or arbitration proceeding initiated as contemplated for the
purpose of Section 9 of the IBC. Here is a case where the second respondent consumed the goods
supplied even after the alleged deficiency continued to exist. The alleged variations do not constitute
a dispute. The conduct of the second respondent would show that the claim of dispute is a sham. It
is contended that in the email dated 03.11.2016, it is stated that in the event of any further damage,
the same would be debited in the account of the first respondent. This circumstance is seized upon
to contend that no damage had occurred till 03.11.2016 which was sufficiently serious to warrant a
debit to the account of the first respondent. Till 03.11.2016, the appellant continued to consume the
coal. In this regard, reference is placed on the words ‘any more damage’. No debit note was raised
after 03.11.2016. This shows there was no further damage.

18. Even after the email dated 03.11.2016, the appellant continued to use the coal. The argument
based on a period of 3 years being available to file a suit close to Rs. 4 crores as against the amount
of approximately Rs.15 lakhs which is the subject matter of the application under Section 9 is sought
to be brushed aside as indicative of the dispute not being a genuine one. If the claim was genuine, it

5

Rajratan Babulal Agarwal vs Solartex India Pvt. Ltd. on 13 October, 2022

would have been reflected in its book of accounts. The claim that the suit can be filed within the
period of limitation does not fit in with the scheme of Section 9 of the IBC.

19. The purchase order contemplated payment within 7 days of delivery. There is no denial of
liability to pay before 12.11.2016 which is the last day by which the account became payable. The
analysis reports relied on by the appellant are sought to be painted as concoctions. Rule 150 of the
NCLT Rules, it is pointed out is only directory and not mandatory.

20. Learned Counsel would contend that the emails relied upon by the appellant must not be seen as
anything more than an effort by the buyer to wriggle out of its obligation to make payment for goods
which were received. He would further contend that the purchase order contemplated production of
the certificate of analysis. Therefore, when the certificate of analysis was present, it is inconceivable
how the appellant without disputing the same could claim that the goods delivered fell short of the
standards agreed to between the parties. As regards the claim by the appellant that the goods were
consumed in large lots (the case of the appellant is that the total quantity delivered was 412 metric
tonnes out of the total quantum agreed of 500 metric tonnes and that the manufacturing process is
such wherein at one go large quantity can be put into the boiler) it is contended that it is not correct.
He would further submit that the boilers would contain specific material indicating the total amount
of raw materials which are put into it. In this regard, he would draw our attention to the findings of
this Court in Mobilox Innovations Private Limited (supra) that a dispute which is raised must be
supported with evidence. He would contend that there is no evidence which can be considered
worthwhile so as to not treat the dispute as spurious.

21. The third respondent is the Interim Resolution Professional. He is represented before us by Shri
Nakul Dewan, learned Senior Counsel. He would submit that he is making submissions on behalf of
the corporate debtor. After referring to the facts, he would contend that the task cut out for the
NCLT is not a mechanical one. While it is not required to establish the existence of a credible
dispute, it is duty bound to ascertain whether there is a credible existence of a dispute. The
questions which would arise, according to him, are, whether the consumption of the coal by the
corporate debtor constituted acceptance of the goods and obliged it to make payment. The argument
is to be based on a prima facie test. He would further pose the question as to whether the emails
dated 30.10.2016 and 03.11.2016 evidenced or any other contemporaneous document evidenced
deficiency in the quality of coal supplied or the coal resulted in damage to the corporate debtor. He
also would draw our attention to Sections 41 and 42 of the Act. He would point out that there is a
purchase order which sets out a guarantee. This constituted the reservation of the right to reject the
material on the ground. There is no evidence, it is pointed out, that the right to reject was exercised
when delivery was effected of 412 Metric Tonnes of the coal. The corporate debtor has accepted and
consumed the delivered coal. As far as Rule 150 of the NCLT Rules is concerned, it is described as a
directory provision. The consequence of non-compliance is not set out. The principle laid down by
this Court in Balwant Singh and others v. Anand Kumar Sharma and others2 is enlisted in support
to contend that the results urged by the appellant cannot follow. He would also submit that the
perusal of the accounts does not establish the case that a loss ensued to the corporate debtor, in that,
accounts do not show that the coal in question was not used.

6

Rajratan Babulal Agarwal vs Solartex India Pvt. Ltd. on 13 October, 2022

22. In response, Shri Kavin Gulati, learned Senior Counsel would invite the Court to undertake a
more exhaustive survey of the Act. He drew our attention to Section 13 besides Section 63 and the
substance of his argument is as follows:

He would contend that the law provides that if the buyer treats the contravention of a
condition as a violation of a warranty, the rights declared in Section 2 2003 (3) SCC
433 59 come into play. The right includes a right to sue not merely for damages but
also to extinguish even the price of the goods. He would submit that proceeding on
the basis that the appellant has accepted the goods, in view of Section 42 of the 1930
Act, it would not be fatal to the appellant. He would contend that Section 13 (2)
would then apply in the facts. In other words, this is a case where, out of 500 Metric
Tonnes, the Court can proceed on the basis that there was a delivery of 412 Metric
Tonnes of coal and the same was consumed by the corporate debtor. The act of
consumption may constitute acceptance of the goods within the meaning of Section
42. But the mere acceptance of the goods within the meaning of Section 41 would not
deprive the buyer of the right which follows treating a condition as a warranty and
seeking remedies as provided in Section 59 of the Act. Such remedies include the
relief of the extinction of the price of the goods. The suit filed within the period of
limitation cannot be brushed aside for the mere reason that it was not filed
immediately or rather that the suit was not pending within the contemplation of
Section 9 of the IBC. He would, in fact, point out that the corporate debtor was
having a turnover of about Rs.314 crores in the previous year. He would ask the Court
to bear in mind how unreasonable it would be to still postulate that for an amount of
about Rs. 15 lakhs, a corporate body would risk its goodwill and very existence, unless
the dispute projected was one which was genuine. He would further contend that all
of these aspects must be considered in light of the limited scrutiny of the question as
to whether there is a dispute. He would point out that a conspectus of the history of
legislation as unravelled by this Court in Mobilox Innovations Private Limited
(supra), would show the following:

Under Section 433 of the Companies Act, 1956, while a dispute could be raised to
resist an order of winding up, the Court had to consider whether the dispute was a
bona fide one. The legislature was perfectly aware of the law in this regard. The law
does not require the existence of a bona fide dispute to defend an application under
Section 9 of the IBC. All that is required is that the dispute must not be got up and
spurious. In this regard, he drew our attention to the exposition of the law in Mobilox
Innovations Private Limited (supra).

ANALYSIS : THE ACT

23. We may notice the relevant provisions of the Act. Sections 4 deals with sale and agreement to
sell:

7

Rajratan Babulal Agarwal vs Solartex India Pvt. Ltd. on 13 October, 2022

“4. Sale and agreement to sell.— (1) A contract of sale of goods is a contract whereby
the seller transfers or agrees to transfer the property in goods to the buyer for a price.
There may be a contract of sale between one part-owner and another.

xxx xxx xxx (3) Where under a contract of sale the property in the goods is
transferred from the seller to the buyer, the contract is called a sale, but where the
transfer of the property in the goods is to take place at a future time or subject to
some condition thereafter to be fulfilled, the contract is called an agreement to sell.

(4) An agreement to sell becomes a sale when the time elapses or the conditions are
fulfilled subject to which the property in the goods is to be transferred.” Thus, till the
property passes, there is no sale. Property has been defined in Section 2(11) as the
general property in goods, and not merely a special property.

24. Section 12 deals with Condition and warranty.

“12. Condition          and warranty.   — (1) A
stipulation in         a contract of    sale with

reference to goods which are the subject thereof may be a condition or a warranty. (2) A condition is
a stipulation essential to the main purpose of the contract, the breach of which gives rise to a right to
treat the contract as repudiated.

(3) A warranty is a stipulation collateral to the main purpose of the contract, the breach of which
gives rise to a claim for damages but not to a right to reject the goods and treat the contract as
repudiated.

(4) Whether a stipulation in a contract of sale is a condition or a warranty depends in each case on
the construction of the contract. A stipulation may be a condition, though called a warranty in the
contract.”

25. Section 13 deals with when a condition is to be treated as a warranty.

“13. When condition to be treated as warranty. — (1) Where a contract of sale is subject to any
condition to be fulfilled by the seller, the buyer may waive the condition or elect to treat the breach
of the condition as a breach of warranty and not as a ground for treating the contract as repudiated.

(2) Where a contract of sale is not severable and the buyer has accepted the goods or part thereof, 1
*** the breach of any condition to be fulfilled by the seller can only be treated as a breach of
warranty and not as a ground for rejecting the goods and treating the contract as repudiated, unless
there is a term of the contract, express or implied, to that effect.

8

Rajratan Babulal Agarwal vs Solartex India Pvt. Ltd. on 13 October, 2022

(3) Nothing in this section shall affect the case of any condition or warranty fulfilment of which is
excused by law by reason of impossibility or otherwise.”

26. Section 14 provides for certain implied warranties and conditions and it reads as follows:

14. Implied undertaking as to title, etc.—In a contract of sale, unless the
circumstances of the contract are such as to show a different intention, there is—

(a) an implied condition on the part of the seller that, in the case of a sale, he has a
right to sell the goods and that, in the case of an agreement to sell, he will have a right
to sell the goods at the time when the property is to pass;

(b) an implied warranty that the buyer shall have and enjoy quiet possession of the goods;

(c) an implied warranty that the goods shall be free from any charge or encumbrance in favour of
any third party not declared or known to the buyer before or at the time when the contract is made.

27. Section 15, inter alia, provides for an implied condition in a sale of goods by description that the
goods must conform with the description.

28. Section 16 is also relied upon by the appellant and it reads as follows: -

“16. Implied conditions as to quality or fitness.—Subject to the provisions of this Act
and of any other law for the time being in force, there is no implied warranty or
condition as to the quality or fitness for any particular purpose of goods supplied
under a contract of sale, except as follows:— (1) Where the buyer, expressly or by
implication, makes known to the seller the particular purpose for which the goods are
required, so as to show that the buyer relies on the seller’s skill or judgment, and the
goods are of a description which it is in the course of the seller’s business to supply
(whether he is the manufacturer or producer or not), there is an implied condition
that the goods shall be reasonably fit for such purpose: Provided that, in the case of a
contract for the sale of a specified article under its patent or other trade name, there
is no implied condition as to its fitness for any particular purpose.

(2) Where goods are bought by description from a seller who deals in goods of that
description (whether he is the manufacturer or producer or not), there is an implied
condition that the goods shall be of merchantable quality: Provided that, if the buyer
has examined the goods, there shall be no implied condition as regards defects which
such examination ought to have revealed. (3) An implied warranty or condition as to
quality or fitness for a particular purpose may be annexed by the usage of trade. (4)
An express warranty or condition does not negative a warranty or condition implied
by this Act unless inconsistent therewith.”

9

Rajratan Babulal Agarwal vs Solartex India Pvt. Ltd. on 13 October, 2022

29. Section 17 provides for implied condition in the case of a sale by sample. Thus, it can be seen
that the Act declares or provides for various implied conditions and warranties.

30. We may also notice Section 19, which deals with the aspect of passing of property in a contract of
sale of goods.

“19. Property passes when intended to pass. — (1) Where there is a contract for the sale of specific or
ascertained goods the property in them is transferred to the buyer at such time as the parties to the
contract intend it to he transferred.

(2) For the purpose of ascertaining the intention of the parties regard shall be had to the terms of
the contract, the conduct of the parties and the circumstances of the case. (3) Unless a different
intention appears, the rules contained in sections 20 to 24 are rules for ascertaining the intention of
the parties as to the time at which the property in the goods is to pass to the buyer.”

31. Chapter IV deals with performance of the contract. Under Section 31, it is the duty of the seller to
deliver the goods and of the buyer to accept and to pay for them in accordance with the terms of the
contract of sale. Section 32 reads as follows: -

“32. Payment and delivery are concurrent conditions. — Unless otherwise agreed,
delivery of the goods and payment of the price are concurrent conditions, that is to
say, the seller shall be ready and willing to give possession of the goods to the buyer
in exchange for the price, and the buyer shall be ready and willing to pay the price in
exchange for possession of the goods.”

32. It is necessary to notice Section 41 and still further Section 42.

“41. Buyer’s right of examining the goods. — (1) Where goods are delivered to the buyer which he
has not previously examined, he is not deemed to have accepted them unless and until he has had a
reasonable opportunity of examining them for the purpose of ascertaining whether they are in
conformity with the contract.

(2) Unless otherwise agreed, when the seller tender’s delivery of goods to the buyer, he is bound, on
request, to afford the buyer a reasonable opportunity of examining the goods for the purpose of
ascertaining whether they are in conformity with the contract.” “42. Acceptance. —The buyer is
deemed to have accepted the goods when he intimates to the seller that he has accepted them, or
when the goods have been delivered to him and he does any act in relation to them which is
inconsistent with the ownership of the seller, or when, after the lapse of a reasonable time, he
retains the goods without intimating to the seller that he has rejected them.”

33. It is apposite also to look into Section 43.

“43. Buyer not bound to return rejected goods. — Unless otherwise agreed, where goods are
delivered to the buyer and he refuses to accept them, having the right so to do, he is not bound to

10

Rajratan Babulal Agarwal vs Solartex India Pvt. Ltd. on 13 October, 2022

return them to the seller, but it is sufficient if he intimates to the seller that he refuses to accept
them.”

34. Chapter V deals with the rights of the unpaid seller against the goods. Apart from exercising the
right of lien thereunder, Section 54(2), inter alia, entitles the unpaid seller in the circumstances
mentioned therein to resell the goods. Chapter VI deals with suits for breach of the contract. Section
55 reads as follows:

“55. Suit for price. — (1) Where under a contract of sale the property in the goods has
passed to the buyer and the buyer wrongfully neglects or refuses to pay for the goods
according to the terms of the contract, the seller may sue him for the price of the
goods. (2) Where under a contract of sale the price is payable on a day certain
irrespective of delivery and the buyer wrongfully neglects or refuses to pay such price,
the seller may sue him for the price although the property in the goods has not passed
and the goods have not been appropriated to the contract.”

35. It may also be necessary to notice Section 59, which reads as follows: -

“59. Remedy for breach of warranty. — (1) Where there is a breach of warranty by the
seller, or where the buyer elects or is compelled to treat any breach of a condition on
the part of the seller as a breach of warranty, the buyer is not by reason only of such
breach of warranty entitled to reject the goods; but he may— (a) set up against the
seller the breach of warranty in diminution or extinction of the price; or (b) sue the
seller for damages for breach of warranty. (2) The fact that a buyer has set up a
breach of warranty in diminution or extinction of the price does not prevent him
from suing for the same breach of warranty if he has suffered further damage.”

36. An analysis of the provisions of the Act would reveal the following in a contract of sale of goods.
A stipulation in regard to goods can be a condition or a warranty. A condition is put on a higher
pedestal than a warranty. A condition is treated as essential to the main purpose of the contract. The
breach of a condition gives rise to the right with the party to treat the contract as repudiated. In the
case of the breach of a warranty which is a stipulation in a contract collateral to the main purpose of
the contract, the party (buyer) cannot reject the goods. He cannot repudiate the contract. Under
Section 12(3), on the breach of the warranty, the buyer can sue for damages. As to whether a
stipulation is a warranty or a condition is a matter to be decided on the facts of each case. The
nomenclature ‘warranty’ cannot conclude the question as to whether in fact it is a ‘condition’. Even
though the breach of a condition entitles the buyer to repudiate the contract it is open to the buyer
to treat the breach of the condition as a breach of warranty. [See Section 13 (1)]. Section 13 (2) then
provides that the breach of any condition by the seller can be treated as only a breach of warranty
and not a ground for repudiating the contract or rejecting the goods. This is in situations where the
contract is not severable. Still further, for Section 13(2) to apply, the buyer must have accepted all or
even part of the goods. This however is again made subject to an express or implied contract
providing otherwise. Section 13(2) of the Act suffered an amendment by the Amending Act 33 of
1963. By the said amendment, the words “or where the contract is for specific goods the property in

11

Rajratan Babulal Agarwal vs Solartex India Pvt. Ltd. on 13 October, 2022

which has passed to the buyer” came to be omitted. Going by the objects and reasons of the
Amending Act, it is found that the said words gave rise to some difficulty. It is, inter alia, stated in
the objects and reasons that under Section 20 of the Act, property in specific goods in a deliverable
state passes to the buyer when the contract is made. When there is a contract for sale of specific
goods by sample, Section 17(2) of the Act provides for an implied condition that the bulk should
correspond to the sample in quality. It is further indicated in the objects and reasons that when in
such a case property is delivered subsequently which does not correspond with the sample, Section
13(2) obliged the buyer to treat the implied condition under Section 17(2) as a warranty, thus,
robbing the buyer of the right to reject the goods and entitling him to claim damages only. The Law
Commission also made a recommendation that in the case of sale of specific goods by sample it
should be taken out of Section 13(2). Thus, the omission in Section 13(2) by the Amending Act 33 of
1963 confines the compelled treatment of a breach of a condition as a breach of a warranty to only
cases where the contract is not severable and the buyer has accepted the goods or part thereof. No
doubt, all of this is subject to a contract either expressly or impliedly otherwise.

37. Section 14 (a) of the Act provides for an implied condition, in the absence of circumstances
indicating a different intention that the seller has a right to sell the goods. This is in a sale. In the
case of the agreement to sell as would be the case of future goods, Section 14

(a) also provides that there is an implied condition that the seller ‘will have’ the right to sell the
goods when the property is to pass. Section 14 (b) declares the existence of an implied warranty that
the buyer will have and enjoy the right of quiet possession of the goods. Section 14 (c) provides for
an implied warranty that the goods shall be free from any charge or encumbrance in favour of a
third party not declared or known to the buyer before or at the time of the contract.

38. Section 15 creates an implied condition in the case of a sale by description interalia that the
goods must correspond with the description. We may notice the following statements relating to
‘Sale of Specific Goods by Description’ and ‘Conditions as to Quality’ in The Sale of Goods Act by
Pollock and Mulla [11th Edition]:

“Sale of Specific Goods by Description It will be observed that the section applies
where there is a “contract for the sale of goods by description”, that is to say where
the goods are described by the contract. This usually applies to a contract for the sale
of unascertained or future goods, but it may apply to the sale of specific goods also, if
the buyer contracts in reliance on that description. This may well occur in a case
where the buyer has never seen the goods and may also occur where he has seen
them, but in the latter case it is more difficult for the buyer to show that the sale was
a sale by description, for usually the contract for the sale of a specific article is a
contract for the article as it is and any description of it at the most amounts to a
warranty, for the breach of which the buyer can only recover damages. Occasionally,
where goods are sold over the counter to a customer who asks for the goods by their
name, the sale may be a sale by description, but in general a customer who buys
goods in a shop across the counter is not buying by description. It would appear that
the only sales not by description are sales of specific goods as such. “Specific goods

12

Rajratan Babulal Agarwal vs Solartex India Pvt. Ltd. on 13 October, 2022

may be sold as such when they are sold without any description, express or implied;
or where any statement made about them is not essential to their identity; or where
though the goods are described, the description is not relied upon, as where the buyer
buys the goods such as they are”.

Whether statements with reference to the goods amount to a description of them
depends upon the terms of the contract, but in mercantile contracts they will usually
amount to a part of the description.” “Conditions as to Quality This section, it will be
observed, deals only with the condition that the goods should correspond with the
description. In the older cases stipulations, express or implied, as to the quality of the
goods were treated as part of their description: the Act, however, deals with them as
separate conditions in section 16(2) and section 17.”

39. Section 16 declares that subject to the other provisions of the Act and of any other law in force,
there can be no implied warranty or condition as regards the quality or the fitness of the goods for
any particular purpose. This is subject to two exceptions. The exception in Section 16 (1) applies
when the buyer expressly or by implication reveals to the seller, the particular purpose for which the
goods are required. Intimation of this information to the seller brings in the belief that the buyer
relies on the seller’s skill or judgement. Furthermore, the goods must be of the description which
must be in the course of the seller’s business to supply. In such a situation there is an implied
condition that the goods are to be reasonably fit for the stated/particular purposes. An implied
warranty or condition regarding the quality or fitness of the particular purpose can be established by
the trade practice or usage of trade. However, if specified goods are sold under trade name or patent
name, there is no such implied condition. In this regard we may notice that Section 16 (2) provides
for an implied condition regarding the goods being merchantable. The cardinal requirement to be
satisfied in this regard is as follows. The goods must be bought by ‘description’ from a seller. The
seller may be a manufacturer or a producer. He may not be either. In both of the cases, the only
requirement for an implied condition to arise is that the seller must be one who deals in goods of
‘that description’. This is made subject to the exception in the proviso namely that if the buyer has
examined the goods, there shall be no implied condition as regards defects which the inspection
should have revealed. This necessarily means that the proviso would not apply where the defects are
latent. In other words, even in a case where goods are purchased after actual inspection of the goods
if defects are not discovered then the implied condition would apply in the circumstances mentioned
in Section 16 (2). Section 17 deals with sale by sample. Section 17(2) reads as follows:

17. Sale by sample:

(2) In the case of a contract for sale by sample there is an implied condition—

(a) that the bulk shall correspond with the sample in quality;

(b) that the buyer shall have a reasonable opportunity of comparing the bulk with the
sample;

13

Rajratan Babulal Agarwal vs Solartex India Pvt. Ltd. on 13 October, 2022

(c) that the goods shall be free from any defect, rendering them unmerchantable,
which would not be apparent on reasonable examination of the sample.

Thus, the Act provides for certain implied conditions and warranties. The parties may further also
provide for express conditions and warranties. Section 31 proclaims that it is the duty of the seller to
deliver goods in accordance with the terms of the contract of sale. Equally, it is the duty of the buyer
to accept the goods and to pay for them in accordance with the terms of the contract of sale. Delivery
of goods and payment of price are acts to be performed concurrently. In other words, the seller
should be ready and willing to give possession of the goods to the buyer in exchange for the price
and the buyer must be ready and willing to pay the price on receipt of the possession of the goods. It
is significant, however, to notice that this obligation though ordinarily concurrent is subject to a
contract to the contrary. In other words, there can be a condition for payment of the price before the
delivery of the possession. Equally the payment of the price can be postponed to a point of time after
the delivery of possession. Such matters can be regulated by the contract between the parties. When
goods are delivered to the buyer it does not mean that he has accepted the goods if he has not
previously examined the goods. In other words, if he (the buyer) has not previously examined the
goods, the delivery of the goods to the buyer by itself will not be deemed to be acceptance of goods
by him. He must be afforded an opportunity of examining the goods. The opportunity must be
afforded for the purpose of finding out whether the goods are in conformity with the agreed terms.
Section 41 (2) declares that the seller when he delivers goods is bound on request of the buyer a
reasonable opportunity of examining the goods. This is again subject to a contract to the contrary. In
other words, unless there is a contract to the contrary if a demand is made by the buyer for an
opportunity to examine the goods, when delivery is given, the seller is duty bound to afford such an
opportunity. Section 42 specifically deals with when the goods are to be treated as having being
accepted. There are three circumstances in which the law treats the goods as having been accepted:

(i) The buyer informs the seller that he has accepted the goods.

(ii) When after the delivery of the goods to the buyer, he does any act which is not
consistent with the ownership of the seller. It includes a sale made by the buyer of the
goods. It may include any other form of transfer of the goods.

It may also include the consumption of the goods by the buyer. It may embrace the destruction of
the goods.

(iii) The buyer retains the goods, even after a lapse of a reasonable time of the delivery of the goods
and furthermore does not inform the seller that he has rejected the goods. As to what is reasonable
time is a matter which is to be determined on the facts.

Section 63 of the Act provides that when the Act refers to reasonable time, it is a question of fact.

40. If any of these three circumstances exist, then, the law provides that the buyer has accepted the
goods. Section 43 deals with a situation where a buyer who is delivered the goods refuses to accept
them. The law contemplates that if the buyer upon being delivered the goods ascertains and finds

14

Rajratan Babulal Agarwal vs Solartex India Pvt. Ltd. on 13 October, 2022

that the goods are not in conformity with the contract, then he is not duty bound to accept the
goods. On the other hand, he is entitled to reject the goods. In such circumstances, subject to a
contract to the contrary, the buyer who is entitled to reject the goods need not return the goods to
the seller. The principle underlying Section 43 is that the buyer need not be saddled with the liability
of expense to be incurred for returning of the goods. This is, however the case only when the buyer
acquires a right to refuse to accept the goods. As we have noticed, Section 19 deals with the question
as to when the property in the goods passes in a contract of sale of specific or ascertained goods. The
property would pass according to the intention of the parties. Section 19 (2) provides for three
criteria to ascertain the intention of the parties as to when the property passes. The court must bear
in mind the following criteria: the terms of the contract, the conduct of the parties and the
circumstances of the case.

41. Section 20 which in terms of Section 19 (3) is one of the rules to ascertain the intention of the
parties provides that in an unconditional contract for sale of specific goods in a deliverable state, the
property passes when the contract is made. Section 20 further declares that the postponement of the
delivery of the goods or the payment of the price or both is immaterial to the passing of the property
upon the making of the contract. Passing of property would lead to divesting of title of the seller and
vesting the title with the buyer. The significance of the passing of the property is also that unless it is
otherwise agreed the goods will remain at the seller’s risk until the property is transferred. Equally,
when the property is transferred, irrespective of whether delivery has been made to the buyer, the
risk will be shouldered by the buyer. This is subject to the two provisos. On each we need not dilate.
Section 55, which provides for an unpaid sellers’ right to sue for the price also highlights the
significance of the passing of property. Section 55(1) contemplates such a suit if property has passed.

Section 55 of the Act provides for a right to sue with the seller of goods for the price of the goods.
Section 55(1) contemplates that property in the goods has passed to the buyer. It further
contemplates that the buyer has wrongfully neglected or refused, to pay for the goods, according to
the terms of the contract. Section 55(2) clothes the seller with a right to sue for the price, if the price
is payable on a certain date. This right inheres in the seller, irrespective of the fact that delivery has
not taken place, and what is more, the property in the goods has not passed. Even the appropriation
of the goods to the contract is not necessary in such a case. The Section reaffirms the principle that
the property can pass without there being delivery. Delivery of goods need not always result in
passing of the property. However, what is important is dehors any of the aspects mentioned in
Section 55(2), viz., delivery of goods, passing of property in the goods or appropriation of goods to
the contract, the agreement between the parties, by which the buyer is obliged to pay the price on a
certain date, would entitle the seller to sue for the price of the goods.

42. Section 59 of the Act deals with the remedies open to the buyer upon there being a breach of
warranty. We have already noticed that a breach of warranty gives rise to a claim for damages. (See
Section 12 (3)). Section 13 as noticed by us entitles the buyer to waive a condition or to elect or treat
the breach of the condition as a breach of the warranty. Section 13 (2) as noticed by us subject to a
contract otherwise limits the right of the buyer even when there is a breach of condition to sue only
for breach of warranty. Section 59, accordingly, applies in all the three situations, which are as
follows. There occurs a breach of the warranty. Secondly, a condition is violated by the seller, but the

15

Rajratan Babulal Agarwal vs Solartex India Pvt. Ltd. on 13 October, 2022

buyer elects to treat the breach of the condition as a breach of the warranty. Thirdly, under Section
13 (2), in view of the buyer having accepted the goods, in circumstances described in Section 13 (2),
the buyer is compelled to sue under Section 59, namely, on the footing that there is a breach of
warranty. Thus, the word ‘elects’ in Section 59 is relatable to Section 13(1) whereas the words ‘is
compelled’ in Section 59 is to be read with Section 13(2) of the Act.

43. It is clear that a breach of warranty does not entitle the buyer to reject the goods. The remedies
which he can seek under Section 59 are as follows. He can seek the reduction (diminution) of the
price. He may also seek to be freed from the liability to pay the price (extinction of the price). In
other words, relying upon the breach of the warranty, he can refuse to pay the price or canvas for the
reduction of the price. Section 59 further proclaims that the buyer may sue the seller for damages
for breach of warranty. Section 59(2) declares that with respect to the same breach of warranty
which is projected as the foundation for seeking diminution or wiping out of the liability to pay the
price, the buyer can also seek damages.

44. A question may arise as to whether after the delivery of the goods by the seller and what is more,
even after acceptance of the goods by the buyer, whether the provisions of Section 59 can be invoked
by the buyer? If the property has passed to the buyer within the meaning of Section 19 which on the
one hand entitles the seller to sue for the price of the goods, in view of the word ‘wrongfully’ neglects
or refuses to pay under Section 55 read with Section 59, cannot the buyer in a suit for the price filed
by the seller, ‘set up’ a breach of warranty within the meaning of Section 59 and persuade the court
to either decree a reduction in the price or extinguish the liability of the buyer to even pay any part
of the price. To put it differently, if the goods are delivered and accepted within the meaning of
Section 42 of the Act, will the right of the buyer arising out of breach of warranty under Section 59
be extinguished? If the mere acceptance of the goods results in depriving the right of the buyer to
invoke Section 59 of the Act, then, undoubtedly, the buyer would be liable to pay the price. Let us
assume that there is delivery and acceptance in a given case. If parties intended that the property in
the goods would pass only after delivery is effected and acceptance is made and if the case falls
under Section 13 (2) of the Act and the buyer sets up a compelled breach of warranty though in fact a
condition was violated, it may not be legal to deny the benefit of the range of remedies open to a
buyer under Section 59. Acceptance of goods at any rate within the meaning of Section 13(2), if it
does not constitute passing of property would not also deprive the buyer of the right under Section
59 of the Act. As long as a condition is violated, be it implied or express, and it is not waived, then,
present other elements of Section 13(2), Section 59 applies.

45. What would be the position if, after there is acceptance of the goods, under Section 42 even if it
be a case of express intimation of acceptance, that events occur which lead to the creation of
circumstances attracting Section 14? As for instance, the buyer is confronted with a situation where
he finds that the goods were in fact stolen and the seller had no right to sell the goods. A third party
comes forward and substantiates his case that the goods were never the property of the seller.
Would it not be a condition under Section 14 (a) which has been observed in its breach by the seller?
Let us further assume that the buyer has not yet paid the price. Can he not despite having accepted
the goods exercise his right under Section 59 and seek extinction of the price apart from claiming
damages?

16

Rajratan Babulal Agarwal vs Solartex India Pvt. Ltd. on 13 October, 2022

46. Under the law, namely the Act, if a suit for price were brought in similar circumstances, the
question would arise squarely, whether the second respondent as buyer could defend the action by
‘setting up’ diminution or extinction of the price. Could the second respondent as defendant seek to
non-suit the first respondent by establishing a breach of a warranty. Undoubtedly, ordinarily
acceptance of the goods by the buyer, a matter which falls to be decided with reference to Sections
41, 42 and 43 would conclude the matter in favor of the seller. What however would be the position
where after acceptance, circumstances exist which justify the buyer in pleading a breach of a
condition which is treated as a warranty or a breach of warranty which is found after acceptance.
Take for example breach of a condition under Section 14 (a). In case where the price has not been
paid and suit is brought under Section 55 (1), where the buyer has found that the seller has no right
to sell the goods, can the buyer be robbed of his right to refuse to pay the price vouchsafed for a
buyer under Section 59 of the Act? The answer would appear to us to be in the negative. No doubt in
such a case it would be said that there is no passing of property or that the seller had no property to
pass. Equally, if after acceptance of the goods, the quiet possession of the goods within the meaning
of Section 14 (b) is thwarted by third party claims, the implied warranty for such possession would
stand violated giving rise to the buyer a right under Section 59 to seek such diminution of the price
or even extinction of the price. Even a claim for damages over and above the relief of diminution and
even extinction of the price is permitted under Section 59 (2).

47. It is to be remembered, that under Section 31 of the Act it is the duty of the buyer to pay for the
goods in terms of the contract. Delivery and payment of price are made concurrent conditions,
unless otherwise agreed. This means with possession of the goods being obtained, the buyer
becomes obliged to pay the price. [See Section 32]. In this case, the contract obliged the second
respondent to pay the price within seven days, according to the first respondent as per the purchase
order. THE DECISION IN MOBILOX

48. After an exhaustive survey of the legislative history of the IBC, and case law, this Court, speaking
through R.F. Nariman J., held inter alia:

“32. In the passage of the Bills which ultimately became the Code, various important
changes have taken place. The original definition of “dispute” has now become an
inclusive definition, the words “bona fide” before “suit or arbitration proceedings”
being deleted. In Section 8(1), the words “through an information utility, wherever
applicable, or by registered post or courier or by any electronic communication” have
been deleted. Likewise, in Section 8(2), the period of “at least 60 days … through an
info rmation utility or by registered post or courier or by any electronic
communication” has also been deleted. In Section 9(5), the absence of a proviso
similar to the proviso occurring in Section 7(5) was also rectified. Further, the time
periods of 2 and 3 days were uniformly substituted, as has been seen above, by 7
days, so that a sufficiently long period is given to do the needful.

xxx xxx xxx

17

Rajratan Babulal Agarwal vs Solartex India Pvt. Ltd. on 13 October, 2022

34. Therefore, the adjudicating authority, when examining an application under
Section 9 of the Act will have to determine:

(i) Whether there is an “operational debt” as defined exceeding Rs 1 lakh? (See
Section 4 of the Act)

(ii) Whether the documentary evidence furnished with the application shows that the
aforesaid debt is due and payable and has not yet been paid? and

(iii) Whether there is existence of a dispute between the parties or the record of the
pendency of a suit or arbitration proceed ing filed before the receipt of the demand
notice of the unpaid operational debt in relation to such dispute?

If any one of the aforesaid conditions is lacking, the application would have to be rejected. Apart
from the above, the adjudicating authority must follow the mandate of Section 9, as outlined above,
and in particular the mandate of Section 9(5) of the Act, and admit or reject the application, as the
case may be, depending upon the factor s mentioned in Section 9(5) of the Act.

xxx xxx xxx

38. It is, thus, clear that so far as an operational creditor is concerned, a demand notice of an unpaid
operational debt or copy of an invoice demanding payment of the amount involved must be
delivered in the prescribed form. The corporate debtor is then given a period of 10 days from the
receipt of the demand notice or copy of the invoice to bring to the notice of the operational creditor
the existence of a dispute, if any. We have also seen the notes on clauses annexed to the Insolvency
and Bankruptcy Bill of 2015, in which “the existence of a dispute” alone is mentioned. Even
otherwise, the word “and” occurring in Section 8(2)(a) must be read as “or” keeping in mind the
legislative intent and the fact that an anomalous situation would arise if it is not read as “or”. If read
as “and”, disputes would only stave off the bankruptcy process if they are already pending in a suit
or arbitration proceedings and not otherwise. This would lead to great hardship; in that a dispute
may arise a few days before triggering of the insolvency process, in which case, though a dispute
may exist, there is no time to approach either an Arbitral Tribunal or a court. Further, given the fact
that long limitation periods are allowed, where disputes may arise and do not reach an Arbitral
Tribunal or a court for up to three years, such persons would be outside the purview of Section 8(2)
leading to bankruptcy proceedings commencing against them. Such an anomaly cannot possibly
have been intended by the legislature nor has it so been intended. We have also seen that one of the
objects of the Code qua operational debts is to ensure that the amount of such debts, which is
usually smaller than that of financial debts, does not enable operational creditors to put the
corporate debtor into the insolvency resolution process prematurely or initiate the process for
extraneous considerations. It is for this reason that it is enough that a dispute exists between the
parties.

xxx xxx xxx

18

Rajratan Babulal Agarwal vs Solartex India Pvt. Ltd. on 13 October, 2022

44. We have already noticed that in the first Insolvency and Bankruptcy Bill, 2015 that was annexed
to the Bankruptcy Law Reforms Committee Report, Section 5(4) defined “dispute” as meaning a
“bona fide suit or arbitration proceedings…”. In its present avatar, Section 5(6) excludes the
expression “bona fide” which is of significance.

Therefore, it is difficult to import the expression “bona fide” into Section 8(2)(a) in order to judge
whether a dispute exists or not.

xxx xxx xxx

48. To similar effect is the judgment of the Chancery Division in Hayes v. Hayes [Hayes v . Hayes,
2014 EWHC 2694 (Ch)] under the UK Insolvency Rules. The Chancery Division held:

“I do not think it necessary, for the purposes of this appeal, to embark on a survey of
the authorities as to precisely what is involved in a genuine and substantial
cross-claim. It is clear that on the one hand , the court does not need to be satisfied
that there is a good claim or even that it is a claim which is prima facie likely to
succeed. In Bayoil S.A., In re [Bayoil S.A., In re, (1999) 1 WLR 147 (CA)] itself,
Nourse, L.J. referred, at WLR p. 153, to what Harman, L.J. had said in L.H.F. Wools
Ltd., In re [L. H.F. Wools Ltd., In re, 1970 Ch 27 : (1969) 3 WLR 100 (CA)] where
Harman, L.J., having referred to a previous case, said: (Ch p. 36 E-F) ‘… The majority
decided in that case that, shadowy as the cross-claim was and improbable as the
events said to support it seemed to be , there was just enough to make the principle
work, namely, that it was right to have the matter tried out before the axe fell.’ On the
other hand, the court should be alert to detect wholly spurious claims merely being
put forward by an unwilling debtor to raise what has been called “a cloud of object
ions” as I referred to earlier.” xxx xxx xxx

51. It is clear, therefore, that once the operational creditor has filed an application ,
which is otherwise complete, the adjudicating authority must reject the application
under Section 9(5)(2)(d) if notice of dispute has been received by the operational
creditor or there is a record of dispute in the information utility. It is clear that such
notice must bring to the notice of the operational creditor the “exist ence” of a dispute
or the fact that a suit or arbitration proceeding relating to a dispute is pending
between the parties. Therefore, all that the adjudicating authority is to see at this
stage is whether there is a plausible contention which requires further investigation
and that the “dispute” is not a patently feeble legal argument or an assertion of fact
unsupported by evidence. It is important to separate the grain from the chaff and to
reject a spurious defence which is mere bluster. However, in doing so, the Court does
not need to be satisfied that the defence is likely to succeed. The Court does not at
this stage examine the merits of the dispute except to the extent indicated above.

So long as a dispute truly exists in fact and is not spurious, hypothetical or illusory, the adjudicating
authority has to reject the application.” (Emphasis supplied) THE PURCHASE ORDER

19

49. The purchase order dated 27.10.2016 reads, inter alia, as follows:

Rajratan Babulal Agarwal vs Solartex India Pvt. Ltd. on 13 October, 2022

“PURCHASE ORDER xxx xxx xxx Dear Sir, This has reference to you offer and
subsequent discussion had with you, we are pleased to place our purchase order no.
the following terms and conditions.

SL.   Description    Quantity Rate    Per   Disc.   Amount
NO.   of Goods                              %

1.    Imp.Coal       5,00,000 3.14     Kgs           15,70,0
.00 Kgs                         00.00
GCV (ADB) -
5400 KCAL
TOTAL
MOISTURE
(ARB) -40%
BY WT (+-2%)
Inherent
Moisture
(ADB) 12%by
W (+/-2%)
Volatile
Matter (ADB)
-38-40%
ASH (ADB) 5-
7% BY WT
Sulfur (ADB)
1% by Wt.
Fix Carbon -
by
Difference
Size-0-50 MM
Shortage
Allowed - 1%
INPUT CST @
2% AGST C-                2       %            31,400.00
FORM

Total          5,00,000                        INR
.00 Kgs                         16,01,4
00.00

Amount Chargeable (in words): Indian Rupees Sixteen Lakh One Thousand Four
Hundred Only Terms & Condition With Statutory Details Note: 1. Certificate of
Analysis is required along with Material Note: 2. All necessary document should be

20

Rajratan Babulal Agarwal vs Solartex India Pvt. Ltd. on 13 October, 2022

mention our P.O. Number compulsory otherwise Material is not Unloading at our site
Note: 3. Courier Name : - Professional Courier - Kindly Mention on your envolope -
Delivered to Jamner Professional Courier Branch Office Price Basis : EX-HAZIRA
Payment Terms : Receipt of material with in 7 days Freight :

Transportation       :   JILANI LOGISTICS
Insurance            :   NIL
Delivery             :   IMMEDIATE
Guarantee            :   We will reserve the right to reject the

material at our ground site towards any quality of manufacturing defect ”

50. The purchase order is dated 27.10.2016. The quotation is described as telephonic and dated
27.10.2016. It is specifically mentioned as against the query where to be used as follows: FBC Boiler.
The goods were described as imported coal. Apart from mentioning the quantity and the price, it is
indicated that the coal must be of a certain quality in terms of its characteristics which we have
already noticed. Under the terms and conditions with statutory details, Note 1 indicated that the
material should be accompanied with a certificate of analysis. Payment terms provided that it was to
be paid within seven days of the receipt of materials. Delivery must be immediate. Under the
heading ‘Guarantee’, it is mentioned that the second respondent would reserve the right to reject the
material at its ground site towards any quality of manufacturing defect. The supply commenced
immediately as contemplated in the purchase order, namely, from 28.10.2016. Indisputably, the
goods were imported coal. This could be treated as a sale of goods by description as the contract for
sale related to 500 MT of Indonesian coal.

51. In this case, a perusal of the notice sent by first respondent and the application under Section 9
of the IBC would show that the case is premised on there being a sale, and there was a ‘debt’ owed by
the second respondent under the sale. It means that the cause of action in general law would have
been a suit for the price of the goods sold within the meaning of Section 55 of the Act.

52. On 30.10.2016, an email was indeed dispatched to the first respondent [See paragraph 4 of this
Judgment]. The email was sent by STDPL, the sister concern of the second respondent. This email
has been brushed aside by the NCLAT in the impugned order on two grounds. In the first place, the
NCLAT has proceeded on the basis that there was no reference to purchase order dated 27.10.2016
and the concern raised in the email was qua purchase order dated 11.10.2016 which related to the
sister concern of the second respondent namely, STDPL. The second reason for refusing the
appellant to draw support from the said email is that there is no reference to email dated 30.10.2016
in the reply to the statutory notice under the IBC.

53. We are of the view that the approach of the NCLAT cannot be sustained. A perusal of the email
would clearly indicate that though it was sent by STDPL express reference is made to the second
respondent also, and thereafter, the issues relating to the quality of the coal are articulated. We also
notice that pictures were attached for the reference.

21

Rajratan Babulal Agarwal vs Solartex India Pvt. Ltd. on 13 October, 2022

54. The further fact that there is no express reference to email dated 30.10.2016 in the reply notice
given by the second respondent to the statutory notice under Section 8 of the IBC given by the first
respondent will not, in our view, detract from the impact of the communication dated 30.12.2016. It
is not as if there is a dispute about the sending and receipt of the communication dated 30.10.2016.
Therefore, we are of the view that the NCLAT has clearly erred in refusing to lay store by the said
communication. On 03.11.2016, undoubtedly, the second respondent in its own name has ventilated
its complaint about the inferior and the poor quality of the Indonesian coal. The impact of using
such coal on the boiler and about the damage being done to the boiler has been specifically
articulated. Further, a request was made to stop delivery of the goods. Even advice was sought as to
what is to be done about the loss. Thereafter, it is stated that for any more losses occurred due to the
poor inferior quality of the coal, the second respondent may debit the same in the account of the
first respondent. On the very next day, that is, 04.11.16, the first respondent wrote back by pointing
to the improbability about the deviation from the quality of the coal but it was indicated that the
further supply was being stopped. Thus, the supply was effected of 412 MT out of the contracted
quantum of 500 MT. The supply was stopped on the basis of the communication dated 04.11.16.

55. This is a case where there was a contract for sale of goods. The contract as gleaned from the
purchase order related to goods which were sold by description, namely, Indonesian coal. Parties
clearly contemplated that the coal was to be a certain quality, the details of which are expressly
enumerated in the purchase order. The purpose for which the coal was purchased was also
indicated, namely, it was to be used in a boiler. Therefore, it formed a part of the raw material for
the second respondent. Pursuant to the purchase order, it is undoubtedly true, that 412 MT was
delivered at the factory site of the second respondent. It is beyond challenge that no part of 412 MT
has been returned by the second respondent to the first respondent. It would be safe to proceed on
the basis that the goods so delivered may have been used or consumed. It may constitute acceptance
of the goods within the meaning of Section 42 of the Act. But then the case of the appellant is
anchored in Section 13(2) of the Act. The case is that the characteristics of the coal or quality of the
coal with reference to certain objective criteria were indeed specified and was understood as a
condition to be fulfilled by the seller and that those conditions were not fulfilled by the first
respondent-seller. It is, therefore, the case of the appellant that the acceptance of the goods under
Section 42 may not detract from Section 13(2) of the Act applying to the facts. In other words,
treating the quality of the coal with reference to certain standards as conditions to be fulfilled by the
seller, the mere acceptance of the goods by the buyer may not prevent the buyer from still
contending that there has been a breach of the condition, but since the law permits the buyer to treat
such breach of the condition when there is acceptance of the goods as only a breach of a warranty,
Section 59 of the Act immediately gets attracted. Section 59 of the Act contemplates a buyer ‘setting
up’ a breach of a warranty to diminish or reduce the price or even extinguish it. If this line is
accepted, it could indeed be said that the decks are not cleared for the first respondent-seller for its
claim under Section 8.

56. However, the objections of the first respondent may be noticed. Apart from supporting the order
of the NCLAT with reference to its contents, it is pointed out that the case of the appellant is a mere
ruse, and that no complaint was raised on the ground and though there was guarantee under the
purchase order, nothing prevented the second respondent from rejecting the goods. The second

22

Rajratan Babulal Agarwal vs Solartex India Pvt. Ltd. on 13 October, 2022

respondent not only accepted the supply of the goods but proceeded to consume the goods. A huge
quantum of 412 MT was supplied from 28.10.2016 to 03.11.2016. No debit was made in the accounts
in keeping with the intimation in the email dated 03.11.2016. This rules out the case of any loss.
There is no evidence of any loss. The case of the appellant would fall under a mere bluster.

57. We are not dealing with a suit under the Act either by the seller or the buyer. We are not
oblivious to the fact that the suit has already been laid by the second respondent seeking damages.
The factum of the filing of the suit, however, cannot be taken into consideration for the purpose of
deciding whether there is a preexisting dispute under the IBC. This is for the simple reason that the
suit was not filed before the receipt of the demand notice under Section 8 of the IBC. No doubt, the
documentary evidence furnished by the first respondent, namely, the purchase order indicates that
the price is to be paid within seven days of receipt of the goods. It is true that Section 55(2) of the
Act speaks about a contract of sale where the price is payable on a day certain entitling the seller to
sue for price. This is irrespective of the fact that the property in the goods has not passed and the
goods have not been appropriated to the contract and whether delivery has been made or not. We
may notice, for the purpose of the limited inquiry we can do, for deciding, whether there was a
pre-existing dispute, to apply Section 55(2) a certain day must be fixed for payment of price. In this
case, the payment terms speak about ‘within seven days of delivery’. We may incidentally notice that
though in the context of Article 54 of the Indian Limitation Act, 1963, a bench of three learned
Judges in Ahmadsahab Abdul Mulla (2) (dead) v. Bibijan and others3 has with reference to the
requirement in Article 54 held that the date for performance which is refused must be a fixed date.
In this case, Section 55(2) speaks about a certain date which must be fixed in the contract. The
clause in the purchase order refers to payment of the price being effected within seven days of
delivery. It could, no doubt, be said that the date of payment cannot go beyond a period of seven
days at any rate of the delivery, and therefore, the seventh day (2009) 5 SCC 462 could be treated as
a day which is certain. We need not explore the matter further particularly having regard to the
pendency of the suit, and also, the nature of the limited inquiry to be conducted under the IBC. We
may further note, however, that Section 55(2) also contemplates that the buyer must wrongfully
neglect or refuse to pay the price. Interestingly, it will be noticed that the law-giver has in Section
55(1) also used the words “and the buyer wrongfully neglects or refuses to pay for the goods” but the
law-giver has further added the words “according to the terms of the contract” which words are not
found in Section 55(2). Even proceeding on the basis that under Section 55(2) of the Act, this is a
case where there is a certain day fixed for the payment of the price irrespective of the passing of the
property inter alia, the law does clothe the buyer with the right to resist the suit on the basis that the
refusal to pay the price is not wrongful. In other words, he can lean on Section 59 and set up a
breach of warranty and seek at least the diminution of the price if not extinction of the same. That
apart, he has a right to seek damages even on the same breach.

58. Section 4 of the Act, inter alia, contemplates that an agreement to sell becomes a sale when the
time elapses or the conditions are fulfilled subject to which the property in the goods is to be
transferred. As far as Section 55(1) of the Act, it clothes a seller with a right to sue for the price of the
goods when a property in the goods has passed. The suit can be resisted by the buyer on the basis
that the refusal to pay the price is not wrongful having regard to the terms of the contract. As to
when property passes and transforms a contract for sale into a sale is largely a matter of intention.

23

Rajratan Babulal Agarwal vs Solartex India Pvt. Ltd. on 13 October, 2022

The rules as contained in Sections 19 to 24 of the Act would be employed. The task, however,
remains to find out the intention of the parties. We may notice that a Division Bench of the High
Court of Nagpur in the judgment in Mangilal Karwa v. Shantibai4 has made the following
observations in an appeal by the defendant-buyer who had agreed to purchase 503 bags of Masur
but found that the goods were not of merchantable quality and were rotten:

“11. The question whether the Defendant- purchaser had an option to reject the goods
because what he bargained for was masur and AIR 1956 Nag 221.

not some rotten stinking stuff which was once masur of that year's harvest does not
arise for consideration in this case. For, even if there be a breach of a condition, the
Defendant by taking delivery has, under Section 13 of the Act, elected to treat it as a
breach of warranty which under Section

59 entitles him to a diminution or extinction of the price.

It is settled law that even after the goods have been delivered into the actual possession of the buyer,
the performance of the seller's duties may still be incomplete by reason of the breach of some of the
conditions or warranties - express or implied - whether as to title, or quality, or fitness to Which he
has bound himself by the contract: (Benjamin on Sale, Page 984). The question then is what is the
diminution in price to which the Defendant is entitled under Section 59 of the Act?

xxx xxx xxx In the instant case the Defendant has set up the breach of warranty of quality in order to
claim a diminution of price under Clause

(a) of Sub-section (1). He is therefore entitled to such damages as are available to him under Clause
(a) which would be all damages resulting as a natural and ordinary consequence of his breach of
contract in supplying a damaged article or an article of an inferior quality than the one contracted
for.” No doubt, the Court found, in the facts therein, that the property had not passed. For the
purpose of this case, we may not have to adjudicate and find that the property has passed in the
goods to the second respondent.

59. In Mobilox (supra), this Court took the view that one of the objects of the IBC in regard to
operational debts is to ensure that the amount of such debts which is usually smaller than the
financial debts does not enable the operational creditor to put the corporate debtor into the
insolvency resolution process prematurely. It is further declared that it is for this reason that it is
enough that a dispute exists between the parties. It is further the law as declared in Mobilox (supra)
that Section 5(6) of the IBC excludes the expression bona fide which qualified the words suit or
arbitration proceedings in Section 5(4) under the Bankruptcy Law Reforms Committee Report. All
that is required is to see whether there is a plausible contention which must be investigated. This
Court has gone on to declare that a ‘patently feeble’ legal argument may not be a plausible dispute.
We respectfully agree. We are unable to find that in the facts of this case, that the case set up by the
second respondent was a patently feeble legal argument. Again, following what this Court held in
Mobilox (supra), we do not have to go to the extent of finding that the second respondent is likely to

24

Rajratan Babulal Agarwal vs Solartex India Pvt. Ltd. on 13 October, 2022

succeed. Still further, finding guidance from Mobilox (supra), the examination of the merits need
not transcend the limited extent which we have undertaken which is to find that the case of the
second respondent is not to be brushed aside as spurious, hypothetical or illusory. We cannot find
that the dispute as projected by the appellant on behalf of the second respondent does not exist. In
the teeth of the emails which we have adverted to, and the inference sought to be drawn in particular
as also the Lab Reports produced, no doubt, from the second respondent’s Labs, we cannot also find
that the case of the corporate debtor is wholly unsupported by evidence. As to the acceptability of
these materials and the weight to be attached to them, needless to say, we have not pronounced on
the same.

60. When we speak about evidence, we must not overlook the law laid down in Mobilox (supra) that
the court need not be satisfied that the defense is likely to succeed. The standard, in other words,
with reference to which a case of a pre-existing dispute under the IBC must be employed cannot be
equated with even the principle of preponderance of probability which guides a civil court at the
stage of finally decreeing a suit. Once this subtle distinction is not overlooked, we would think that
the NCLAT has clearly erred in finding that there was no dispute within the meaning of the IBC.

61. On the one hand the case of the appellant appears to be that the boiler can be used by putting in
large quantities of raw material (300 MT approximately) and this justified the consumption of the
supplied goods over a period of a few days, and yet, justifying the complaint about the quality of the
raw material and its impact on the boiler. The stand of the first respondent is that there is no
material to justify such a claim. We are of the view that this would involve the court making a deeper
foray into the merits and attempting to find whether the dispute is bona fide as against it being a
plausible contention. We cannot be unmindful about the impact of Section 13(2). In other words, the
delivery of the goods and the acceptance of the goods by use of the goods by the corporate debtor
being not in dispute, the impact of Section 13(2) read with Section 59 cannot at least for the purpose
of determining whether there is a pre- existing dispute be ignored.

62. No doubt, the first respondent lays store by the purchase order requiring certificate of analysis in
that in view of there being no challenge to the said certificate of analysis and there being no rejection
of the goods which was contemplated under the purchase order at the ground site, it is contended
that the dispute cannot be countenanced. The appellant would, on the other hand, seek to buttress
his case with reference to the lab reports, no doubt, procured from the labs which the second
respondent has set up. The appellant, it must not be overlooked has a definite case that, only upon
use of the goods, the defect in the goods came to be discovered. No doubt, the lab reports may
support the appellant. It is not the case of either party that the quality of the coal as set out in the
purchase order is something which could be established on mere physical examination. As far as the
contention that no debit note was raised in respect of supplied goods and that the accounts may not
bear out the case of the appellant about the alleged loss, as a result of the use of the goods in
question, we feel that while they may indeed have lent assurance to the case of the corporate debtor,
their absence may not clinchingly rule out the existence of a ‘pre-existing dispute’ under the IBC.
Here, we must not be oblivious to the limited nature of examination of the case of the corporate
debtor projecting a pre-existing dispute. Overlooking the boundaries of the jurisdiction can cause a
serious miscarriage of justice besides frustrating the object of the IBC. The NCLAT, has clearly erred

25

in not appreciating the issue, bearing in mind the principles in the Act.

Rajratan Babulal Agarwal vs Solartex India Pvt. Ltd. on 13 October, 2022

63. In view of our finding that the NCLAT has erred in its finding about the existence of a
pre-existing dispute, the impugned order merits interference. In the said view, we need not
pronounce on the aspect about the effect of Rule 150 being breached by the NCLT.

64. We make it clear, however, that as far as the suits filed by the second respondent are concerned,
we must not be treated as having pronounced on any factual issues and observations made in this
regard must be treated as having been made for the purpose of deciding this appeal. We also make it
clear that since Section 13 of the Act permits the buyer to waive a condition, it will be open to the
first respondent to canvass that at any rate the second respondent has waived the alleged condition.

65. The appeal is allowed. The impugned order will stand set aside. The application filed by the first
respondent against the second respondent under Section 9 will stand rejected. In view of the fact
that the appellant succeeds on the basis that there is a pre-existing dispute within the meaning of
IBC, we leave open all the remedies and contentions available to the first respondent in law. Parties
are left to bear their respective costs.

… … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … J .   [   K . M .   J O S E P H   ]
…………………………………………………………………J. [ HRISHIKESH ROY ] New Delhi;

October 13, 2022.

26