Ram Niwas vs The State Of Haryana on 11 August, 2022

Ram Niwas vs The State Of Haryana on 11 August, 2022

Author: B.R. Gavai

Bench: Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha, B.R. Gavai

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 25 OF 2012

RAM NIWAS                                    ...APPELLANT(S)

VERSUS
STATE OF HARYANA                            ...RESPONDENT(S)

JUDGMENT

B.R. GAVAI, J.

1. This appeal challenges the judgment and order passed by the High Court of Punjab & Haryana at
Chandigarh dated 16 th March 2009, thereby dismissing the appeal filed by the accused/appellant−
Ram Niwas, which was filed challenging the judgment and order dated 11 th/12th January 2005
passed by the learned Sessions Judge, Sonepat, thereby convicting the appellant for the offences
punishable under Section 302 and 201 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (“IPC” for short) and
sentencing him to suffer rigorous imprisonment for life and to a fine of Rs.5,000/−, in default of
payment of fine to further undergo rigorous imprisonment for two years under Section 302 IPC and
to suffer imprisonment for three years and to a fine of Rs.2,000/− in default of payment of fine to
further undergo rigorous imprisonment for one year. Both the sentences are directed to run
concurrently.

2. The prosecution case, in brief, is thus:

2.1 Deceased Dalip Singh, Bhim Singh (P.W.10), and the complainant−Deep Chand
(P.W.9) are brothers. Pale, son of Bhim Singh (P.W.10), was married to Sunita,
daughter of Chander Singh and the sister of the accused/appellant− Ram Niwas.
After the death of Pale, his wife Sunita along with her minor son went to her parental
house in village Rewli. Deceased Dalip Singh, Bhim Singh (P.W.10), and
complainant−Deep Chand (P.W.9) wanted Sunita to be married to Rampal son of
deceased Dalip Singh. As such, on 7th March 2003, all three of them had gone to the

1

Ram Niwas vs The State Of Haryana on 11 August, 2022

house of Chander Singh, father of the accused/appellant−Ram Niwas with the
proposal of remarriage of Sunita with Rampal son of deceased Dalip Singh.

2.2 It is the prosecution case that all three of them reached village Rewli and went to
the house of Chander Singh, father of the accused/appellant−Ram Niwas at around
5.00 p.m. on 7th March 2003. At around 7.30 p.m., deceased Dalip Singh and
accused/appellant−Ram Niwas started taking liquor and at that time the proposal of
marrying Sunita with Rampal was mentioned. On such mention being made,
accused/appellant−Ram Niwas got angry and started abusing deceased Dalip Singh.
However, complainant−Deep Chand (P.W.9) and Bhim Singh (P.W.10) intervened
and pacified the accused/appellant−Ram Niwas.

Thereafter, both of them after having their meals went to the first floor to sleep.

2.3 On the morning of 8th March 2003, at around 6.30 a.m., when the complainant−Deep Chand
(P.W.9) and Bhim Singh (P.W.10) went to the drawing room of Chander Singh, deceased Dalip
Singh was not seen there. They asked about the whereabouts of deceased Dalip Singh from the
accused/appellant−Ram Niwas, who told them that he had gone for answering the call of nature.
Both of them waited for deceased Dalip Singh for about half an hour, but he did not return.
Therefore, they again asked the accused/appellant−Ram Niwas about the whereabouts of deceased
Dalip Singh, but they did not receive any satisfactory reply.

2.4 It is further the prosecution case that after the complainant−Deep Chand (P.W.9) and Bhim
Singh (P.W.10) came to the courtyard, they felt the smell of the burnt human body. The
complainant−Deep Chand (P.W.9) again enquired from the accused/appellant−Ram Niwas about
deceased Dalip Singh. Then the accused/appellant−Ram Niwas became nervous and replied that
when deceased Dalip Singh had proposed to marry Sunita with his son Rampal then he had pressed
the throat of deceased Dalip Singh and strangulated him to death. In order to destroy the evidence,
the dead−body of the deceased Dalip Singh was burnt, but the same could not be burnt completely.
The dead body of deceased Dalip Singh was concealed in Paraal (Paddy Fodder). Thereafter, the
complainant−Deep Chand (P.W.9) and Bhim Singh (P.W.10) after removing the Paddy straw found
the partially burnt dead body of deceased Dalip Singh wrapped in a piece of Plastic palli. Thereafter,
the complainant−Deep Chand (P.W.9) and Bhim Singh (P.W.10) expressed their resentment
t o w a r d s   t h e   a c c u s e d / a p p e l l a n t − R a m   N i w a s ,   a n d   o n   h e a r i n g   t h e i r   r e s e n t m e n t ,   t h e
accused/appellant−Ram Niwas fled away from the spot. The complainant−Deep Chand (P.W.9) and
Bhim Singh (P.W.10) went to their village Bhawar and returned back with other family members to
village Rewli in the evening.

2.5 The complainant−Deep Chand (P.W.9) lodged a report with the Police station at 4.45 p.m. On
the basis of the statement of the complainant−Deep Chand (P.W.9), a First Information Report
(“FIR” for short) came to be registered at 5.00 p.m. 2.6 Upon completion of the investigation, a
charge−sheet came to be filed in the Court of learned Judicial Magistrate First Class, Sonepat. Since
the case was exclusively triable by the Sessions Court, it came to be committed to the learned
Sessions Judge, Sonepat.

2

Ram Niwas vs The State Of Haryana on 11 August, 2022

2.7 Charges came to be framed for the offences punishable under Sections 302 and 201 of the IPC.
The accused/appellant−Ram Niwas pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried. At the conclusion of
the trial, the learned Sessions Judge, Sonepat passed orders of conviction and sentence, as
aforesaid. Being aggrieved, the accused/appellant−Ram Niwas preferred an appeal before the High
Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh. The same came to be dismissed. Hence the present
appeal.

3. We have heard Mr. Rishi Malhotra, learned Advocate−on− Record appearing on behalf of the
accused/appellant−Ram Niwas and Mr. Birendra Kumar Choudhary, learned Additional Advocate
General appearing on behalf of the State of Haryana.

4. Mr. Rishi Malhotra, learned counsel, submitted that from the perusal of the postmortem report, it
is clear that it is not proved beyond reasonable doubt that the dead−body on which the postmortem
was conducted was of deceased Dalip Singh. He submitted that Dr. Sanjeev Malhotra (P.W.5) has
admitted that the face of the dead−body of which he had carried the postmortem was not
recognizable. He therefore submitted that in the absence of the prosecution proving that the dead−
body was of deceased Dalip Singh, the conviction was not sustainable. He further submitted that the
evidence of the complainant−Deep Chand (P.W.9) and Bhim Singh (P.W.10), which is relied upon
by the learned Sessions Judge, Sonepat as well as the High Court, is totally unreliable. He submitted
that the conduct of the said witnesses is totally unnatural. He submitted that from their evidence, it
is seen that after they had seen the dead−body, they went all the way to their village Bhawar and
returned back in the evening. He submitted that when the Police Station was at a distance of about
one and a half kilometers from the place of the incident, their conduct in not going to the Police
Station immediately and informing about the incident creates a serious doubt about the prosecution
case. He therefore submits that the accused/appellant−Ram Niwas is entitled to be acquitted of all
the charges charged with.

5. Mr. Birendra Kumar Choudhary, learned AAG, on the contrary, submitted that both the courts
below, upon correct appreciation of evidence, have concurrently found the accused/appellant−Ram
Niwas to be guilty of the offences charged with. He submitted that the accused/appellant−Ram
Niwas has made an extra−judicial confession before the complainant−Deep Chand (P.W.9) and
Bhim Singh (P.W.10). He submitted that the said extra−judicial confession is corroborated by the
recovery of ‘ash’ concealed in a plastic cover on the memorandum of the accused/appellant−Ram
Niwas under

Section 27 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (“Evidence Act” for short). He therefore
submitted that no case is made out for interference with the findings of fact, recorded
by the learned Sessions Judge, Sonepat as well as by the High Court.

6. To examine the correctness of the findings of the High Court, it will be apposite to scrutinize the
evidence on record.

7. Dr. Sanjeev Malhotra (P.W.5) has conducted postmortem examination of the dead−body of
deceased. In his evidence, he stated that the dead−body was lying naked. It was showing deep burns

3

Ram Niwas vs The State Of Haryana on 11 August, 2022

all over the body. It was also emitting the smell of kerosene. The hair and scalp were missing. Eye
balls, eye− lashes, and both ears were burnt out. Both lips and the nose were also burnt. He has
categorically stated in his examination− in−chief that the face of the dead−body could not be
recognized. He has also stated in his examination−in−chief that both feet were missing. Dr. Sanjeev
Malhotra (P.W.5), in his cross− examination, has given a clear admission to the following effect:

(cid:12)          “It is correct that      the   body   was   not
recognizable. ………..”

8. The complainant−Deep Chand (P.W.9), in his evidence, states that on 7th March 2003, he along
with his two brothers, namely, Bhim Singh (P.W.10) and deceased Dalip Singh had gone to village
Rewli. He states that all the three brothers had gone to village Rewli to ask for Sunita’s hand in re−
marriage for Rampal, son of his brother deceased Dalip Singh. After reaching the village Rewli at
around 5.00 p.m., they met Chander Singh and his son accused/appellant−Ram Niwas. He further
states that after some time, accused/appellant−Ram Niwas brought a bottle of liquor and he along
with his father Chander Singh and his brother deceased Dalip Singh started taking liquor. He
further states that upon the deceased Dalip Singh proposing the re−marriage of Sunita with his son
Rampal, there was a minor altercation between them. He states that he and Bhim Singh (P.W.10)
persuaded both sides to not fight. After taking their meals, the accused/appellant−Ram Niwas told
him and Bhim Singh (P.W.10) to go to the first floor to sleep, since the accused/appellant−Ram
Niwas and deceased Dalip Singh wanted to have some talk. Thereafter, they went to sleep on the
first floor.

9. Complainant−Deep Chand (P.W.9) further states that in the morning when they had gone to the
drawing room of the accused/appellant−Ram Niwas at around 6.30 a.m. and asked about their
brother the deceased Dalip Singh, the accused/appellant−Ram Niwas told them that deceased Dalip
Singh had gone to ease himself. After waiting for about half an hour, when deceased Dalip Singh did
not return, they again enquired from the accused/appellant−Ram Niwas about the deceased Dalip
Singh. Thereafter, accused/appellant−Ram Niwas told them that he had murdered deceased Dalip
Singh. On being enquired about the dead−body of deceased Dalip Singh, accused/appellant−Ram
Niwas told them that he had kept the dead−body concealed in the paraal (paddy fodder). They also
felt the foul smell of burning. They went there and saw the dead− body of deceased Dalip Singh,
wrapped in a plastic palli and lying in a heap of paraal and also in a burnt condition. Thereafter, he
and Bhim Singh (P.W.10) ran away from there since they had an apprehension that
accused/appellant−Ram Niwas might kill them also. He states that they, thereafter, straightway
went to their village Bhawar and on the same day after taking 4−5 persons from the village, he came
to Murthal Adda and at the turning of Engineering College, they met the Police and informed about
the incident.

10. In his cross−examination, complainant−Deep Chand (P.W.9) admitted that parents of Sunita
had come to his village Bhawar at the time of Chhamahi and Barsi ceremonies of Pale. He has
further admitted that they did not talk with the parents of Sunita regarding the re−marriage of
Sunita with Rampal on those occasions. He has further admitted that according to customs in their

4

Ram Niwas vs The State Of Haryana on 11 August, 2022

society, the remarriage of a widow or Karewa is to be solemnized on the occasion of Chhamahi and
Barsi. It will be relevant to refer to the following admissions in the evidence of the complainant−
Deep Chand (P.W.9):

“After seeing the dead body we not raise any alarm and none came at the spot in our
presence. Sunita was also 'present in village Revli on that day. We did not tell even to
Sunita or any body else in the village. We went to our village Bhawar through a jeep
and bus. Police station Murthal is situated at a distance of one and ·half ·kilometer
from village Revli. We did not inform the police of P.S. Murthal. We reached in our
village at about 9:00 A.M. We came back in a jeep. Subhash, Ganga, Prem, Raju, Sher
Singh, Pappu etc. had accompanied us to village Revli. We did not inform any police
station which falls on the way back to village Revli. However, police station Baroda,
Gohana, Mohana, sonepat and Murthal falls on the way.”

11. It could thus clearly be seen from the evidence of the complainant−Deep Chand (P.W.9) that
after seeing the dead−body of deceased Dalip Singh, they did not raise any alarm. He has clearly
admitted in his deposition that there are residential houses on one side of the house of
accused/appellant−Ram Niwas. He further admitted that they reached their village Bhawar at
around 9.00 a.m. They waited till 2.30/3.00 p.m. to inform the Police. He has further admitted that
between village Rewli and his village Bhawar, Police Station Baroda, Gohana, Mohana, Sonepat, and
Murthal are on the way. They did not give intimation to any of these Police Stations either on their
way to village Bhawar or while returning to Murthal.

12. The evidence of Bhim Singh (P.W.10) is to the similar effect.

13. Apart from the ocular testimony of the complainant−Deep Chand (P.W.9) and Bhim Singh
(P.W.10), the only incriminating circumstance, on which the prosecution relies is the recovery of
‘ash’ and ‘plastic can’ on the memorandum of the accused/appellant−Ram Niwas under Section 27
of the Evidence Act.

14. It could clearly be seen that even according to the complainant−Deep Chand (P.W.9) and Bhim
Singh (P.W.10), after they saw the dead−body of the deceased Dalip Singh in paraal (paddy fodder),
they did not inform anyone in the village. No doubt that how a person responds to a situation is
differ from a person to person. However, the conduct of the said witnesses in not informing anybody
in the village Rewli and thereafter going to their village Bhawar in the morning, returning back in
the afternoon and not informing five Police Stations, which were in between village Bhawar and
village Rewli cast a serious doubt with regard to the truthfulness of their version. It is further
difficult to believe the testimony of these witnesses that in the night, the deceased Dalip Singh was
done to death, set on fire in a paraal (paddy fodder) and they did not come to know about the same
till the accused/appellant−Ram Niwas told them about the same next morning. In the evidence of
these witnesses, it has clearly come out that there are houses surrounding the house of the
accused/appellant−Ram Niwas. The prosecution version appears improbable that such an incident
took place in an area surrounded by houses. The prosecution has also not examined any
independent witness residing nearby so as to lend credence to the prosecution’s version.

5

Ram Niwas vs The State Of Haryana on 11 August, 2022

15. The prosecution relies on the extra−judicial confession made by the accused/appellant−Ram
Niwas to these witnesses. This Court in the case of S. Arul Raja vs. State of Tamil Nadu1, 1 (2010) 8
SCC 233 after considering the earlier judgments of this Court, has observed thus:

“48. The concept of an extra−judicial confession is primarily a judicial creation, and
must be used with restraint. Such a confession must be used only in limited
circumstances, and should also be corroborated by way of abundant caution. This
Court in Ram Singh v. Sonia [(2007) 3 SCC 1 : (2007) 2 SCC (Cri) 1] has held that an
extra−judicial confession while in police custody cannot be allowed. Moreover, when
there is a case hanging on an extra−judicial confession, corroborated only by
circumstantial evidence, then the courts must treat the same with utmost caution.

This principle has been affirmed by this Court in Ediga Anamma v. State of A.P.
[(1974) 4 SCC 443 : 1974 SCC (Cri) 479] and State of Maharashtra v. Kondiba
Tukaram Shirke [(1976) 3 SCC 775 : 1976 SCC (Cri) 514] . It is significant to observe
that A−1 has subsequently sought to retract this statement upon his arrival in Tamil
Nadu.”

16. We therefore find that it will not be safe to base conviction solely on the basis of
the alleged extra−judicial confession made by the appellant to these witnesses.

17. The only other circumstance on which the prosecution relies is the seizure of ‘ash’
kept in the plastic bag on the memorandum of the accused/appellant−Ram Niwas
under

Section 27 of the Evidence Act. Satish Kumar (P.W.11), the Investigating Officer
(I.O.), in his deposition has clearly admitted that the disclosure statement made by
the accused/appellant− Ram Niwas was made in the lock−up of the police station. He
has further admitted that though independent witnesses were available, inasmuch as
the Police Station is in the heart of the city, he had not called any independent
witness as ‘Panch’ of the said memorandum. As such, the reliance on the said seizure
also is of no help to the prosecution case. It is further to be noted that Dr. Sanjeev
Malhotra (P.W.5), in his evidence, has admitted that it was difficult to recognize the
face of the dead− body. From the postmortem, it is also not established that the death
was homicidal.

18. The prosecution case rests on circumstantial evidence. The law with regard to
conviction on the basis of circumstantial evidence has very well been crystalized in
the judgment of this Court in the case of Sharad Birdhichand Sarda vs. State of
Maharashtra2, wherein this Court held thus:

“152. Before discussing the cases relied upon by the High Court we would like to cite a
few decisions on the nature, character and essential proof required in a criminal case
which rests on circumstantial evidence alone. The most fundamental and basic

6

Ram Niwas vs The State Of Haryana on 11 August, 2022

decision of this Court is Hanumant v. State of Madhya Pradesh [AIR 1952 SC 343 :
1952 SCR 1091 : 1953 Cri LJ 129] . This case has been uniformly followed and applied
by this Court in a large number of later decisions up− to−date, for instance, the cases
of Tufail (Alias) Simmi v. State of Uttar Pradesh [(1969) 3 SCC 198: 1970 SCC (Cri)
55] and Ramgopal v. State of Maharashtra [(1972) 4 SCC 625: AIR 1972 SC 656]. It
may be useful to extract what Mahajan, J. has laid down in Hanumant case [AIR 1952
SC 343 : 1952 SCR 1091 : 1953 Cri LJ 129] :

“It is well to remember that in in cases where the evidence is of a circumstantial
nature, the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should in
the first instance be fully established, and all the facts so established should be
consistent only with the hypothesis of the

2 (1984) 4 SCC 116 guilt of the accused. Again, the circum− stances should be of a conclusive nature
and tendency and they should be such as to exclude every hypothesis but the one proposed to be
proved. In other words, there must be a chain of evidence so far complete as not to leave any
reasonable ground for a conclusion consistent with the innocence of the accused and it must be such
as to show that within all human probability the act must have been done by the accused.”

153. A close analysis of this decision would show that the following conditions must be fulfilled
before a case against an accused can be said to be fully established:

(1) the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should be
fully established.

It may be noted here that this Court indicated that the circumstances concerned “must or should”
and not “may be” established. There is not only a grammatical but a legal distinction between “may
be proved” and “must be or should be proved” as was held by this Court in Shivaji Sahabrao Bobade
v. State of Maharashtra [(1973) 2 SCC 793 : 1973 SCC (Cri) 1033 : 1973 Crl LJ 1783] where the
observations were made : [SCC para 19, p. 807 : SCC (Cri) p. 1047] “Certainly, it is a primary
principle that the accused must be and not merely may be guilty before a court can convict and the
mental distance between ‘may be’ and ‘must be’ is long and divides vague conjectures from sure
conclusions.” (2) the facts so established should be consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt of
the accused, that is to say, they should not be explainable on any other hypothesis except that the
accused is guilty, (3) the circumstances should be of a conclusive nature and tendency, (4) they
should exclude every possible hypothesis except the one to be proved, and (5) there must be a chain
of evidence so complete as not to leave any reasonable ground for the conclusion consistent with the
innocence of the accused and must show that in all human probability the act must have been done
by the accused.

154. These five golden principles, if we may say so, constitute the panchsheel of the proof of a case
based on circumstantial evidence.”

7

Ram Niwas vs The State Of Haryana on 11 August, 2022

19. This Court has held that there has to be a chain of evidence so complete so as not to leave any
reasonable ground for a conclusion consistent with the innocence of the accused and must show that
in all human probability the act must have been done by the accused. It has been held that the
circumstances should be of a conclusive nature and tendency. This Court has held that the
circumstances should exclude every possible hypothesis except the one to be proved. It has been
held that the accused ‘must be’ and not merely ‘may be’ guilty before a Court can convict.

20. It is settled law that the suspicion, however strong it may be, cannot take the place of proof
beyond reasonable doubt. An accused cannot be convicted on the ground of suspicion, no matter
how strong it is. An accused is presumed to be innocent unless proved guilty beyond a reasonable
doubt.

21. In the present case, we find that the prosecution has utterly failed to establish the chain of events
which can be said to exclusively lead to the one and only conclusion, i.e., the guilt of the accused. In
that view of the matter, we find that the judgment and order of the learned Sessions Judge and that
of the High Court are not sustainable.

22. The appeal is therefore allowed. The judgment and order of conviction and sentence dated 11
th/12th January 2005 of the learned Sessions Judge, Sonepat and the judgment and order of the
High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh dated 16 th March 2009, dismissing the appeal of
the accused/appellant− Ram Niwas are quashed and set aside. The accused/appellant− Ram Niwas
is acquitted of all the charges charged with. The bail bonds shall stand discharged.

23. Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed of.

…….........................J. [B.R. GAVAI] ………………....…….........................J. [PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI
NARASIMHA] NEW DELHI;

AUGUST 11, 2022

8