Samruddhi Co Operative Housing Society ... vs Mumbai Mahalaxmi Construction Pvt. ... on 11 January, 2022

Samruddhi Co Operative Housing Society ... vs Mumbai
Mahalaxmi Construction Pvt. ... on 11 January, 2022

Author: D.Y. Chandrachud

Bench: As Bopanna, Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud

Reportable

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

Civil Appeal No 4000 of 2019

Samruddhi Co-operative Housing Society Ltd.          … Appellant

Versus

Mumbai Mahalaxmi Construction Pvt. Ltd.            …Respondent

J U D G M E N T   D r   D h a n a n j a y a   Y   C h a n d r a c h u d ,   J   A   F a c t u a l   B a c k g r o u n d
................................................................................. 3 B Submissions of Counsel
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6   C   A n a l y s i s
..................................................................................................... 9 D Conclusion
.............................................................................................. 17 PART A A Factual Background 1 The
appeal arises from a judgment and order of the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission
1 dated 3 December 2018. The complaint was filed by the appellant for refund of the excess taxes
and charges paid the appellant to the municipal authorities, due to the alleged deficiency of service
of the respondent. By the impugned order, the NCDRC dismissed the complaint on the ground that
it was barred by limitation and that it was not maintainable since it was in the nature of a recovery
proceeding and not a consumer dispute. 2 The appellant is a co-operative housing society. The
respondent constructed Wings ‘A’ and ‘B’ and entered into agreements to sell flats with individual
purchasers in accordance with the Maharashtra Ownership Flats (Regulation of the Promotion of
Construction, Sale, Management and Transfer) Act 1963 2. The members of the appellant booked
the flats in 1993 and were granted possession in 1997. According to the appellant, the respondent
failed to take steps to obtain the occupation certificate from the municipal authorities. In the
absence of the occupation certificate, individual flat owners were not eligible for electricity and
water connections. Due to the efforts of the appellant, temporary water and electricity connections
were granted by the authorities. However, the members of the appellant had to pay property tax at a
rate 25% higher than the normal rate and water charges at a rate which was 50% higher than the
normal charge.

1

Samruddhi Co Operative Housing Society ... vs Mumbai Mahalaxmi Construction Pvt. ... on 11 January, 2022

“NCDRC” “MOFA” PART A 3 On 8 July 1998, the appellant instituted a consumer complaint before
the State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission Mumbai 3 seeking a direction to the
respondent to obtain the occupation certificate. On 7 April 2014, the respondent made an offer of a
one-time settlement to the appellant, which the appellant refused by a letter dated 18 April 2014 as
it was allegedly lower than the amount owed by the respondent. By its judgment and order dated 20
August 2014, the SCDRC directed the respondent to obtain an occupancy certificate within four
months. The SCDRC also directed the respondent to pay, inter alia Rs. 1,00,000/- towards
reimbursement of extra water charges paid. 4 On 28 December 2015, the appellant sent a legal
notice to the respondent demanding the payment of outstanding dues in an amount of Rs.
3,56,42,257/- . The respondent failed to comply with the demand. Thereafter, the appellant filed an
application for execution of the order of the SCDRC dated 20 August 2014. The appellant also filed a
complaint 4 before the NCDRC seeking payment of Rs. 2,60,73,475/- as reimbursement of excess
charges and tax paid by the members of the appellant due to the deficiency in service of the
respondent and Rs. 20,00,000/- towards the mental agony and inconvenience caused to the
members of the appellant.

5 Before the NCDRC, the appellant claimed that the complaint was not barred by limitation as the
payment of excess water usage charges and the non- issuance of occupancy certificate is a
continuing cause of action. Even otherwise, the cause of action was stated to have arisen on 7 April
2014, when the “SCDRC” PART A respondent allegedly acknowledged its liability and agreed to pay
an amount of Rs. 1 crore in settlement. The cause of action was also alleged to have arisen on 15
December 2015, when the respondent failed to pay the amount demanded by the appellant. Thus,
the complaint was, according to the appellant, filed within the prescribed period of limitation under
Section 24A of the Consumer Protection Act 1986.

6 By the impugned order, the NCDRC held that the complaint was barred by limitation as:

(i) The members of the appellant booked the flats in 1993 and obtained possession in
1997, which they have continued to enjoy since then. The possession was obtained
a g a i n s t   t h e   l a w   a s   n o   o c c u p a n c y   c e r t i f i c a t e   h a d   b e e n   p r o v i d e d   b y   t h e
respondent-builder;

(ii) The cause of action arose at the time when the appellant made efforts to obtain
individual water and electricity connections and the municipal authorities ordered
the members to pay higher charges. The complaint should have been filed within two
years of the accrual of the cause of action;

(iii) Since the cause of action arose on the date when the municipal authorities
demanded payment of higher taxes and charges, the period of limitation also
commenced from this date and cannot be extended by the communication between
parties;

(iv) With respect to the claim that there was a continuing cause of action due to
non-availability of the occupancy certificate, no relief was sought by the appellant in

2

Samruddhi Co Operative Housing Society ... vs Mumbai Mahalaxmi Construction Pvt. ... on 11 January, 2022

their complaint regarding the obtaining of an occupancy PART B certificate. The only
relief which was sought is a refund of Rs. 2.60 crores for payment of higher taxes.

7 On the merits of the dispute, the NCDRC observed that the complaint was filed for refund of the
excess amount paid by the appellant to the authorities. In essence, the complaint was filed for
recovery of this excess amount from the respondent. The NCDRC held that the respondent was not
the service provider of the services for which the property tax or water charges were levied. Since
these services were provided by the municipal authorities, the NCDRC held that the appellant would
not fall under the definition of ‘consumer’ under Section 2(1)(d) of the Consumer Protection Act
1986. Thus, the NCDRC dismissed the complaint as being barred by limitation and as being not
maintainable under the Consumer Protection Act 1986.

B      Submissions of Counsel

8      Mr Sunil Fernandes, counsel for the appellant, urged the following

submissions:

(i)    There is a continuing cause of action in the present case as the

respondent has failed to provide the occupancy certificate;

(ii) Due to the failure of the respondent to obtain the occupancy certificate, the members of the
appellant have had to pay a 25% higher amount on account of the property tax and an additional
50% towards the water charges;

PART B

(iii) Under Section 6 of the MOFA, it is the duty of the builder to provide the occupancy certificate to
the society, which the respondent has failed to fulfil;

(iv) Prior to the order of the SCDRC, the respondent offered to pay an amount of Rs. 1 crore as a
one-time settlement amount towards payment of the extra charges or penalty incurred by the
appellant for the increased property tax and water charges;

(v) The offer of a one-time settlement had no relation to the complaint pending before the SCDRC as
the relief claimed before the SCDRC was for the grant of an occupancy certificate and payment of
penalty to the appellant for excess charges and deficiencies;

(vi) When the residents started residing in the society’s premises, they had to incur increased
amount towards the property tax and water charges. These charges were levied on an annual basis
and continue to be raised due to the failure of the respondent to obtain an occupancy certificate;

3

Samruddhi Co Operative Housing Society ... vs Mumbai Mahalaxmi Construction Pvt. ... on 11 January, 2022

(vii) The conduct of the respondent has been improper. The respondent has not obtained the
occupancy certificate even twenty four years after giving possession and has not complied with the
order of the SCDRC dated 20 August 2014. Due to the failure of the respondent to comply with the
order of the SCDRC, non-bailable warrants have been issued against the respondent; and

(viii) Under the MOFA and the agreement to sell with the members of the appellant, the respondent
has an obligation to obtain the occupancy certificate. Due to the deficiency in service, the members
of the appellant PART B have had to make excess payment. Thus, the appellant is a consumer under
the Consumer Protection Act 1986.

9 Opposing these submissions, Mr Atul Babasaheb Dakh, appearing on behalf of the respondent
submitted that:

(i) When the construction of the project was completed in 1997, the respondent
applied for an occupancy certificate. However, the respondent did not offer
possession to the flat-purchasers;

(ii) The members of the appellant society took possession of their flats to refurbish
the interiors and to make suitable arrangements till the occupancy certificate was
issued. Instead, they started occupying the premises and made arrangements for
water and electricity by paying additional charges;

(iii) The members of the appellant made unauthorized constructions due to which
there was a delay in obtaining the occupancy certificate;

(iv) The proposal for one-time settlement in 2014 did not pertain to the additional
property tax and water charges;

(v) In the consumer complaint filed by the appellant in 1998, the appellant had raised
the issue of excessive water charges and the SCDRC had directed payment of Rs.
1,00,000/- to them. On 2 May 2016, the appellant society received an amount of Rs.
11,55,885/- in the proceedings for execution of the order dated 20 August 2014 of the
SCDRC;

PART C

(vi) The complaint is barred by limitation as the cause of action arose in 1997 and the complaint was
filed 18 years later;

(vii) The appellant’s failure to incorporate their present grievances in the prior complaint before the
SCDRC indicates relinquishment of their grievances;

(viii) Under Section 6 of the MOFA, the builder is entitled to pay all outgoing charges till the grant of
possession. The members of the appellant received possession in 1997 and there is no claim for an

4

Samruddhi Co Operative Housing Society ... vs Mumbai Mahalaxmi Construction Pvt. ... on 11 January, 2022

amount due till 1997;

(ix) Section 12 of the MOFA provides that it is the liability of the flat purchasers to pay municipal
taxes and water and electricity charges;

(x) The respondent is not a service provider of water supply and has not received any payment for
water and property tax. Thus, the appellant is not a consumer under the Consumer Protection Act
1986 and the complaint is not maintainable; and

(xi) There is no privity of contract between the parties for payment of extra charges in the absence of
an occupancy certificate.

C        Analysis

10       The crux of the appeal revolves around the maintainability of the complaint

and whether it is barred by limitation. The NCDRC held that the cause of action arose when the
municipal authorities asked the appellant to pay higher charges in the first instance and thus, a
complaint should have been filed within two years of the accrual of the cause of action. The
appellant however, has argued that the cause of action is of a continuing nature, since members of
the appellant have PART C continued paying higher charges as the respondent failed to provide the
occupancy certificate.

11 Section 24A of the Consumer Protection Act 1986 provides for the period of limitation period for
lodging a complaint. A complaint to a consumer forum has to be filed within two years of the date on
which the cause of action has arisen. In the instant case, the appellant has submitted that since the
cause of action is founded on a continuing wrong, the complaint is within limitation. 12 Section 22
of the Limitation Act 1963 5 provides for the computation of limitation in the case of a continuing
breach of contract or tort. It provides that in case of a continuing breach of contract, a fresh period
of limitation begins to run at every moment of time during which the breach continues. This Court
in Balakrishna Savalram Pujari Waghmare v. Shree Dhyaneshwar Maharaj Sansthan6 elaborated on
when a continuous cause of action arises. Speaking for the three-judge Bench, Justice PB
Gajendragadkar (as the learned Chief Justice then was) observed that “31. […] Does the conduct of
the trustees amount to a continuing wrong under Section 23? That is the question which this
contention raises for our decision. In other words, did the cause of action arise de die in diem as
claimed by the appellants? In dealing with this argument it is necessary to bear in mind that Section
23 refers not to a continuing right but to a continuing wrong. It is the very essence of a continuing
wrong that it is an act which creates a continuing source of injury and renders the doer of the act
responsible and liable for the continuance of the said injury. If the wrongful act causes an injury
which is complete, there is no continuing wrong even though the damage resulting from the act may
continue. If, however, a wrongful act is of such a character that the injury caused by it itself
continues, then the act constitutes a “22. Continuing breaches and torts.—In the case of a continuing
breach of contract or in the case of a continuing tort, a fresh period of limitation begins to run at
every moment of the time during which the breach or the tort, as the case may be, continues.” AIR

5

Samruddhi Co Operative Housing Society ... vs Mumbai Mahalaxmi Construction Pvt. ... on 11 January, 2022

1959 SC 798 PART C continuing wrong. In this connection it is necessary to draw a distinction
between the injury caused by the wrongful act and what may be described as the effect of the said
injury. It is only in regard to acts which can be properly characterised as continuing wrongs that
Section 23 can be invoked.” (emphasis supplied) The Court held that the act of the trustees to deny
the rights of Guravs as hereditary worshippers and dispossessing them through a decree of the court
was not a continuing wrong. Although the continued dispossession caused damage to the appellants,
the injury to their rights was complete when they were evicted.

13 In CWT v. Suresh Seth 7, a two-judge Bench of this Court dealt with the question of whether a
default in filing a return under the Wealth Tax Act amounted to a continuing wrong. Justice ES
Venkataramiah (as the learned Chief Justice then was) observed that:

“11. […] The distinctive nature of a continuing wrong is that the law that is violated
makes the wrongdoer continuously liable for penalty. A wrong or default which is
complete but whose effect may continue to be felt even after its completion is,
however, not a continuing wrong or default. It is reasonable to take the view that the
court should not be eager to hold that an act or omission is a continuing wrong or
default unless there are words in the statute concerned which make out that such was
the intention of the legislature. In the instant case whenever the question of levying
penalty arises what has to be first considered is whether the assessee has failed
without reasonable cause of file the return as required by law and if it is held that he
has failed to do so then penalty has to be levied in accordance with the measure
provided in the Act. When the default is the filing of delayed return the penalty may
be correlated to the time-lag between the last day for filing it without penalty and the
day on which it is filed and the quantum of tax or wealth involved in the case for
purposes of determining the quantum (1981) 2 SCC 790 PART C of penalty but the
default however is only one which takes place on the expiry of the last day for filing
the return without penalty and not a continuing one. The default in question does
not, however, give rise to a fresh cause of action every day. Explaining the expression
“a continuing cause of action” Lord Lindley in Hole v. Chard Union [(1894) 1 Ch D
293 : 63 LJ Ch 469 : 70 LT 52] observed:

“What is a continuing cause of action? Speaking accurately, there is no such thing;
but what is called a continuing cause of action is a cause of action which arises from
the repetition of acts or omissions of the same kind as that for which the action was
brought.” (emphasis supplied) The Court further provided illustrations of continuous
wrongs:

“17. The true principle appears to be that where the wrong complained of is the
omission to perform a positive duty requiring a person to do a certain act the test to
determine whether such a wrong is a continuing one is whether the duty in question
is one which requires him to continue to do that act. Breach of a covenant to keep the
premises in good repair, breach of a continuing guarantee, obstruction to a right of
way, obstruction to the right of a person to the unobstructed flow of water, refusal by

6

Samruddhi Co Operative Housing Society ... vs Mumbai Mahalaxmi Construction Pvt. ... on 11 January, 2022

a man to maintain his wife and children whom he is bound to maintain under law
and the carrying on of mining operations or the running of a factory without
complying with the measures intended for the safety and well-being of workmen may
be illustrations of continuing breaches or wrongs giving rise to civil or criminal
liability, as the case may be, de die in diem.”

14 In M. Siddiq v. Suresh Das 8, a Constitution Bench of this Court (of which one of us (Justice DY
Chandrachud) was a part) examined the precedents with regards to a continuing wrong. The Court
observed that:

“343. The submission of Nirmohi Akhara is based on the principle of continuing
wrong as a defence to a plea of limitation. In assessing the submission, a distinction
must be made between the source of a legal injury and the effect of the injury. The
source of a legal injury is founded in a breach of an obligation. A continuing wrong
arises where there is an obligation imposed by law, (2020) 1 SCC 1 PART C
agreement or otherwise to continue to act or to desist from acting in a particular
manner. The breach of such an obligation extends beyond a single completed act or
omission. The breach is of a continuing nature, giving rise to a legal injury which
assumes the nature of a continuing wrong. For a continuing wrong to arise, there
must in the first place be a wrong which is actionable because in the absence of a
wrong, there can be no continuing wrong. It is when there is a wrong that a further
line of enquiry of whether there is a continuing wrong would arise. Without a wrong
there cannot be a continuing wrong. A wrong postulates a breach of an obligation
imposed on an individual, whether positive or negative, to act or desist from acting in
a particular manner.

The obligation on one individual finds a corresponding reflection of a right which inheres in
another. A continuing wrong postulates a breach of a continuing duty or a breach of an obligation
which is of a continuing nature. […] Hence, in evaluating whether there is a continuing wrong within
the meaning of Section 23, the mere fact that the effect of the injury caused has continued, is not
sufficient to constitute it as a continuing wrong. For instance, when the wrong is complete as a result
of the act or omission which is complained of, no continuing wrong arises even though the effect or
damage that is sustained may enure in the future. What makes a wrong, a wrong of a continuing
nature is the breach of a duty which has not ceased but which continues to subsist. The breach of
such a duty creates a continuing wrong and hence a defence to a plea of limitation.” (emphasis
supplied) 15 A continuing wrong occurs when a party continuously breaches an obligation imposed
by law or agreement. Section 3 of the MOFA imposes certain general obligations on a promoter.
These obligations inter alia include making disclosures on the nature of title to the land,
encumbrances on the land, fixtures, fittings and amenities to be provided, and to not grant
possession of a flat until a completion certificate is given by the local authority. The responsibility to
obtain the occupancy certificate from the local authority has also been imposed under PART C the
agreement to sell between the members of the appellant and the respondent on the latter.

7

Samruddhi Co Operative Housing Society ... vs Mumbai Mahalaxmi Construction Pvt. ... on 11 January, 2022

16 Section 6 of the MOFA make the promoter responsible for payments of outgoings till the property
is transferred. Section 6 reads as follows:

“A promoter shall, while he is in possession and where he collects from persons who
have taken over flats or are to take over flats sums for the payment of outgoings even
thereafter, pay all outgoings (including ground rent, municipal or other local taxes,
on income taxes, water charges, electricity charges, revenue assessment, interest on
any mortgage or other encumbrances, if any), until he transfers the property to the
persons taking over the flats, or to the organisation of any such persons, [where any
promoter fails to pay all or any of the outgoings collected by him from the persons
who have taken over flats or are to take over flats, before transferring the property to
the persons taking over the flats or to the organisation of any such persons, the
promoter shall continue to be liable, even after the transfer of the property, to pay
such outgoings and penal charges (if any) to the authority or person to whom they are
payable and to be responsible for any legal proceedings which may be taken therefor
by such authority or persons.]” (emphasis supplied)

17 Sections 3 and 6 of the MOFA indicate that the promoter has an obligation to provide the
occupancy certificate to the flat owners. Apart from this, the promoter must make payments of
outgoings such as ground rent, municipal taxes, water charges and electricity charges till the time
the property is transferred to the flat-owners. Where the promoter fails to pay such charges, the
promoter is liable even after the transfer of property . PART C 18 Based on these provisions, it is
evident that there was an obligation on the respondent to provide the occupancy certificate and pay
for the relevant charges till the certificate has been provided. The respondent has time and again
failed to provide the occupancy certificate to the appellant society. For this reason, a complaint was
instituted in 1998 by the appellant against the respondent. The NCDRC on 20 August 2014 directed
the respondent to obtain the certificate within a period of four months. Further, the NCDRC also
imposed a penalty for any the delay in obtaining the occupancy certificate beyond these 4 months.
Since 2014 till date, the respondent has failed to provide the occupancy certificate. Owing to the
failure of the respondent to obtain the certificate, there has been a direct impact on the members of
the appellant in terms of the payment of higher taxes and water charges to the municipal authority.
This continuous failure to obtain an occupancy certificate is a breach of the obligations imposed on
the respondent under the MOFA and amounts to a continuing wrong. The appellants therefore, are
entitled to damages arising out of this continuing wrong and their complaint is not barred by
limitation. 19 The NCDRC in its impugned order has held that the cause of action arose when the
municipal authorities ordered the payment of higher taxes in the first instance. Further, the
impugned order also states that the present complaint is barred by limitation as there is no prayer
for supply of occupancy certificate. We are unable to subscribe to the view of the NCDRC on both
counts. Undoubtedly, the continuing wrong in the present case is the failure to obtain the occupancy
certificate. Against this act of the respondent, the appellant society has taken appropriate action by
filing a complaint before the consumer forum. The appellant PART C is currently pursuing the
execution of the order of the SCDRC arising from that complaint. However, that itself does not
preclude it from claiming compensation for the consequences which have arisen out of this
continuing wrong. The failure to obtain the occupancy certificate has resulted in the levy of higher

8

Samruddhi Co Operative Housing Society ... vs Mumbai Mahalaxmi Construction Pvt. ... on 11 January, 2022

taxes on the members of the appellant society repeatedly by the municipal authorities. Despite the
order of 20 August 2014, the respondent has failed to obtain the occupancy certificate. This has
resulted in a situation where the appellant, despite having followed the correct course of litigation in
demanding the furnishing of an occupancy certificate, will continue to suffer the injury inflicted by
the respondent merely due to the delay in the execution of the order against the respondent.
Rejecting the complaint as being barred by limitation, when the demand for higher taxes is made
repeatedly due to the lack of an occupancy certificate, is a narrow view which is not consonance with
the welfare objective of the Consumer Protection Act 1986.

20 We shall now briefly advert to the finding of the NCDRC on the merits of the dispute. The
NCDRC has held that the appellant is not a ‘consumer’ under the provisions of the Consumer
Protection Act as they have claimed the recovery of higher charges paid to the municipal authorities
from the respondent. Extending this further, the NCDRC has observed that the respondent is not
the service provider for water or electricity and thus, the complaint is not maintainable.

21 Section 2(1)(d) of the Consumer Protection Act defines a ‘consumer’ as a person that avails of any
service for a consideration. A ‘deficiency’ is defined under Section 2(1)(g) as the shortcoming or
inadequacy in the quality of service PART D that is required to be maintained by law. In its decisions
in Wing Commander Arifur Rahman Khan & Others v. DLF Southern Homes Private Limited &
Others 9 and Pioneer Urban Land Infrastructure Limited v. Govindan Raghavan 10, this Court has
held that the failure to obtain an occupancy certificate or abide by contractual obligations amounts
to a deficiency in service. In Treaty Construction v. Ruby Tower Cooperative Housing Society Ltd.
11, the Court also considered the question of awarding compensation for not obtaining the
certificate. In that case, the Court declined to award damages as there was no cogent basis for
holding the appellant liable for compensation, and assessing the quantum of compensation or
assessing the loss to the members of the respondent society.

22 In the present case, the respondent was responsible for transferring the title to the flats to the
society along with the occupancy certificate. The failure of the respondent to obtain the occupation
certificate is a deficiency in service for which the respondent is liable. Thus, the members of the
appellant society are well within their rights as ‘consumers’ to pray for compensation as a
recompense for the consequent liability (such as payment of higher taxes and water charges by the
owners) arising from the lack of an occupancy certificate.

D       Conclusion

23      For the above reasons, we allow the appeal against the order of the

NCDRC dated 3 December 2018 and hold that the complaint is maintainable. We direct the NCDRC
to decide the merits of the dispute having regard to the (2020) 16 SCC 512 (2019) 5 SCC 725 (2019)
8 SCC 157 PART D observations contained in the present judgment and dispose the complaint
within a period of three months from the date of this judgment. 24 Pending applications, if any,
shall stand dismissed.

9

Samruddhi Co Operative Housing Society ... vs Mumbai Mahalaxmi Construction Pvt. ... on 11 January, 2022

… … … . … . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . J .   [ D r   D h a n a n j a y a   Y   C h a n d r a c h u d ]
…..….….....................................................J. [AS Bopanna] New Delhi;

January 11, 2022

10