Satya Dev Bhagaur vs The State Of Rajasthan on 17 February, 2022

Satya Dev Bhagaur vs The State Of Rajasthan on 17 February,
2022

Author: B.R. Gavai

Bench: B.R. Gavai, L. Nageswara Rao

NON−REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1422 OF 2022
[Arising out of SLP(C) No. 24434 of 2019]

SATYA DEV BHAGAUR & ORS.                  ...APPELLANT(S)

VERSUS

THE STATE OF RAJASTHAN AND ORS. ...RESPONDENT(S)

WITH

CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 1426−1430 OF 2022
[Arising out of SLP(C) Nos. 7341−7345 of 2020]

CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 1431−1437 OF 2022
[Arising out of SLP(C) Nos. 8155−8161 of 2020]

CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 1438−1440 OF 2022
[Arising out of SLP(C) Nos. 13124−13126 of 2020]

CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 1423−1425 OF 2022
[Arising out of SLP(C) Nos. 6142−6144 of 2021]

JUDGMENT

B.R. GAVAI, J.

1. Leave granted.

appellants assail the order dated 13.08.2019, passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of
Judicature for Rajasthan at Jodhpur (hereinafter referred to as the “High Court”), in D.B. Special
Appeal Writ No. 837 of 2019, thereby allowing the appeal filed by the State of Rajasthan, challenging
the order of the Single Judge of the High Court dated 28.08.2018. The Single Judge of the High
Court vide the said order had allowed the writ petitions filed by the appellants and directed the
respondent−State to grant bonus marks to the appellants herein, who have worked under the
National Health Mission Schemes (hereinafter referred to as “NHM”) and National Rural Health

1

Mission Schemes (hereinafter referred to as “NRHM”) in States other than the State of Rajasthan.

Satya Dev Bhagaur vs The State Of Rajasthan on 17 February, 2022

3. Appellants in civil appeals arising out of the connected Special Leave Petitions viz., SLP(C) Nos.
7341−7345 of 2020, SLP(C) Nos. 8155−8161 of 2020 and SLP(C) Nos. 13124− 13126 of 2020 are
similarly situated candidates, who were originally writ petitioners before the Single Judge of the
High Court, seeking similar reliefs as the appellants in the lead matter. The Single Judge had
dismissed the said writ petitions vide a common order dated 29.08.2019. The appellants herein
preferred appeals before the Division Bench of the High Court. The Division Bench vide common
order dated 23.03.2020, relying on the impugned judgment rendered in the lead matter, dismissed
the appeals. Being aggrieved thereby, the appellants are before this Court.

4. The appellants in civil appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 6142−6144 of 2021 are another set of
similarly placed candidates. They have approached this Court, being aggrieved by the judgment
passed by the Division Bench of the High Court dated 28.02.2019, thereby dismissing their appeals,
challenging the order dated 26.11.2018 passed by the Single Judge, whereby two separate writ
petitions were dismissed.

5. All these appeals are heard together.

6. For the sake of convenience, the facts in civil appeal arising out of SLP (C) No 24434 of 2019 are
referred to for consideration.

The State of Rajasthan has framed rules known as Rajasthan Ayurvedic, Unani, Homeopathy and
Naturopathy Services (Amendment) Rules, 2013 (hereinafter referred to as the “said Rules”). Rule
19 of the said Rules reads thus :

"19. Scrutiny of applications.− The Appointing Authority shall scrutinize the
applications received by it and require as many candidates qualified for appointment
under these rule as seem to it desirable for interview:

Provided that in case of appointment to the post of Nurse Compounder Junior Grade,
the merit shall be prepared by the Appointing Authority on the basis of marks
obtained in such qualifying examination specified in the Schedule appended to the
rules and bonus marks as may be specified by State Government having regard to the
length of experience on similar work under the Government, Chief Minister BPL
Jeevan Raksha Kosh, National Rural Health Mission, as the case may be.

Provided further that the decision of the Appointing Authority, as to the eligibility or
otherwise of a candidate, shall be final."

7. The respondent−State of Rajasthan has issued a notification on 30.05.2018, thereby providing
that such of the candidate who had worked under the Government, Chief Minister BPL Life Saving
Fund, NRHM Medicare Relief Society, AIDS Control Society, National TB Control Program,
Jhalawar Hospital and Medical College Society, Samekit Rog Nirgrani Pariyojna or State Institute of

2

Satya Dev Bhagaur vs The State Of Rajasthan on 17 February, 2022

Health Family Welfare (SIHFW), would be entitled to bonus marks as per the experience attained.
For 1 year of experience, the bonus marks will be 10, for 2 years of experience the bonus marks will
be 20 and for 3 years of experience it will be 30. The advertisement also provided that only such of
the candidates who were having experience certificate from the competent authority as mentioned
in the said advertisement would be entitled to the bonus marks.

8. The appellants herein, who have the experience of working under the NRHM scheme on contract
basis in different States, approached the High Court vide various writ petitions seeking a direction to
the respondent−State of Rajasthan to accept the experience certificate of the petitioners which was
issued by the NRHM authorities of different States, so as to qualify them for getting the bonus
marks. The Single Judge of the High Court vide order dated 28.08.2018, allowed the said writ
petitions and directed the State of Rajasthan to grant bonus marks to the appellants who had
worked under the NHM/NRHM schemes in different states.

9. Being aggrieved by the order passed by the Single Judge, the State of Rajasthan approached the
Division Bench of the High Court. The Division Bench by the impugned order dated 13.08.2018,
allowed the appeal by holding that the intention of the State of Rajasthan was to confine the benefit
of award of bonus marks to those employed in the schemes within the State of Rajasthan and not in
other States. Being aggrieved thereby, the appellants are before this Court.

10. We have heard Mr. Rishabh Sancheti, Mr. Himanshu Jain and Ms. Alpana Sharma, learned
counsel for the appellants and Dr. Manish Singhvi, learned Senior Counsel for the State of
Rajasthan.

11. The main contention of the appellants is that a plain reading of Rule 19 of the said Rules would
clearly show that the experience of working anywhere in the country under the NHM/NRHM
schemes would be sufficient to qualify a candidate to get bonus marks. It is submitted that the work
which is being done by all the contractual employees working under the NHM/NRHM schemes in
the State of Rajasthan is the same as that being done by the employees working under the
NHM/NRHM schemes in the other States. Learned counsel submitted that basically all these
contractual employees are working as Nursing Assistants in ambulances. It is therefore, submitted
that the Rule 19 of the said Rules itself enables a candidate working anywhere in the country under
the NHM/NRHM schemes to qualify to get the bonus marks. The candidate cannot be deprived of
the same on the ground that only the employees working under the NHM/NRHM schemes in the
State of Rajasthan are entitled to such benefit.

12. The learned counsel for the appellants submit that, to discriminate between employees working
under the NHM/NRHM schemes in the State of Rajasthan as against those working outside the
State of Rajasthan, is without intelligible differentia, not having the nexus with the object sought to
be achieved and as such, is palpably arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.

13. Dr. Singhvi, the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the State of Rajasthan, per contra,
submitted that if Rule 19 is read in proper prospective along with the advertisement, it will be clear
that the benefit of bonus marks is available only to the employees working under the NHM/NRHM

3

Satya Dev Bhagaur vs The State Of Rajasthan on 17 February, 2022

schemes who have rendered their services in the State of Rajasthan. He submits that Rajasthan is a
vast State with different types of topographies. He further submitted that the object of Rule 19 is
only to give additional weightage for the services rendered by the contractual employees either with
the State Government or under the schemes executed or implemented in the State of Rajasthan. He
submitted that the Division Bench has rightly construed this aspect and allowed the appeal filed by
the State.

14. Rule 19, which has been reproduced by us in the beginning itself, provides that in the case of
appointment to the post of Nurse Compounder Junior Grade, the merit shall be prepared by the
Appointing Authority on the basis of the marks obtained in such qualifying examination specified in
the Schedule appended to the said Rules. It further provides that bonus marks as specified by the
State Government, having regard to the length of experience on similar work under the
Government, Chief Minister BPL Jeevan Raksha Kosh and National Rural Health Mission, would be
added to the qualifying marks.

15. From the material placed on record, it appears that the policy of the State of Rajasthan is that
while selecting Nurse Compounder Junior Grade, the bonus marks are to be given to such
employees who have done similar work under the State Government and under the various schemes.
The question thus, would be whether such bonus marks would also be available to the contractual
employees working under the NHM/NRHM schemes in other States.

16. It is trite that the Courts would be slow in interfering in the policy matters, unless the policy is
found to be palpably discriminatory and arbitrary. This court would not interfere with the policy
decision when a State is in a position to point out that there is intelligible differentia in application
of policy and that such intelligible differentia has a nexus with the object sought to be achieved.

17. This Court in the case of Krishnan Kakkanth vs. Government of Kerala and others1 has observed
thus:

“36. To ascertain unreasonableness and arbitrariness in the context of Article 14 of the Constitution,
it is not necessary to enter upon any exercise for finding out the wisdom in the policy decision of the
State Government. It is immaterial whether a better or more comprehensive policy decision could
have been taken. It is equally immaterial if it can be demonstrated that the policy decision is unwise
and is likely to defeat the purpose for which such decision has been taken. Unless the policy decision
is demonstrably capricious or arbitrary and not informed by any reason whatsoever or it suffers
from the vice of discrimination or infringes any statute or provisions of the Constitution, the policy
decision cannot be struck down. It should be borne in mind that except for the limited purpose of
testing a public policy in the context of illegality and unconstitutionality, courts should avoid
“embarking on uncharted ocean of public policy”.” 1 (1997) 9 SCC 495

18. A three−Judge bench of this Court in Sher Singh and Others vs. Union of India and Others2 has
observed thus:

4

Satya Dev Bhagaur vs The State Of Rajasthan on 17 February, 2022

“As a matter of fact the courts would be slow in interfering with matters of
government policy except where it is shown that the decision is unfair, mala fide or
contrary to any statutory directions.”

19. When Rule 19 is read with sub−clause (ii) of Clause 7 of the advertisement, the policy and object
of the State of Rajasthan would be clear. Sub−clause (ii) of Clause 7 of the advertisement enlists the
authorities who are competent to issue experience certificate for contractual employees. The list
would reveal that most of the competent authorities are the authorities who are heads of the
institution like Government Medical College, Government Dental College, Director, Public Health,
All Chief Medical and Health Officer of the State, All Primary Medical Officers, etc. Insofar as the
NHM/AIDS is concerned, the competent authority is mentioned as Project Director, NHM/AIDS.
We find that reading ‘Project Director, NHM/AIDS’ to be a Project Director of NHM/NRHM
anywhere in the country would be reading 2 (1995) 6 SCC 515 the said words without context. When
sub−clause (ii) of Clause (7) of the advertisement mentions all other authorities who are the heads of
the various establishments in the State of Rajasthan, the term ‘Project Director, NHM’ will have to
be construed as ‘Project Director, NHM’ within the State of Rajasthan.

20. Though the impugned order does not consider this aspect in detail, it will be apposite to refer to
the observation made by the Division Bench of the High Court of Rajasthan in the case of Jagdish
Prasad and Others vs. State of Rajasthan and Ors.3:

“From perusal of the record made available, the Government of Rajasthan has
conducted several training programmes for the persons working even on contractual
basis and under different schemes controlled by the Government of Rajasthan and
Medi Care Relief Society. The training programmes mainly pertain to the peculiar
working pattern in the rural areas of the State of Rajasthan including tribal and arid
zones. It is also pertinent to note that the participation in such trainings is mandatory
and non−joining of the same may result into non−renewal of service contract. The
persons working with Government of Rajasthan and Medi Care Relief Society with
experience similar to the work of Nurse Grade−II are posted at different 3 D.B. Civil
Writ Petition No. 12942/2015, dated 09.02.2016 hospitals and other institutions
affiliated with the health projects and as such these persons are having a special
knowledge of working in the State.

A person having such knowledge certainly forms a class different than the persons not having such
experience of working in the State. It is also pertinent to note that the benefit extended is only a little
weightage on basis of the length of service with experience of working in Rajasthan and not the
eligibility. A person having qualification eligibility is entitled to face the process of recruitment
irrespective of having any experience or not. The experience gained in other States cannot be
compared with the working in the State of Rajasthan as every State is having its own problems and
issues and the persons trained to meet such circumstances stand on different pedestal.”

21. It could thus clearly be seen that the Division Bench in the case of Jagdish Prasad (Supra) after
considering the record, has come to the finding that the Government of Rajasthan has conducted

5

Satya Dev Bhagaur vs The State Of Rajasthan on 17 February, 2022

several training programmes for the persons working with it on contractual basis, as well as under
different schemes. The training programmes mainly pertain to the peculiar working pattern in the
rural areas of the State of Rajasthan including tribal and arid zones. The Division Bench has further
come to a finding that participation in such a training is mandatory and non−joining of the same
would result in non−renewal of service contracts. It has been held that persons having special
knowledge in working in the State of Rajasthan form a class different than the persons not having
such experience of working in the State. It was found that the benefit extended by the State policy
was only that of giving a little more weightage on the basis of experience and all the candidates were
required to undergo the rigor of selection process. The Division Bench has clearly held that the
experienced candidates in other States cannot be compared with the candidates working in the State
of Rajasthan, as every State has its own problems and issues and the persons trained to meet such
circumstances, stand on a different pedestal.

22. We are in complete agreement with the aforesaid observations of the Division Bench. We find
that the policy of the State of Rajasthan to restrict the benefit of bonus marks only to such
employees who have worked under different organizations in the State of Rajasthan and to
employees working under the NHM/NRHM schemes in the State of Rajasthan, cannot be said to be
arbitrary.

23. It is further to be noted that this Court in the case of Sachivalaya Dainik Vetan Bhogi
Karamchari Union, Jaipur vs. State of Rajasthan and Others4, has upheld the policy of the State of
Rajasthan, for giving weightage for the services rendered by the employees, where services were
used by the State either temporarily or on ad hoc basis.

24. In that view of the matter, we do not find any reason to interfere with the impugned judgment.
The appeals are dismissed.

25. No order as to cost. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of in the above terms.

……....….......................J. [L. NAGESWARA RAO] ..…....….......................J. [B.R. GAVAI] NEW
DELHI;

FEBRUARY 17, 2022.

4 (2017) 11 SCC 421

6