Lok Mal @ Loku vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 7 March, 2025

Lok Mal @ Loku vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 7 March, 2025

Author: Bela M. Trivedi

Bench: Bela M. Trivedi

2025 INSC 344

                                                                      NON-REPORTABLE

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 325 OF 2011

             LOK MAL @ LOKU                                               Appellant(s)……
                                                       VERSUS

             THE STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH                                Respondent(s)…….

                                                  JUDGMENT

PRASANNA B. VARALE, J.

1. The present criminal appeal arises out of a judgement and order dated 22nd July 2010 passed by
High Court of Judicature at Allahabad, Lucknow Bench in Crl. Appeal No. 496 of 1986. By the
impugned judgment and order, the conviction which was rendered by the trial court under Section
376, 323 Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter being referred to as ‘IPC’) was affirmed by the High
Court and a sentence of 5 years rigorous imprisonment under Section 376 IPC and 6 months
rigorous imprisonment under Section 323 IPC imposed by the trial court was confirmed.

BRIEF FACTS

2. The factual matrix of the case is that on 19.03.1984 at 9.30 A.M, the prosecutrix went to take
tuition classes for the girls at the house of the accused. It was stated that out of the two girls. One
went to the bathroom and the other was sent by the accused for bringing water. It was further stated
that when she was engaged in the work on the first floor of the house, the accused entered the room
and latched the door from inside and forced her on the bed. The prosecutrix tried to raise an alarm

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/3778978/

1

Lok Mal @ Loku vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 7 March, 2025

but her mouth was gagged with a piece of cloth. The accused then removed her salwar to make her
naked. It was further stated that she tried to resist and run away from the accused, but he held her
by force and committed rape on her. In the meantime, the girls reached there, and they knocked at
the door which was not opened. The accused threatened the prosecutrix that if she raises a hue and
cry about the incident, he will kill her. The grandmother of the girls eventually came to the rescue
and brought the prosecutrix on the ground floor. Due to the outcry of the prosecutrix, the local
people had gathered at the place of the incident. She was taken to her own house by uncle Nand
Kishore and she narrated the entire incident to her mother and uncle. When the family members
attempted to lodge the report, the inhabitants of the mahalla and family members of the accused
threatened them with dire consequences if they tried to intimate the incident to the police.
Subsequently, a written report was submitted at the police station by the prosecutrix, and a case was
registered under Section 376, 323, 504 and 506 of IPC. After the investigation, a charge sheet was
submitted against the accused in the court. The case was committed to the Court of sessions by the
learned Magistrate and charges were framed under Section 376,323 506 of IPC.

3. The accused pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried before the court of law. The prosecutrix
was examined as PW1, PW2 Smt. Dada Bai was the mother of the accused. PW3 Kumari Sangeeta
was the niece of the accused, PW4 was Dr. Daya Chaturvedi, PW5 was head constable Kishan Niwas
Tiwari. PW6 was a person named Chhote Lala Choudhary. PW 7 was the Investigating Officer of the
case. PW8 Smt. Asha Devi was the head constable of the police station concerned.

4. Statement of the accused under Section 313 of Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 (hereinafter being
referred to as ‘CrPC’) was recorded. The accused had denied the prosecution case and claimed that
he was falsely implicated due to the enmity with the prosecutrix. The Trial Court vide its judgement
and order dated 13.08.1986 convicted the accused under Sections 376, 323 IPC and awarded
imprisonment for a term of 5 years.

5. On appreciation of evidence of record, the High Court vide its judgement dated 22.03.2010
confirmed the conviction rendered by the Trial Court under Section 376 and Section 323 IPC, while
acquitting him under Section 506 IPC.

6. Aggrieved by the said Judgement of the High Court, the appellant is before us.

CONTENTIONS

7. The counsel for the appellant vehemently submitted that there is absolutely no evidence against
the appellant. It is submitted that oral evidence is in the form of interested witnesses and as such
Trial Court as well as the High Court erred in recording the conviction and awarding sentence to the
appellant on such unacceptable evidence. The learned counsel for the appellant also submitted that
it is a case of false implication and that the mother of the prosecutrix has a doubtful character. The
Ld. counsel for the appellant submitted that the medical evidence on record does not corroborate
with the version of the prosecutrix as there is no injury found in the private parts. Hence, the
conviction ought not have been rendered in the present case. Ld. counsel further submitted the sole
testimony of PW1 prosecutrix was not trustworthy to sustain a conviction.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/3778978/

2

Lok Mal @ Loku vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 7 March, 2025

8. On the other hand, Ld. counsel for the State of UP argued that the judgement argued that the
judgement passed by the High Court is a very well-reasoned judgement. The High Court has rightly
convicted the accused persons on appreciation of evidence and the appeal of the appellant needs to
be set aside.

ANALYSIS

9. We have heard the arguments from both sides and perused other relevant documents as also the
judgment passed by the High Court.

10. Though learned counsel for the appellant, submitted before this Court that the oral evidence is
unacceptable being the testimony of interested witnesses, we are unable to accept the submissions
of the learned counsel for the simple reason that the evidence of the prosecutrix is wholly
trustworthy, unshaken and inspires confidence. Admittedly, the prosecutrix was a major girl
studying in first part of B.A. at the time of the incident. Though she was subjected to detailed cross
examination, she stood firm and unshaken disclosing the incident in detail regarding the presence
and participation of the accused in ravishing her.

11. Merely because in the medical evidence, there are no major injury marks, this cannot a be a
reason to discard the otherwise reliable evidence of the prosecutrix. It is not necessary that in each
and every case where rape is alleged there has to be an injury to the private parts of the victim and it
depends on the facts and circumstances of a particular case. We reiterate that absence of injuries on
the private parts of the victim is not always fatal to the case of the prosecution. According to the
version of the prosecutrix, the accused overpowered her and pushed her to bed in spite of her
resistance and gagged her mouth using a piece of cloth. Thus, considering this very aspect, it is
possible that there were no major injury marks. The appellant made an attempt to raise the defence
of false implication, however, he was unable to support his defence by any cogent evidence. Ld.
counsel for the appellant further submitted that there is an inordinate delay in lodging complaint
and registering FIR. However, considering the evidence on record, we are of the opinion that the
said delay in lodging of the complaint and registering FIR has been sufficiently explained and is not
fatal to the case of the prosecution.

12. In the present case, the prosecutrix was continuously threatened by the appellant that she will
face his wrath if she creates a commotion. The prosecutrix was hence forced to submit to the lust of
the appellant and was left with no other alternative than to submit to the evil wish of the appellant.

13. It is a settled principle of criminal jurisprudence that the evidence of a prosecutrix in a case of
rape is of the same value as that of an injured witness and conviction can be made on the basis of the
sole testimony of the prosecutrix. In the case of State of Punjab v. Gurmit Singh1, the Supreme
Court observed as under:

“21… The courts should examine the broader probabilities of a case and not get
swayed by minor contradictions or insignificant discrepancies in the statement of the
prosecutrix, which are not of a fatal nature, to throw out an otherwise reliable

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/3778978/

3

Lok Mal @ Loku vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 7 March, 2025

prosecution case. If evidence of the prosecutrix inspires confidence, it must be relied
upon without seeking corroboration of her statement in material particulars. If for
some reason the court finds it difficult to place implicit reliance on her testimony, it
may look for evidence which may lend assurance to her testimony, short of
corroboration required in the case of an accomplice. The testimony of the prosecutrix
must be appreciated in the background of the entire case (1996) 2 SCC 384 and the
trial court must be alive to its responsibility and be sensitive while dealing with cases
involving sexual molestations.”

14. A profitable reference can also be made to the case of Bharwada Bhoginbhai Hirjibhai v. State of
Gujarat 2 where the Supreme Court observed as under:

“9..In the Indian setting, refusal to act on the testimony of a victim of sexual assault
in the absence of corroboration as a rule, is adding insult to injury. Why should the
evidence of the girl or the woman who complains of rape or sexual molestation be
viewed with the aid of spectacles fitted with lenses tinged with doubt, disbelief or
suspicion?”

15. Applying the above said principle of law to the facts of the present case, we are of the opinion
that the testimony of the prosecutrix is trustworthy and leaves no shadow of doubt to discredit her
case. Moreover, the appellant has failed to cause a dent in the testimony of the prosecutrix.

16. Merely by alleging that mother of the prosecutrix was a lady of easy virtue or her husband left
her, there is absolutely no supportive material brought by the appellant in his defence so as to
explain why he was implicated. The court is separately required to adjudicate whether the accused
committed rape on the victim or not. We find (1983) 3 SCC 217 no reason to accept the contention
that the alleged immoral character of the mother of the prosecutrix has any bearing on the accused
being falsely roped in on the basis of a concocted story by the mother of the prosecutrix. The
question of conviction of the accused for rape of the prosecutrix is independent and distinct. It has
absolutely no connection with the character of the mother of the prosecutrix and seems to be a dire
attempt at using it as a license to discredit the testimony of the prosecutrix. We find no merit in
these contentions.

17. Guided by law as aforesaid and applying it to the facts and circumstances of the present case, we
find no reason to interfere with the judgment of the High Court which is hereby affirmed. The
appeal is dismissed accordingly.

18. Considering that the incident is of the year 1984 and the impugned judgment of the High Court
was of 2010, we deem it fit to direct the competent authority to consider and decide the case of the
accused for the purpose of remission strictly in accordance with applicable state policy, within a
period of four weeks from this judgment.

19. Pending application(s), if any, be disposed of accordingly.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/3778978/

4

Lok Mal @ Loku vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 7 March, 2025

........................................J. [SANDEEP MEHTA] .........................................J. [PRASANNA B.
VARALE] NEW DELHI;

MARCH 7, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/3778978/

5

