Shiv Kumar vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 7 September, 2022

Shiv Kumar vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 7 September,
2022

Author: Hrishikesh Roy

Bench: K.M. Joseph, Aniruddha Bose, Hrishikesh Roy

[REPORTABLE]
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO._1503 OF 2022
(Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 9141 OF 2019)

Shiv Kumar                                         Appellant(s)

VERSUS

The State of Madhya Pradesh                        Respondent(s)

J U D G M E N T

Hrishikesh Roy, J.

Leave granted.

2. Heard Mr. Lav Kumar Agrawal, the learned counsel appearing for the appellant. Also heard Mr.
Gopal Jha, the learned counsel appearing for the respondent-State of Madhya Pradesh.

3. The challenge in this appeal is to the judgment dated 12.03.2019 in the Criminal Appeal No. 1261
of 2006 whereunder the appellant’s conviction by the trial Court under Section 411 of the Indian
Penal Code, 1860 (for short “IPC”), was sustained by the High Court. For such conviction, the
appellant was sentenced to rigorous imprisonment (for short “R.I.”) for 2 years and fine of Rs. 1,000
and in default of fine payment, additional R.I. for 3 months was ordered.

4. In this appeal, limited notice was initially issued on 4.10.2019 only on the quantum of sentence
but on 9.5.2022, after considering the submission of the learned counsel for the appellant, the Court
decided to examine the challenge to the conviction itself. Earlier, the appellant was exempted from
surrendering by the Court’s order dated 6.9.2019.

1

Shiv Kumar vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 7 September, 2022

5. In the common judgment, the High Court had disposed of three appeals including the appeal filed
by one Sadhu Singh alias Vijaybhan Singh Patel who was convicted for murder and other offences
and was sentenced, inter alia, to imprisonment for life. The appellant and one Shatrughan Prasad
were not charged in the murder case, but were charged with the offence of receiving stolen property
and were convicted for the offence punishable under Section 411 of the IPC.

6. The prosecution’s case, as revealed from the impugned judgment, is that on 14.2.2003,
complainant Abhay Kumar Jain (PW-26) gave a written report to the Town Inspector, City Kotwali,
Satna with the information that a truck loaded with household articles operating under the
informant’s Excel Transport Agency had proceeded from Indore for delivering goods at Satna. The
truck driven by Gurmel Singh after starting from the transport office at Indore on 8.2.2003 had,
however, failed to reach its destination at Satna until 12.2.2003. On 14.2.2003, the informant, on
learning that the truck was standing on Galla Mandi, Satna, found that the loaded goods from the
truck were missing. Initially, an FIR was registered for offence under Section 406 of the IPC in the
Crime No. 183/2003 but during police investigation, it came to light that the truck driver was
murdered by Sadhu Singh alias Vijaybhan Singh with co-accused Raju alias Rajendra. The loaded
goods in the truck were looted and those stolen articles were dishonestly received by the present
appellant Shiv Kumar and co-accused Shatrughan Prasad allegedly knowing the articles to be stolen
property. It is the further case of the prosecution that the goods in question were sold at cheaper
rate by the two accused who were, accordingly, charged for offences under Section 411 of the IPC.

7. The trial Court convicted the co-accused Sadhu Singh for the offence of murder and related
charges. It was also held that the prosecution is able to prove that the appellant Shiv Kumar and
co-accused Shatrughan Prasad had received the articles looted from the truck knowing fully well
that those are stolen property, and thereby, both accused committed the offence punishable under
Section 411 of the IPC.

8. The learned trial Judge noted that the articles looted from the truck were seized from the
possession of the appellant and co-accused Shatrughan Prasad, through the seizure memos (Ext. P-4
and Ext. P-5). Both accused were found selling articles at cheaper rates. It was, therefore, concluded
that the accused were aware of the fact that the articles seized from them were stolen property. The
appellant was, accordingly, convicted by the trial Court and such conviction under Section 411 of the
IPC was affirmed on appeal, by the High Court, through the impugned judgment.

Counsel’s Submissions 9.1 Assailing the legality of the guilty verdict against the appellant, Mr. Lav
Kumar Agrawal, the learned counsel would submit that the essential ingredients of Section 411 IPC
offence are not at all made out as the prosecution has failed to adduce any evidence to show that the
accused had knowledge that the seized articles were stolen from the looted truck. It is, therefore,
argued that unless the knowledge of the accused on the nature of the articles sold by them is
established, his conviction under Section 411 of the IPC cannot be sustained in law.

10.1 On the other hand, Mr. Gopal Jha, the learned Counsel appearing for the Respondent – State
supported the view taken by the Courts below. According to him, there are adequate material and
evidence on record which establishes the guilt of the accused, beyond reasonable doubt. The State

2

Shiv Kumar vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 7 September, 2022

Counsel has further placed reliance on Sambhu Das alias Bijoy Das & Anr. V. State of Assam1 for
sustaining the impugned conviction where Justice H.L. Dattu for invoking Article 136 power, opined
the following: -

“16. This Court, in exercise of its powers under Article 136 of the Constitution, will
not reopen the findings of the High Court when there are concurrent findings of facts
and there is no question of law involved and the conclusion is not perverse. Article
136 of the Constitution, does not confer a right of appeal on a party. It only confers a
discretionary power on the Supreme Court to be exercised sparingly to interfere in
suitable cases where grave miscarriage of justice has resulted from illegality or
misapprehension or mistake in reading evidence or from ignoring, excluding or
illegally admitting material evidence.” 10.2 It is pointed out by the State’s counsel
that the appellant was in possession of the property from 10.02.2003 till those were
recovered on 27.06.2003, on the basis of the disclosure statement of other accused
Raju alias Rajendra and Sadhu alias Vijaybhan Singh.

As the articles were being sold at cheaper rates would lead to the logical inference that the
ingredients under Section 411 of the IPC are satisfied against the appellant. In support of his
argument, Mr. Jha has 1 (2010) 10 SCC 374 placed reliance on Nagappa Dondiba Kalal v. State of
Karnataka2, where Justice S. Murtaza Fazal Ali observed as under: -

“3. …At the utmost as the ornaments have been proved to be stolen property received
by the appellant knowing that they were stolen property. The accused can thus be
convicted on the basis of presumption under Section 114 of the Evidence Act and
under Section 411 of Indian Penal Code as a receiver of stolen property knowing the
same to be stolen.” Analysis & Findings

11. The law governing disclosure statement was discussed by this Court in the case of
Haricharan Kurmi & Anr. Vs. State of Bihar3. It was observed:

“12. …….In dealing with a criminal case where the prosecution relies upon the
confession of one accused person against another accused person, the proper
approach to adopt is to consider the other evidence against such an accused person,
and if the said evidence appears to be satisfactory and the court is inclined to hold
that the said evidence may sustain the charge framed against the said accused person,
the court turns to the confession with a view to assure itself that the conclusion which
it is inclined to draw from the other evidence is right....”

2 1980 (Supp) SCC 336 3 AIR 1964 SC 1184

12. In this case, although recovery of items was made, the prosecution must further establish the
essential ingredient of knowledge of the appellant that such goods are stolen property. Reliance
solely upon the disclosure statement of accused Raju alias Rajendra and Sadhu alias Vijaybhan
Singh will not otherwise be clinching, for the conviction under Section 411 of the IPC.

3

13. Section 411 IPC:

Shiv Kumar vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 7 September, 2022

“411. Dishonestly receiving stolen property.– Whoever dishonestly receives or retains any stolen
property, knowing or having reason to believe the same to be stolen property, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with
both.” The penal Section extracted above can be broken down into four segments namely: Whoever,
I. Dishonestly; II. Receives or retains any stolen property; III. Knowing; or IV. Having reason to
believe the same to be stolen property, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.

14. “Dishonestly” is defined under Section 24 of the IPC as, “Whoever does anything with the
intention of causing wrongful gain to one person or wrongful loss to another person, is said to do
that thing “dishonestly”. The key ingredient for a crime is, of course, Mens Rea. This was nicely
explained by Justice K. Subba Rao in the case of Dr. Vimla v. Delhi Administration4 in the following
paragraphs: -

“9A. A Full Bench of the Madras High Court, in Kotamraju Venkatraadu v. Emperor
[(1905)ILR 28 Mad 90, 96, 97] had to consider the case of a person obtaining
admission to the matriculation examination of the Madras University as a private
candidate producing to the Registrar a certificate purporting to have been signed by
the headmaster of a recognized High School that he was of good character and had
attained his 20th year. It was found in that case that the candidate had fabricated the
signature of the headmaster. The court held that the accused was guilty of forgery.
White, C.J., observed:

“Intending to defraud means, of course, something more than deceiving.” He
illustrated this by the following example:

“A tells B a lie and B believes him. B is deceived but it does not follow that A intended
to defraud B. But, as it seams to me, if A tells B a lie intending that B should do
something which A conceives to be to his own benefit or advantage, and which, if
done, would be to the loss or detriment of B, A intends to defraud B.” The learned
Chief Justice indicated his line of thought, which has some bearing on the question
now raised, by the following observations: “I may observe, however, in this
connection that by Section 24 of the Code person does a thing dishonestly who does it
with the intention of 4 AIR 1963 SC 1572 causing wrongful gain or wrongful loss. It is
not necessary that there should be an intention to cause both. On the analogy of this
definition, it might be said that either an intention to secure a benefit or advantage
on the one hand, or to cause loss or detriment on the other, by means of deceit is an
intent to defraud.” But, he found in that case that both the elements were present.
Benson, J. pointed out at p. 114:

“I am of opinion that the act was fraudulent not merely by reason of the advantage
which the accused intended to secure for himself by means of his deceit, but also by

4

Shiv Kumar vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 7 September, 2022

reason of the injury which must necessarily result to the University, and through it to
the public from such acts if unrepressed. The University is injured, if through the
evasion of its bye-laws, it is induced to declare that certain persons have fulfilled the
conditions prescribed for Matriculation and are entitled to the benefits of
Matriculation, when in fact, they have not fulfilled those conditions for the value of
its examinations is depreciated in the eyes of the public if it is found that the
certificate of the University that they have passed its examinations is no longer a
guarantee that they have in truth fulfilled the conditions on which alone the
University professes to certify them as passed, and to admit them to the benefits of
Matriculation.” Boddam, J., agreed with the learned Chief Justice and Benson, J. This
decision accepts the principle laid down by Stephen, namely, that the intention to
defraud is made up of two elements, first an intention to deceive and second the
intention to expose some person either to actual injury or risk of possible injury; but
the learned Judges were also inclined to hold on the analogy of the definition of
“dishonestly” in Section 24 of the Code that intention to secure a benefit or advantage
to the deceiver satisfies the second condition.”

15. To establish that a person is dealing with stolen property, the "believe" factor of the person is of
stellar import. For successful prosecution, it is not enough to prove that the accused was either
negligent or that he had a cause to think that the property was stolen, or that he failed to make
enough inquiries to comprehend the nature of the goods procured by him. The initial possession of
the goods in question may not be illegal but retaining those with the knowledge that it was stolen
property, makes it culpable.

16. On the above aspect, Mr. Gopal Jha for the State refers particularly to the seizure memo as also
the evidence of PW-5, PW-22, and PW-24 to contend that the evidence therefrom establish that the
appellant was aware that he was dealing in stolen goods. On this, crucially it can be noticed that in
the FIR No. 407/2003 (25.6.2003), Rs. 12,50,000/- is shown as the total value of the goods
(utensils, clothes, hosiery goods and electrical goods) loaded in the truck No. MP 09/D0559.
However, in the seizure memo (27.6.2003), only Rs.20,000/- is shown as the value of the articles
(steel articles, torch, aluminium box) allegedly seized from the appellant’s possession. Considering
the disparate and incomparable figures, those values cannot be reasonably inter-linked to support
the guilt finding under Section 411 of the IPC. Moreover, the appellant in usual course, sold utensils
in his shop and nothing is unnatural about him possessing such household articles, as seized from
him.

17. The learned counsel for the State next points out that the accused Shiv Kumar had a shop of steel
utensils and some of the articles stolen from the truck were sold in his shop. On this, the testimony
of Nitin Jain (PW-5) becomes relevant. PW-5, however, stated that the utensils of a particular mark
are not sold in the shop of the appellant. More importantly, he does not remember the special marks
of the utensils carried in the truck. According to PW-5, he is unable to remember whether the details
of the seized goods were noted in the appellant’s house or was prepared subsequently. His testimony
also mentioned that he met S.I., G.P. Tiwari (PW-24) at the shop of the other accused Shatrughan
Prasad and only after Shatrughan Prasad was arrested, the police effected the arrest of the present

5

Shiv Kumar vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 7 September, 2022

appellant, Shiv Kumar. The evidence of PW-5, by no stretch establishes that the appellant Shiv
Kumar was conscious that the goods seized from his shop, were stolen articles.

18. Furthermore, one Bharat Singh Thakur (PW-22) was the Sub-Inspector at Police Station,
Pannagarh who received information about clothes and utensils being sold at low prices. This
PW-22 while proving his signature on the seizure memo, had acknowledged that the accused Shiv
Kumar had a utensil store and most pertinently “because of hastiness”, seal has not been put on the
seizure memo (Ext. P-4). The testimony of PW-22 suggests that a defective procedure was followed
in preparing the seizure memo and importantly, his testimony does not show that the appellant was
aware that he received articles, which had any connection with the stolen goods in the truck.

19. Likewise, G.P. Tiwari, the S.I. at Police Station Kotwali, Satna in his testimony as PW-24 while
acknowledging that he had not conducted the seizure procedure for the articles seized from the
appellant, Shiv Kumar, nowhere mentioned that the appellant was aware that the goods seized from
him were stolen property.

20. The contradiction in the testimonies of Nitin Jain (PW-5), Sub-Inspector Bharat Singh Thakur
(PW-22), and Sub-Inspector G.P. Tiwari (PW-24) are also quite glaring. For instance, the utensils as
per PW-5, were seized by Sub-Inspector G.P. Tiwari (PW-24) in the presence of Nitin Jain (PW-5),
however, the S.I. G.P. Tiwari (PW-24) in his testimony has denied seizing any property, owing to
lacking Jurisdiction, stating “seizure must have been done by Police Station, Panagarh” and not by
the officer from the Police Station Kotwali, Satna. Apart from the above, interestingly, the support
for the testimony of Sub- Inspector G.P. Tiwari (PW-24) is provided by Sub- Inspector Bharat Singh
Thakur (PW-22) of Police Station, Panagarh to the effect that PW-24 was not present at Shiv
Kumar’s house during the seizure process. He has also denied that PW-24 called Nitin Jain (PW-5)
to the house of Shiv Kumar to witness the seizure. Moreover, the seizure memo being written by
Sub-Inspector G.P. Tiwari (PW-24) is also not supported by PW-24. Noticing all these
discrepancies, the seizure evidence is found to be totally unreliable.

21. In Trimbak vs. State of Madhya Pradesh5, this Court discussed the essential ingredients for
conviction under Section 411 of the IPC. Justice Mehr Chand Mahajan, in his erudite opinion rightly
observed that in order to bring home the guilt under Section 411 IPC, the prosecution must prove,
“5. (1) that the stolen property was in the possession of the accused, (2) that some person other than
the accused had possession of the property before the accused got possession of it, and (3) that the
accused had knowledge that the property was stolen property....”

22. When we apply the legal proposition as propounded to the present circumstances, the inevitable
conclusion is that the prosecution has failed to establish that the appellant had the knowledge that
articles seized from his possession are stolen goods. This essential element was not established
against the appellant to bring home the charge under Section 411 of the IPC against him.

5 AIR 1954 SC 39

6

Shiv Kumar vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 7 September, 2022

23. That apart, the disclosure statement of one accused cannot be accepted as a proof of the
appellant having knowledge of utensils being stolen goods. The prosecution has also failed to
establish any basis for the appellant to believe that the utensils seized from him were stolen articles.
The factum of selling utensils at a lower price cannot, by itself, lead to the conclusion that the
appellant was aware of the theft of those articles. The essential ingredient of mens Rea is clearly not
established for the charge under Section 411 of IPC. The Prosecution’s evidence on this aspect, as
they would speak of the character Gratiano in Merchant of Venice, can be appropriately described
as, “you speak an infinite deal of nothing."6

24. In a case like this, where the fundamental evidence is not available and the law leans in
appellant’s favour, notwithstanding the concurrent finding, the Court has to exercise corrective
jurisdiction as the circumstances justify. As such, taking a cue from Haryana State Industrial
Development Corporation vs. William Shakespeare. Merchant of Venice, Act 1 Scene 1. Cork
Manufacturing Co7., the exercise of extraordinary jurisdiction under Article 136 is found to be
merited to do justice to the appellant who was held to be guilty, without the requisite evidence to
establish his mens rea in the crime.

25. In these circumstances where it is not established that the appellant dishonestly received stolen
property with the knowledge and belief that the goods found in his possession were stolen, the
conviction of the appellant under Section 411 IPC, in our view, cannot be sustained. Therefore,
applying the test in Trimbak [supra], it must be held that the appellant was erroneously convicted.
Therefore, we order the acquittal of the appellant. The appeal stands allowed with this order.

………………………………………………………J. [K.M. JOSEPH] ………………………………………………………J.
[HRISHIKESH ROY] NEW DELHI SEPTEMBER 7, 2022 7 (2007) 8 SCC 120

7