Shraddha Gupta vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 26 April, 2022

Shraddha Gupta vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 26 April, 2022

Author: M.R. Shah

Bench: B.V. Nagarathna, M.R. Shah

REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 569-570 OF 2022

Shraddha Gupta                                              …Appellant

Versus

The State of Uttar Pradesh and Others                       …Respondents

JUDGMENT

M.R. SHAH, J.

1. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned order dated 27.09.2019 passed by the High
Court of Judicature at Allahabad in Criminal Miscellaneous Writ Petition No. 21964 of 2019 and the
subsequent order dated 10.11.2020 passed in Criminal Miscellaneous Review Application No.
2/2019, the original accused, Shraddha Gupta, against whom an FIR has been filed under Section
2/3 of the Uttar Pradesh Gangsters and Anti-Social Activities (Prevention) Act, 1986 (hereinafter
referred to as the ‘Gangsters Act, 1986’), has filed the present appeals.

2. The facts leading to the present appeals in nutshell are as under:

That a written report was made by respondent no.4 herein (original informant) on
24.05.2016 to the effect that her sister and her family members had previous enmity
with the accused persons, namely, (1) Shravan Kumar (husband of the appellant
herein), (2) Guddu @ Sudhanshu, (3) Munna @ Brajendranth Sharma, (4) Kamal
Sharma and (5) Bhure. That on 23.5.2016, her sister Kumari Sadhna Sharma, In-

charge, DGC(Crl.) in the Court of the District Judge, Badaun, had gone to the Court on her scooty to
pursue the cases on behalf of the Government. Bhure and others had a hearing date in the Court of
District Judge, Badaun for appearance. At about 5:30 p.m. her sister was returning from Badaun to
Ujhani, sitting on the rear seat of the scooty being driven by her servant Bihari. When the scooty

1

Shraddha Gupta vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 26 April, 2022

reached near Balaji temple, they saw a car parked near the temple in which all the above- named
accused were present. The car followed the scooty of her sister Sadhna and when she reached near
Jiorlia village, the car of the accused rammed into her sister’s scooty with the result both Sadhna
and Behari fell on the road. Then the accused drove their car towards her sister, stopped it near
Behari and shouted, ‘kill this fellow also otherwise he may also give evidence’. The accused,
however, ran away on the arrival of the people. The incident was witnessed by the passer-by and
with their help Behari took her sister to Badaun hospital in a vehicle. Her sister Sadhna died in the
hospital. The complainant further stated that she had come to the hospital at 11:00 on getting the
information and lost her consciousness on seeing the dead body of her sister. The autopsy of the
deceased was conducted in the night. When she regained her consciousness, Behari told her the
entire incident. After making arrangements for the last rites of her sister, she came to the police
station to lodge the report. The complainant alleged that she apprehends the association of the
former BJP MLA Yogender Sagar in the entire conspiracy. On the basis of this report, a case under
Section 147, 304, 504, 323, 506, 120-B IPC was registered against the above named six accused
persons at P.S. Ujhani, District Badaun, vide Case Crime No. 337/2016 dated 24.05.2016.

2.1 That subsequently on 27.05.2017, a case under Sections 2/3 of the Gangsters Act, 1986 was
registered against eight accused persons vide Case Crime No. 268/2017. The charge sheet was filed
against the said eight accused persons on 26.5.2018 and the cognizance of the same was taken by the
learned Special Judge under the Gangsters Act, Badaun on 2.7.2018.

2.2 It appears that thereafter on further investigation and on the basis of the call recordings between
the co-accused, handed over to the Investigating Officer by the complainant, the names of the
appellant – Shraddha Gupta, her husband Sharvan Gupta and Kamlesh Sharma, came to light and
accordingly they were arrayed as accused in Case Crime No. 337/2016.

2.3 That in the course of investigation, it also revealed that the appellant – Shraddha Gupta, her
husband – Sharvan Gupta and Kamlesh Sharma were also involved in the offence pertaining to the
conspiracy of murder of deceased Sadhna Sharma. Therefore, supplementary charge sheet was also
filed against the aforesaid three accused persons, namely, Shraddha Gupta, Sharvan Gupta and
Kamlesh Sharma. That subsequently, it was brought to the notice of the Senior Superintendent of
Police, Badaun, that the case under the Gangsters Act, 1986 has been registered only against eight
accused persons and the charge sheet has been filed against eleven accused persons in Case Crime
No. 337/2016.

2.4 Thereafter, a gang chart was prepared against the appellant and other two accused, which was
sent to the Senior Superintendent of Police, District Badaun on 19.03.2019. That thereafter the Joint
Director (Prosecution), Badaun granted approval on 1.4.2019 to register a case against the aforesaid
three persons under Sections 2/3 of the Gangsters Act, 1986. SSP, Badaun, vide communication
dated 2.4.2019 communicated to the Investigating Officer and accordingly FIR dated 27.05.2019 in
Case Crime No. 268/2017 under Sections 2/3 of the Gangsters Act has been lodged/registered
against the appellant and other two co-accused. Thus, the FIR for the offences under the Gangsters
Act has been registered against eleven accused in all (eight accused charged earlier and the three
accused including the appellant herein charge sheeted subsequently).

2

Shraddha Gupta vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 26 April, 2022

2.5 That the appellant herein filed the present Criminal Miscellaneous Writ Petition No. 21964/2019
before the High Court under Section 482 of the Criminal Procedure Code and prayed for the
following reliefs:

i) Issue a writ, order or direction in the nature of certiorari to quash the orders dated
7.6.2019 and 2.4.2019 passed by the respondent no.3;

ii) Issue a writ, order or direction in the nature of certiorari to quash the impugned
FIR dated 27.5.2017 as Case Crime No. 268/2017 under Section 2/3 Gangsters Act,
P.S. Ujhani, Dist.

Badaun, only to the extent of the petitioner;

iii) Issue a writ, order or direction in the nature of mandamus commanding respondents no. 2 and 3
not to arrest the petitioner in case Crime No. 268/2017 under Sections 2/3 Gangsters Act, P.S.
Ujhani, District Badaun.

2.6 It was the case on behalf of the appellant that she has been falsely implicated in the case; she was
not named in the FIR; in the FIR, no role has been assigned to her; her name has surfaced in further
investigation under Section 173(8) Cr.P.C.; the Senior Superintendent of Police, Badaun maliciously
submitted the supplementary gang chart against her approved by the District Magistrate, Badaun;
that she is neither a gang leader nor a member of the gang being a household lady. It was also the
case on behalf of the appellant-accused that solely on the basis of the single FIR/charge sheet, she
cannot be charged for the offences under the provisions of the Gangsters Act.

2.7 That by the impugned order, the High Court has dismissed the said writ petition and has refused
to quash the criminal proceedings under Sections 2/3 of the Gangsters Act. A review application was
also filed which has also been dismissed.

2.8 Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned orders passed by the High Court
dismissing the writ petition under Section 482 Cr.P.C. and dismissing the review application, the
accused Shraddha Gupta has preferred the present appeals.

3. Shri Divyesh Pratap Singh, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant has, as such,
reiterated what was argued before the High Court.

3.1 It is vehemently submitted by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant that in
the facts and circumstances of the case, the appellant has been wrongly booked/charged for the
offences under Sections 2/3 of the Gangsters Act, 1986.

3.2 It is contended that by no stretch of imagination, the appellant can be said to be a ‘Gangster’
and/or a member of the ‘Gang’. It is submitted that solely on the basis of a single FIR/charge sheet
and that too with respect to a single murder, the appellant cannot be said to be a ‘Gangster’ and/or a
member of the ‘Gang’.

3

Shraddha Gupta vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 26 April, 2022

3.3 It is submitted that the allegations against the appellant cannot be said to be in connection with
anti-social activities for which she is to be charged for the offences under Sections 2/3 of the
Gangsters Act, 1986. 3.4 Relying upon the decision of this Court in the case of Piyush Kantilal Mehta
v. Commissioner of Police, Ahmedabad City, 1989 Supp (1) SCC 322, it is submitted that as held by
this Court only such activity which adversely affect and/or likely to affect the maintenance of public
order can be said to be an anti-social activity.

3.5 Relying upon the decision of the Gujarat High Court in the case of Karansinh Chetansinh
Vaghela v. State of Gujarat, 2021 SCConLine Gujarat 1260, it is submitted that as held by the
Gujarat High Court, a single FIR cannot be said to be sufficient for invocation of the preventive
statutes.

3.6 It is further submitted by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant-accused that
she cannot be implicated in the FIR in question under the Gangsters Act solely on the basis of an
isolated case. It is contended that the appellant cannot be said to be a habitual offender and she does
not indulge in anti-social activities. 3.7 That in the present case, as such, the appellant was
implicated in the case on further investigation and by way of supplementary charge sheet. That prior
thereto eight persons were already charge sheeted including for the offence under the Gangsters Act,
1986 and the learned Special Court took cognizance against eight accused persons. It is submitted
that subsequently, the appellant and other two co-accused are implicated along with eight accused
persons and also charged for the offences under the Gangsters Act also. It is contended that once the
Special Court took cognizance against eight persons, thereafter it was not open to implicate the
present accused, who were charge sheeted subsequently for the offences under the Gansters Act.

4. The present appeals are vehemently opposed by Shri Sanjay Kumar Tyagi, learned counsel
appearing on behalf of the State of Uttar Pradesh and Shri Shuvodeep Roy, learned counsel
appearing for respondent No.4 herein (original informant).

4.1 It is vehemently submitted that in the facts and circumstances of the case, the appellant and two
other accused are rightly charged for the offences under Sections 2/3 of the Gangsters Act, 1986. 4.2
It is contended that in the present case, the provisions of the Gangsters Act are invoked after
following due procedure under the Gangsters Act and after the gang chart was prepared and the
same was approved by the higher authority as well as the District Magistrate. 4.3 It is submitted that
as such the eight co-accused persons, against whom the earlier charge sheet was filed, were already
charged for the offences under Sections 2/3 of the Gangsters Act with respect to the same offence.

4.4 That however after the initial charge sheet was filed against the eight accused persons, during
the course of further investigation, the names of the appellant and two other accused persons came
to surface and therefore they were also arrayed as an accused. It is submitted that therefore with
respect to the same offence, when the other accused persons were also charged for the offences
under the Gangsters Act, being co-accused and considering the definitions of ‘Gang’ and ‘Gangster’
under the Gangsters Act, 1986, the appellant and other two co-accused who were charge sheeted
subsequently were also required to be prosecuted for the offences under the Gangsters Act also. It is
urged that therefore the appellant and other two co-accused are rightly being prosecuted for the

4

Shraddha Gupta vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 26 April, 2022

offences under the Gangsters Act. 4.5 It is submitted that in the present case, it has been revealed
that the father of the appellant Ramindra Nath Sharma had five daughters and had no son. The
deceased Sadhna Sharma was the eldest daughter while the complainant Viparna Gaur, respondent
no.4 herein is the youngest. Late Ramindra Nath Sharma had left behind huge immovable
properties and it was found during investigation that there was a chequered litigation amongst the
daughters over the division of the properties left behind by their father.

4.6 It is submitted that during the course of the investigation, it has been revealed that the accused
Shraddha Gupta, Sharvan Gupta and Kamlesh Sharma are also involved for the offence pertaining
to the conspiracy of the murder of the deceased Sadhna Sharma. 4.7 It is pointed that the main
co-accused P.C. Sharma, who is the Gang Leader, is a dangerous criminal. He has an organised
gang. He along with his accomplices, with the purposes of making pecuniary gain indulges and
causes to indulge in offences relating to human body and murder. It is submitted that all the accused
now charge sheeted have joined hands, connived and hatched the conspiracy to kill the deceased
with a view to make a pecuniary gain.

4.8 It is submitted that the appellant herein, being a member of the ‘Gang’, as defined under Section
2(b) of the Gangsters Act and is found to have indulged in anti-social activities, mentioned in
Section 2(b) of the Gangsters Act, is also liable to be prosecuted for the offences under the Gangsters
Act being ‘Gangster’ as defined in Section 2(c) of the Gangsters Act.

4.9 It is contended that even in case of a single FIR/charge sheet but with respect to anti-social
activities mentioned in Section 2(b) of the Gangsters Act, there can be a prosecution under the
Gangsters Act. It is urged that under the Gangsters Act, there is no bar like in the other statutes,
such as, Maharashtra Control of Organized Crime Act, 1999 and the Gujarat Control of Terrorism
and Organized Crime Act, 2015. 4.10 Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents -State
has heavily relied upon the various decisions of the High Court of Allahabad in which the High
Court had an occasion to consider a similar issue and had taken the view that considering the
provisions of the Gangsters Act, more particularly Sections 2(b) and 2(c), even in case of a single
FIR/charge sheet for the anti-social activities mentioned in Section 2(b) of the Gangsters Act, an
accused can be prosecuted for the offences under the Gangsters Act. (Reference is made to Criminal
Miscellaneous Application No. 2226/2002, titled ‘Vishnu Dayal Vishwanath v. State of UP’, decided
on 15.06.2007; Writ Petition No. 4936/1999, titled ‘Rinku @ Hukku v. State of U.P.’, decided on
12.1.2000; Application u/s 482 No., 32940/2015, titled ‘Mohit Chaudhary v. State of U.P.’, decided
on 10.12.2015; Criminal Miscellaneous Writ Petition No. 3938/2021, titled ‘Ritesh Kumar @ Rikki v.
State of U.P.’, decided on 5.8.2021; and Criminal Miscellaneous Writ Petition No. 16164/1994, titled
‘Ajay Rai v. State of U.P.’, decided on 22.11.1994). 4.11 Making the above submissions and relying
upon the above decisions, it is prayed to dismiss the present appeals.

5. We have heard the learned counsel for the respective parties at length.

6. The short question which is posed for the consideration of this Court is, whether, a person against
whom a single FIR/charge sheet is filed for any of the anti-social activities mentioned in section 2(b)
of the Gangsters Act, 1986 can be prosecuted under the Gangsters Act. In other words, whether a

5

Shraddha Gupta vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 26 April, 2022

single crime committed by a ‘Gangster’ is sufficient to apply the Gangsters Act on such members of a
‘Gang’.

7. While considering the aforesaid issues/questions, the relevant provisions of the Gangsters Act,
1986 are required to be referred to. The object and purpose of enactment of the Gangsters Act, 1986
is to make special provisions for the prevention of, for coping with, gangsters and anti-social
activities and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. Section 2(b) defines ‘Gang’ and
Section 2(c) defines ‘Gangster’. Sections 2(b) and 2(c) read as under:

“2(b) “Gang” means a group of persons, who acting either singly or collectively, by
violence, or threat or show of violence, or intimidation, or coercion or otherwise with
the object of disturbing public order or of gaining any undue temporal, pecuniary,
material or other advantage for himself or any other person, indulge in anti-social
activities (Act no. 2 of 1974), namely—

(i) offences punishable under Chapter XVI, or Chapter XVII, or Chapter XXII of the
Indian Penal Code (Act no. 45 of 1860), or

(ii) distilling or manufacturing or storing or transporting or importing or exporting or
selling or distributing any liquor, or intoxicating or dangerous drugs, or other
intoxicants or narcotics or cultivating any plant, in contravention of any of the
provisions of the U.P. Excise Act, 1910 (U.P. Act no. 4 of 1910) or the Narcotic Drugs
and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 or any other law for the time being in force, or

(iii) occupying or talking possession of immovable property otherwise than in
accordance with law, or setting-up false claims for title or possession of immovable
property whether in himself or any other person, or (Act no. 61 of 1985)

(iv) preventing or attempting to prevent any public servant or any witness from
discharging his lawful duties, or

(v) offences punishable under the Suppression of Immoral Traffic in Women and
Girls Art, 1956, or

(vi) offences punishable under section 3 of the Public Gambling Act, 1867 (Act no.
104 of 1956), or

(vii) preventing any person from offering bids in auction lawfully conducted, or
tender, lawfully invited, by or on behalf of any Government department, local body or
public or private undertaking for any lease or right or supply of goods or work to be
done, or

(viii) preventing or disturbing the smooth running by any person of his lawful
business profession, trade or employment or any other lawful activity connected

6

Shraddha Gupta vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 26 April, 2022

therewith, or

(ix) offences punishable under section 171-E of the Indian Penal Code, or in
preventing or obstructing any public election being lawfully held, by physically
preventing the voter from exercising his electoral rights, or

(x) inciting others to resort to violence to disturb communal harmony, or

(xi) creating panic, alarm or terror in public, or

(xii) terrorising or assaulting employees or owners or occupiers of public or private
undertakings or factories and causing mischief in respect of their properties, or

(xiii) inducing or attempting to induce any person to go to foreign countries on false
representation that any employment, trade or profession shall be provided to him in
such foreign country, or

(xiv) kidnapping or abducting any person with intent to extort ransom, or

(xv) diverting or otherwise preventing any aircraft or public transport vehicle from
following its scheduled course;

(c) “gangster” means a member or leader or organiser of a gang and includes any
person who abets or assists in the activities of a gang enumerated in clause (b),
whether before or after the commission of such activities or harbours any person who
has indulged in such activities.” 7.1 Section 3 of the Gangsters Act, 1986 provides for
punishment, which reads as under:

“3. (1) A gangster shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which shall not be less than two years and which may extend to ten years and
also with fine which shall not be less than five thousand rupees:

Provided that a gangster who commits an offence against the person of a public
servant of the person of a member of the family of a public servant shall be punished
Kith imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than three
years and also with fine which shall not be less than five thousand rupees, (2)
Whoever being a public servant renders any illegal help or support in any manner to
a gangster, whether before or after the Commission of any offence by the gangster
(whether by himself or through others) or abstains from taking lawful measures or
intentionally avoids to carry out the directions of any court or of his superior officers,
in this respect, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to ten years but shall not be less than three years and also with
fine.” 7.2 Section 5 of the Gangsters Act provides for constitution of Special Courts for
the speedy trial of the offences under the Act. Section 6 provides that a Special Court

7

Shraddha Gupta vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 26 April, 2022

may, if it considers it expedient or desirable so to do, hold its sitting for any of its
proceedings at any place, other than the ordinary place of its sitting or seat. Section 8
of the Act provides that when trying any offence punishable under the Gangsters Act,
a Special Court may also try any other offence with which the accused may, under any
other law for the time being in force, be charged at the same trial.

Under Section 9 of the Gangsters Act, the State Government shall appoint a person to be the Public
Prosecutor for every Special Court. Section 10 provides that a Special Court may take cognizance of
any offence triable by it, without the accused being committed to it for trial upon receiving a
complaint of facts which constitute such offence or upon a police report of such facts. Section 12
provides that the trial under the Gangsters Act of any offence by Special Court shall have precedence
over the trial of any other case against the accused in any other court (not being a Special Court) and
shall be concluded in preference to the trial of such other case and accordingly the trial of such other
case shall remain in abeyance. Section 13 of the Gangsters Act provides that where, after taking
cognizance of any offence, a Special Court is opinion that the offence is not triable by it, it shall,
notwithstanding that it has no jurisdiction to try such an offence, transfer the case for trial of such
offence to any other court having jurisdiction under the Code and the court to which the case is
transferred may proceed with the trial of the offence as if it has taken cognizance of the offence.

8. From the aforesaid, it can be seen that all provisions are to ensure that the offences under the
Gangsters Act should be given preference and should be tried expeditiously and that too, by the
Special Courts, to achieve the object and purpose of the enactment of the Gangsters Act.

9. Now so far as the main submission on behalf of the accused that for a single offence/FIR/charge
sheet with respect to any of the anti- social activities, such an accused cannot be prosecuted under
the Gangsters Act, 1986 is concerned, on a fair reading of the definitions of ‘Gang’ and ‘Gangster’
under the Gangsters Act, 1986, it can be seen that a ‘Gang’ is a group of one or more persons who
commit/s the crimes mentioned in the definition clause for the motive of earning undue advantage,
whether pecuniary, material or otherwise. Even a single crime committed by a ‘Gang’ is sufficient to
implant Gangsters Act on such members of the ‘Gang’. The definition clause does not engulf
plurality of offence before the Gangsters Act is invoked.

A group of persons may act collectively or anyone of the members of the group may also act singly,
with the object of disturbing public order indulging in anti-social activities mentioned in Section
2(b) of the Gangsters Act, who can be termed as ‘Gangster’. A member of a ‘Gang’ acting either
singly or collectively may be termed as a member of the ‘Gang’ and comes within the definition of
‘Gang’, provided he/she is found to have indulged in any of the anti-social activities mentioned in
Section 2(b) of the Gangsters Act.

10. On a fair reading of the definitions of ‘Gang’ contained in Section 2(b) and ‘Gangster’ contained
in Section 2(c) of the Gangsters Act, a ‘Gangster’ means a member or leader or organiser of a gang
including any person who abets or assists in the activities of a gang enumerated in clause (b) of
Section 2, who either acting singly or collectively commits and indulges in any of the anti-social
activities mentioned in Section 2(b) can be said to have committed the offence under the Gangsters

8

Shraddha Gupta vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 26 April, 2022

Act and can be prosecuted and punished for the offence under the Gangsters Act. There is no
specific provision under the Gangsters Act, 1986 like the specific provisions under the Maharashtra
Control of Organized Crime Act, 1999 and the Gujarat Control of Terrorism and Organized Crime
Act, 2015 that while prosecuting an accused under the Gangsters Act, there shall be more than one
offence or the FIR/charge sheet. As per the settled position of law, the provisions of the statute are
to be read and considered as it is. Therefore, considering the provisions under the Gangsters Act,
1986 as they are, even in case of a single offence/FIR/charge sheet, if it is found that the accused is a
member of a ‘Gang’ and has indulged in any of the anti-social activities mentioned in Section 2(b) of
the Gangsters Act, such as, by violence, or threat or show of violence, or intimidation, or coercion or
otherwise with the object of disturbing public order or of gaining any undue temporal, pecuniary,
material or other advantage for himself or any other person and he/she can be termed as ‘Gangster’
within the definition of Section 2(c) of the Act, he/she can be prosecuted for the offences under the
Gangsters Act. Therefore, so far as the Gangsters Act, 1986 is concerned, there can be prosecution
against a person even in case of a single offence/FIR/charge sheet for any of the anti-social activities
mentioned in Section 2(b) of the Act provided such an anti-social activity is by violence, or threat or
show of violence, or intimidation, or coercion or otherwise with the object of disturbing public order
or of gaining any undue temporal, pecuniary, material or other advantage for himself or any other
person.

11. In the present case, it is alleged that the main accused P.C. Sharma was a gang leader and who
was the mastermind and he hatched the criminal conspiracy along with other co-accused including
the appellant herein to commit the murder of the deceased Sadhna Sharma for a pecuniary benefit
as there was a property dispute going on since long between the family members. It is also to be
noted that the other co-accused were already charge sheeted/prosecuted for the offence under the
Gangsters Act and therefore the appellant and the other two co-accused being members of the
‘Gang’ were also required to be prosecuted for the offences under the Gangsters Act also like other
co-accused. Therefore, in the facts and circumstances of the case, it cannot be said that no
prosecution could have been initiated against the appellant-accused for the offences under Sections
2/3 of the Gangsters Act, 1986.

12. In view of the above discussion and for the reasons stated above, the High Court has rightly
refused to quash the criminal proceedings against the appellant-accused under Sections 2/3 of the
Gangsters Act, 1986, in exercise of powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C. We are in complete agreement
with the view taken by the High Court. Under the circumstances, the present appeals fail and the
same deserve to be dismissed and are accordingly dismissed.

………………………………….J.
[M.R. SHAH]

NEW DELHI;                             …………………………………J.
APRIL 26, 2022.                        [B.V. NAGARATHNA]

9

Shraddha Gupta vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 26 April, 2022

10