Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16
November, 2022

Author: Surya Kant

Bench: Surya Kant

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8510 OF 2022
(arising out of S.L.P. (Civil) No. 19277 of 2018)

SIDRAM                                                      .…APPELLANT
Versus

THE DIVISIONAL MANAGER,                                     ….RESPONDENTS
UNITED INDIA INSURANCE CO. LTD.
AND ANR.

JUDGMENT

J.B. PARDIWALA, J.

1. Leave granted.

2. This appeal has been filed against the impugned final judgment and order dated 25th of April,
2018 passed by the High Court of Karnataka (Dharwad Bench) in “Shri Sidram S/o Raju Bhosale v.
Shri Siddu Mahadev Bhosale & Anr.” urging various legal grounds and contentions for further
enhancement of compensation in the case of a motor accident involving the appellant-claimant
herein whereby the High Court enhanced the compensation awarded by the Motor Accidents Claims
Tribunal, Belgaum (for short, ‘Tribunal’) by Rs. 3,13,800/- to a total of Rs. 9,26,800/-. The Tribunal
had awarded compensation of Rs. 17:03:56 IST Reason:

6,13,000/- under the various heads along with interest at the rate of 6% per annum
from the date of filing of the petition till the date of realisation of payment.

3. The briefs facts of the case are given hereinunder. The appellant- claimant suffered grievous
injuries in a road accident that occurred on 18.07.2012, while he was walking on the left side of the
Kulgod-Gokak road. While the claimant was near the Laxmeshwar crossing, a goods vehicle bearing

1

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

registration No. KA-23/9426, being driven in a rash and negligent manner banged into the
appellant- claimant. The appellant- claimant was shifted to a hospital and was treated as an indoor
patient from 18.07.2012 till 06.08.2012. On account of the accident, the appellant-claimant suffered
permanent disability to the extent of 45%. The appellant-claimant suffered from paraplegia due to
the accident. The appellant- claimant was in the business of selling utensils in different villages of
the district.

4. The appellant-claimant filed a claim petition before the First Additional Senior Civil Division
Judge & MACT, Belgaum at Belgaum which was registered as the M.V.C. No. 1786 of 2012. Before
the Tribunal, the appellant- claimant examined himself (PW-1) and also examined Dr. Anil B. Patil
as PW2 in respect of his claim and various other documents were taken on record as evidence.

5. The Tribunal held that the accident took place due to the rash and negligent driving of the
offending vehicle as a result of which, the appellant sustained injuries and was awarded pecuniary as
well as non- pecuniary damages. The Tribunal held that the appellant was entitled to the
compensation as under:

(cid:12)Towards pain and suffering                 :            Rs. 40,000/-
Loss of earning during laid of period      :            Rs. 4,000/-
Loss of earning due to disability          :            Rs.3,24,000/
Towards Medical expenses                   :            Rs. 1,50,000/
Conveyance, special diet etc               :            Rs. 20,000/
Loss of amenities in life                  :            Rs. 30,000/
Towards marriage prospects                 :            Rs. 20,000/
Towards future medical expenses            :            Rs. 25,000/-

Total             :            Rs.6,13,000/-

6. Aggrieved by the order of the Tribunal, the appellant filed an appeal in the High Court praying for
enhancement of the compensation on the ground that the Tribunal ought to have awarded enhanced
compensation on the basis of the evidence adduced. The contentions of the appellant will be taken
up in detail at a later stage.

7. The High Court enhanced the compensation to Rs. 9,26,800/-. The High Court in its impugned
order held:

“9. The Tribunal has taken the income of the claimant at Rs. 5,000/- which is on the
lower sipe. The accident is of the year 2012 and the notional income of the claimant
could be taken at Rs.7,000/- per month considering the nature of business carried on
by him.

10. Thus, the claimant would be entitled to compensation under the head of loss of
future earning as follows: Rs.7,000/- x 12 x 18 x 40% = Rs.6,04,800/.

2

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

11. The compensation awarded under the head of pain and suffering, medical
expenses, conveyance, special diet, etc., loss of amenities in life and marriage
prospects is just and proper and same is not disturbed. The claimant who suffered
grievous injury would have suffered loss of earning during the laid up. The
compensation awarded under the head of pain and suffering, medical expenses,
conveyance, special diet, etc., loss of amenities in life and marriage prospects is just
and proper and same is not disturbed. The claimant who suffered grievous injury
would have suffered loss of earning during the laid up period for a minimum period
of six months. Therefore, he is entitled for a sum of Rs.42,000/- (Rs. 7,000 x 6). The
claimant would be further entitled to litigation expenses of Rs.20,000/-.

12. With regard to future medical expenses, the claimant has not stated as to the
nature of future treatment required. Hence, he would not be entitled for any
compensation on the head of future medical expenses. However, it is made clear that
if at all the claimant incurs any expenses towards any surgery or treatment on
account of the injury suffering in the present motor accident and if he proves the
same before the insurer, the insurer shall indemnify the same.

13. Accordingly, the claimant is entitled for a total compensation of Rs.9,26,800/- as
against Rs.6,13,000/-

awarded by the Tribunal.

14. Thus, the claimant shall be entitled to a total compensation under the following heads:

SI. .         Particulars                      Amount
No.
1.      Pain and suffering                     Rs. 40,000/-
2.      Loss of earning during laid-up         Rs.42,000/-
Period for six months
3.      Loss of earning due to disability     Rs.6,04,800/-
4.      Towards medical expenses              Rs.1,50,000/-
5.      Conveyance, special diet etc.         Rs. 20,000/-
6.      Loss of amenities in life             Rs. 30,000/-
7.      Marriage prospects                    Rs. 20,000/-
8.      Litigation expenses                   Rs. 20,000/-
Total                             Rs. 9,26,800/-

Accordingly, there would be an enhanced compensation of Rs. 3,13,800/-, which shall carry interest
at the rate of 6% per annum from the date of petition till date of realization.”

8. Not satisfied with the compensation awarded by the High Court, the appellant has appealed to
this Court urging various contentions in support of further enhancement of the compensation.

SUBMISSION ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT

3

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

9. Mr. Anand Sanjay M. Nuli, the learned counsel appearing for the appellant, filed his submissions
in writing. The submissions are as under:

10. The accident had occurred on 18.07.2012 when the appellant- claimant was walking on the left
side of the Kulgod-Gokak Road, Karnataka when a goods vehicle bearing No. KA-23/9426 dashed
against the appellant-claimant, whilst being driven in a rash and negligent manner. In lieu of the
same, the appellant-claimant sustained grievous injuries. The appellant-claimant was admitted to
Lake View Hospital from 18.07.2012 to 06.08.2012 and was an indoor patient for 19 days. An
amount of Rs.2,00,000/- had been spent towards his medical expenses. It was observed that there
was a permanent physical disability of 45% of the whole body as certified by the doctor and further
was a functional disability of 100% as the appellant-claimant is unable to continue with his vocation
and unable to find any work in lieu of the accident.

11. It is submitted that the appellant-claimant was hale, healthy and aged only 19 years at the time of
the accident. The appellant-claimant being aggrieved, had sought compensation to the tune of Rs.
25,00,000/- by filing MYC No.1786/20 12 before the Tribunal. The Tribunal had awarded a meagre
sum of Rs.6,13,000/- along with interest at 6%. Being aggrieved, the appellant-claimant had
proceeded to file M.F.A. No.100867/2014 (MV) before the High Court of Karnataka (Dharwad
Bench). The High Court vide its impugned order has only marginally increased the compensation
payable to the appellant- claimant from Rs.6,13,000/- to Rs.9,26,800/-. The High Court had
considered the income of the appellant-claimant to be only Rs. 7,000/- as against Rs. 9,000/- which
the appellant-claimant was earning through his utensil business. The physical disability had only
been taken as 40% as against 45% as opined by the Doctor. The table showing the heads awarded as
compensation by the High Court and the Tribunal to the appellant-claimant is as follows:

SL.      PARTICULARS         HIGH     MACT (IN            AMOUNT
NO                         COURT (IN     RS.)             CLAIMED
RS.)
1.    Pain and suffering  40,000/-   40,000/-            1,00,000/-
2.    Loss of Earning for 42,000/-   4,000/-             9000 x 6 =
6 months                                           54,000
3.    Loss of earning due 6,04,800/- 3,24,000/-          9000 x 12 x
to disability                                      18 x 40% =
7,77,600/-
4.    Towards       medical   1,50,000/-   1,50,000/-    2,00,000/-
expenses
5.    Conveyance              20,000/-     20,000/-      50,000/-
6.    Loss of amenities in    30,000/-     30,000/-      50,000/-
life
7.    Marriage prospects      20,000/-    20,000/-    1,00,000/-
8.    Litigation charges      20,000/-    Not awarded 50,000/-
9.    Future        medical   Not awarded 25,000/-    2,50,000/-
expenses
10.   Attendant charges       Not awarded Not awarded 4500 x 12 x
18          =
9,72,000/-
TOTAL                   9,26,800/-  6,13,000/-  26,03,600/-

4

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

12. It is submitted that both the Tribunal as well as the High Court have failed to correctly
provide/grant compensation under the head "future prospects" as mandated by this Court by only
taking the salary of the appellant-claimant to be Rs. 7,000/- and not Rs. 9,000/-. It is submitted
that it had been specifically stated by Dr. Anil B. Patil (PW-2) that the appellant would require
future medical expenses to the tune of Rs. 2,50,000/-. However, the Tribunal awarded only a sum of
Rs. 25,000/- towards future medical expenses as against Rs. 2,50,000/- as stated by PW-2. The
High Court has not considered the same at all.

13. It is submitted that with regard to conveyance, it ought to be appreciated that the accident
occurred on the Kulgod-Gokak Highway and the appellant was subsequently transferred to Belgaum
for treatment. Therefore, compensation under the head of conveyance ought to be granted on the
higher side as the appellant was completely disabled and must have received help from family
members or friends to get admitted at the hospital and back and forth which has also been observed
in Master Ayush v. Branch Manager, Reliance General Insurance Company Limited and Another,
(2022) 7 SCC 738. Therefore, it would be reasonable to award conveyance charges of Rs.50,000/-.

14. It is submitted that this Court in Sanjay Kumar v. Ashok Kumar and Another, (2014) 5 SCC 330,
was pleased to award compensation to the tune of Rs.75,000/- for loss of marriage prospects
wherein the claimant was earning only a sum of Rs.3,500/- per month. Therefore, it would be
reasonable to award compensation to the tune of Rs. 1,00,000/- for loss of marriage prospects to
the appellant-claimant in the present matter.

15. The appellant suffers from paraplegia because of the accident and requires an attendant
throughout the day and hence, Attendant charges of Rs.4,500/- per month ought to be awarded to
the appellant, which has not been considered by the Tribunal as well as the High Court. The
appellant is unable to stand, walk or sit and is unable to bend his body or lift any weights. It is
pertinent to point out herein that the appellant as a consequence of his grievous injuries will not be
able to work in the same manner as he used to prior to the accident and therefore, functional
disability of the appellant ought to be considered as 100%.

16. It is further submitted that the appellant had been operated upon twice and has undergone a
great deal of pain and suffering in lieu of the accident and has had to give up his vocation as a
consequence of the grievous nature of the injuries sustained. This Court in Ramesh v. Karan Singh &
Anr. in Civil Appeal No. 6365 of 2022 dated September 16, 2022 was pleased to grant compensation
to the tune of Rs. 4,00,000/- after taking notice of the grievous nature of the injuries sustained by
the Claimant in the said matter and taking into consideration that he had been operated upon 5
times. In light of the same, it would be reasonable to award compensation of Rs. 1,00,000/- to the
appellant under the head of pain and suffering.

17. It is submitted that this Court in R.D. Hattangadi v. Pest Control (India) Pvt. Ltd. and Others,
(1995) 1 SCC 551, (Para-9) had categorically stated that in injury cases, compensation ought to be
assessed as Pecuniary Damages i.e the costs incurred by the claimant for the injury and Special

5

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

Damages which includes damages for mental and physical shock, loss of amenities, loss of
expectation of life and inconvenience. It may be observed that cumulatively, only a meagre sum of
Rs. 90,000/- has been awarded to the appellant for the same. It ought to be appreciated that the
appellant would not be able to marry as a consequence of the accident and is forced to live with the
pain and suffering throughout his life as he would require an attendant to care for him as well. It
may be observed that it has been specifically stated that the appellant is unable to squat or sit cross
legged and unable to stand and walk as well as per the disability certificate. Keeping in mind the
same, it would be reasonable to award compensation of Rs.50,000/- each to the appellant-claimant
under the non-pecuniary heads of loss of amenities. It is submitted that with regards to litigation
expenses, the appellant has contested the matter right from the point of the Tribunal upto this
Court, in light of the same, it would be reasonable to award litigation expenses of Rs.50,000/- to the
appellant.

18. It is submitted that this Court in Govind Yadav v. New India Insurance Company Limited, (2011)
10 SCC 683, Arvind Kumar Mishra v. New India Assurance Company Limited and Another, (2010)
10 SCC 254, and Raj Kumar v. Ajay Kumar and Another, (2011) 1 SCC 343, has categorically held
that adequate compensation ought to be awarded not only for the physical injury and treatment, but
also for the loss of earning and his inability to lead a normal life and enjoy amenities, which he
would have enjoyed but for the disability caused due to the accident.

19. It is pertinent to point out herein that the appellant would be entitled to fair and just
compensation in order to place the appellant in such a position as close to how the appellant was
living prior to the accident as held by this Court in National Insurance Company Limited v. Pranay
Sethi and Others, (2017) 16 SCC 680, (Para-55) and in Raj Kumar v. Ajay Kumar (supra)(Para-5).
This Court has also held in Helen C. Rebello (Mrs.) and Others v. Maharashtra State Road Transport
Corporation and Another, (1999) 1 SCC 90 (Para-36), that the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (for short,
‘the Act’) is a beneficial piece of legislation and hence the object of the Courts ought to be to assist
the injured/deceased person.

20. It is pertinent to point out herein that the claim of the appellant

-claimant before the Tribunal was only Rs. 25,00,000/-. However, it is submitted that this Court in
Nagappa v. Gurudayal Singh and Others, (2003) 2 SCC 274, and in Laxman alias Laxman Mourya v.
Divisional Manager, Oriental Insurance Company Limited and Another, (2011) 10 SCC 756, had
categorically stated that there is no restriction that the Tribunal/Court cannot award compensation
amount exceeding the claim amount.

21. Thus, in view of the aforesaid, the learned counsel prayed that there being merit in his appeal,
the same may be allowed and the amount of compensation may be enhanced accordingly.

SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT NO. 1- INSURANCE COMPANY

22. Mr. Maibam Nabaghanashyam Singh, the learned counsel appearing for the insurance company
has also submitted his submissions in writing. The same are as under:

6

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

23. It is submitted that the present petition is filed by the petitioner challenging the impugned order
whereby the High Court had allowed the appeal filed by the petitioner and enhanced the
compensation from Rs. 6,13,000/- to Rs. 9,26,800/-. The petitioner by filing the present petition is
seeking further enhancement of the award. It is submitted that the High Court after considering the
evidence on record and also after considering the MACT award had rightly enhanced the award as
claimed by the petitioner as such there is no scope for any further enhancement of the amount in the
present petition.

24. It is submitted that the High Court has rightly appreciated the evidence and has taken 40%
disability for whole body after considering the nature of injury suffered and the evidence of treating
doctor, which is 10% more than what has been considered by the Tribunal. The High Court has
rightly assessed the future earning as per the law laid down by this Court in Anant son of
Sidheshwar Dukre v. Pratap son of Zhamnnappa Lamzane and Another in Civil Appeal No. 8420 of
2018 dated August 21, 2022. The calculation of loss of future earning where the claimant suffers
permanent disability as a result of injuries has been dealt in the aforementioned judgment in para
no. 7.2. Therefore, under this head there is no scope of enhancement as claimed in the present
petition.

25. It is submitted that the appellant has wrongly claimed enhancement of the compensation
towards the loss of future earnings during the laid-up period. In fact, the High Court has awarded
for loss of earning during the laid-up period for six months. Whereas as per the law laid down by
this Court in Anant v. Pratap (supra), this Court has held that the claimant cannot succeed in the
claim of actual loss of income. It was observed by this Court in para No. 7.3 that “The grant of loss of
future income compensates for any further period of time where income was lost. Actual loss of
income can be awarded for the month in which accident took place.” In fact, the High Court had
rather awarded on the higher side under this head i.e. for actual loss income, which ought to be have
been awarded only for the month in which accident took place.

26. It is submitted that the appellant therein without any evidence on record is allegedly claiming
that the claimant had 100% disability. It is pertinent to submit here that the appellant had miserably
failed to produce any document before the Tribunal, the High Court or even in this Court to show
that the claimant had 100% disability. The only document relied upon by appellant as regards to the
disability of the claimant is the disability certificate which shows that total permanent physical
disability of 45% to whole body. No document filed by the appellant is showing that the claimant has
100% disability. Therefore, the contention made by the appellant for enhancement of the
compensation on the ground of disability of 100% is nothing but a desire of the claimant to gain
sympathy of this Court to grant further amount as enhancement of the award. The approach of the
appellant is unhealthy and will set a bad precedent if such pleas are accepted by this Court. In view
of the same the present appeal is liable to be dismissed being devoid of merits.

27. Thus, in view of the aforesaid, the learned counsel appearing for the insurance company prays
that there being no merit in the appeal filed by the original claimant, the same may be dismissed.

ANALYSIS

7

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

28. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having gone through the
materials on record, the only question that falls for our consideration is whether the
appellant-claimant has made out any case for further enhancement of the amount of compensation.

POSITION OF LAW

29. The process of determining the compensation by the court is essentially a very difficult task and
can never be an exact science. Perfect compensation is hardly possible, more so in claims of injury
and disability. As rightly pointed out in H. West & Son Ltd. v. Shephard, 1958-65 ACJ 504 (HL,
England):

“…money cannot renew a physical frame that has been battered.”

30. The principle consistently followed by this court in assessing motor vehicle compensation
claims, is to place the victim in as near a position as she or he was in before the accident, with other
compensatory directions for loss of amenities and other payments. These general principles have
been stated and reiterated in several decisions. [Govind Yadav v. New India Insurance Co. Ltd.,
(2011) 10 SCC 683.]

31. It is now a well settled position of law that even in cases of permanent disablement incurred as a
result of a motor-accident, the claimant can seek, apart from compensation for future loss of
income, amounts for future prospects as well. We have come across many orders of different
tribunals and unfortunately affirmed by different High Courts, taking the view that the claimant is
not entitled to compensation for future prospects in accident cases involving serious injuries
resulting in permanent disablement. That is not a correct position of law. There is no justification to
exclude the possibility of compensation for future prospects in accident cases involving serious
injuries resulting in permanent disablement. Such a narrow reading is illogical because it denies
altogether the possibility of the living victim progressing further in life in accident cases – and
admits such possibility of future prospects, in case of the victim’s death.

32. This Court has emphasised time and again that “just compensation” should include all elements
that would go to place the victim in as near a position as she or he was in, before the occurrence of
the accident. Whilst no amount of money or other material compensation can erase the trauma,
pain and suffering that a victim undergoes after a serious accident, (or replace the loss of a loved
one), monetary compensation is the manner known to law, whereby society assures some measure
of restitution to those who survive, and the victims who have to face their lives.

33. In Santosh Devi v. National Insurance Company Limited and Others, (2012) 6 SCC 421, this
Court held that:

“14. We find it extremely difficult to fathom any rationale for the observation made in
paragraph 24 of the judgment in Sarla Verma case [Sarla Verma v. DTC, (2009) 6
SCC 121] that where the deceased was self-employed or was on a fixed salary without
provision for annual increment, etc., the Courts will usually take only the actual

8

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

income at the time of death and a departure from this rule should be made only in
rare and exceptional cases involving special circumstances. In our view, it will be
nave to say that the wages or total emoluments/income of a person who is
self-employed or who is employed on a fixed salary without provision for annual
increment, etc., would remain the same throughout his life.

15. The rise in the cost of living affects everyone across the board. It does not make
any distinction between rich and poor.

As a matter of fact, the effect of rise in prices which directly impacts the cost of living is minimal on
the rich and maximum on those who are self-employed or who get fixed income/emoluments. They
are the worst affected people. Therefore, they put in extra efforts to generate additional income
necessary for sustaining their families.

16. The salaries of those employed under the Central and State Governments and their
agencies/instrumentalities have been revised from time to time to provide a cushion against the
rising prices and provisions have been made for providing security to the families of the deceased
employees. The salaries of those employed in private sectors have also increased manifold. Till
about two decades ago, nobody could have imagined that salary of Class IV employee of the
Government would be in five figures and total emoluments of those in higher echelons of service will
cross the figure of rupees one lakh.

17. Although the wages/income of those employed in unorganised sectors has not registered a
corresponding increase and has not kept pace with the increase in the salaries of the government
employees and those employed in private sectors, but it cannot be denied that there has been
incremental enhancement in the income of those who are self- employed and even those engaged on
daily basis, monthly basis or even seasonal basis. We can take judicial notice of the fact that with a
view to meet the challenges posed by high cost of living, the persons falling in the latter category
periodically increase the cost of their labour. In this context, it may be useful to give an example of a
tailor who earns his livelihood by stitching cloths. If the cost of living increases and the prices of
essentials go up, it is but natural for him to increase the cost of his labour. So will be the cases of
ordinary skilled and unskilled labour, like, barber, blacksmith, cobbler, mason etc.

18. Therefore, we do not think that while making the observations in the last three lines of para 24 of
Sarla Verma [Sarla Verma v. DTC, (2009) 6 SCC 121] judgment, the Court had intended to lay down
an absolute rule that there will be no addition in the income of a person who is self-employed or who
is paid fixed wages. Rather, it would be reasonable to say that a person who is self-employed or is
engaged on fixed wages will also get 30% increase in his total income over a period of time and if
he/she becomes the victim of an accident then the same formula deserves to be applied for
calculating the amount of compensation.”

34. In Jagdish v. Mohan and Others, (2018) 4 SCC 571, the victim, a carpenter, suffered permanent
disablement, and his claim for compensation including for loss of future prospects was considered
by a three-Judge Bench which included, incidentally, the judges who had decided National

9

Insurance Company (supra). This Court held that:

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

“13. In the judgment of the Constitution Bench in Pranay Sethi [National Insurance
Co. Ltd. v. Pranay Sethi, (2017) 16 SCC 680], this Court has held that the benefit of
future prospects should not be confined only to those who have a permanent job and
would extend to self-employed individuals. In the case of a self-employed person, an
addition of 40% of the established income should be made where the age of the
victim at the time of the accident was below 40 years. Hence, in the present case, the
appellant would be entitled to an enhancement of Rs. 2400 towards loss of future
prospects.

14. In making the computation in the present case, the court must be mindful of the
fact that the appellant has suffered a serious disability in which he has suffered a loss
of the use of both his hands. For a person engaged in manual activities, it requires no
stretch of imagination to understand that a loss of hands is a complete deprivation of
the ability to earn. Nothing —at least in the facts of this case—can restore lost hands.
But the measure of compensation must reflect a genuine attempt of the law to restore
the dignity of the being. Our yardsticks of compensation should not be so abysmal as
to lead one to question whether our law values human life. If it does, as it must, it
must provide a realistic recompense for the pain of loss and the trauma of suffering.
Awards of compensation are not law's doles. In a discourse of rights, they constitute
entitlements under law. Our conversations about law must shift from a paternalistic
subordination of the individual to an assertion of enforceable rights as intrinsic to
human dignity.

15. The Tribunal has noted that the appellant is unable to even eat or to attend to a
visit to the toilet without the assistance of an attendant. In this background, it would
be a denial of justice to compute the disability at 90%. The disability is indeed total.

Having regard to the age of the appellant, the Tribunal applied a multiplier of 18. In the
circumstances, the compensation payable to the appellant on account of the loss of income,
including future prospects, would be Rs 18,14,400. In addition to this amount, the appellant should
be granted an amount of Rs 2 lakhs on account of pain, suffering and loss of amenities. The amount
awarded by the Tribunal towards medical expenses (Rs 98,908); for extra nourishment (Rs 25,000)
and for attendant's expenses (Rs 1 lakh) is maintained. The Tribunal has declined to award any
amount towards future treatment. The appellant should be allowed an amount of Rs 3 lakhs towards
future medical expenses. The appellant is thus awarded a total sum of Rs 25,38,308 by way of
compensation. The appellant would be entitled to interest at the rate of 9% p.a. on the compensation
from the date of the filing of the claim petition. The liability to pay compensation has been fastened
by the Tribunal and by the High Court on the insurer, owner and driver jointly and severally which
is affirmed. The amount shall be deposited before the Tribunal within a period of 6 weeks from
today and shall be paid over to the appellant upon proper identification.”

10

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

35. The case of Parminder Singh v. New India Assurance Company Limited and Others, (2019) 7
SCC 217, involved an accident victim, who underwent surgery for hemiplegia (weakness of one half
of the body on the left side; in this case, caused by an accident). According to the treating medic, the
victim could not work as a labourer or perform any agricultural work, or work as a driver (as he was
wont to); the assessment of his disability was at 75%, and of a permanent nature. The Court held
that:

“5.1. The appellant has however, produced an affidavit by his employer in this Court.
As per the said affidavit, the appellant was earning Rs 10,000 p.m. at the time of the
accident. 5.2. On the basis of the affidavit filed by the employer of the appellant, we
accept that the income of the appellant was Rs 10,000 p.m. at the time of the
accident, for the purpose of computing the compensation payable to him.

5.3. Taking the income of the appellant as Rs 10,000 p.m., with future prospects @
50% as awarded by the High Court, the total income of the appellant would come to
Rs 15,000 p.m. 5.4. The appellant was 23 years old at the time when the accident
occurred. Applying the multiplier of 18, the loss of future earnings suffered by the
appellant would work out to Rs 15,000 × 12 × 18 = Rs 32,40,000.

********* ********* ********* 5.7. In K. Suresh v. New India Assurance Co. Ltd.
(2012) 12 SCC 274, this Court held that: (SCC p. 279, para 10) “10. It is noteworthy to
state that an adjudicating authority, while determining the quantum of
compensation, has to keep in view the sufferings of the injured person which would
include his inability to lead a full life, his incapacity to enjoy the normal amenities
which he would have enjoyed but for the injuries and his ability to earn as much as he
used to earn or could have earned. Hence, while computing compensation the
approach of the Tribunal or a court has to be broad-based. Needless to say, it would
involve some guesswork as there cannot be any mathematical exactitude or a precise
formula to determine the quantum of compensation. In determination of
compensation the fundamental criterion of “just compensation” should be inhered.”
******** ********* ******** 5.9. In the present case, it is an admitted position that it
is not possible for the appellant to get employed as a driver, or do any kind of manual
labour, or engage in any agricultural operations whatsoever, for his sustenance. In
such circumstances, the High Court has rightly assessed the appellant's functional
disability at 100% insofar as his loss of earning capacity is concerned. The appellant
is, therefore, awarded Rs 32,40,000 towards loss of earning capacity.”

36. Yet later and in near past, in an accident case, which tragically left in its wake a young girl in a
life-long state of paraplegia, this Court, in Kajal v. Jagdish Chand and Others, (2020) 4 SCC 413,
reiterated that in addition to loss of earnings, compensation for future prospects too could be
factored in, and observed that:

“14. In Concord of India Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Nirmala Devi [ (1979) 4 SCC 365 : 1979
SCC (Cri) 996 : 1980 ACJ 55], this Court held : (SCC p. 366, para 2) “2. … the

11

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

determination of the quantum must be liberal, not niggardly since the law values life
and limb in a free country in generous scales.”

15. In R.D. Hattangadi v. Pest Control (India) (P) Ltd. [(1995) 1 SCC 551 : 1995 SCC
(Cri) 250], dealing with the different heads of compensation in injury cases this Court
held thus:

(SCC p. 556, para 9) “9. Broadly speaking while fixing the amount of compensation
payable to a victim of an accident, the damages have to be assessed separately as
pecuniary damages and special damages. Pecuniary damages are those which the
victim has actually incurred and which are capable of being calculated in terms of
money; whereas non-pecuniary damages are those which are incapable of being
assessed by arithmetical calculations. In order to appreciate two concepts pecuniary
damages may include expenses incurred by the claimant: (i) medical attendance; (ii)
loss of earning of profit up to the date of trial; (iii) other material loss. So far as non-
pecuniary damages are concerned, they may include: (i) damages for mental and
physical shock, pain and suffering, already suffered or likely to be suffered in the
future; (ii) damages to compensate for the loss of amenities of life which may include
a variety of matters i.e. on account of injury the claimant may not be able to walk, run
or sit; (iii) damages for loss of expectation of life i.e. on account of injury the normal
longevity of the person concerned is shortened; (iv) inconvenience, hardship,
discomfort, disappointment, frustration and mental stress in life.”

16. In Raj Kumar v. Ajay Kumar [(2011) 1 SCC 343 : (2011) 1 SCC (Civ) 164 : (2011) 1
SCC (Cri) 1161], this Court laid down the heads under which compensation is to be
awarded for personal injuries: (SCC p. 348, para 6) “6. The heads under which
compensation is awarded in personal injury cases are the following:

Pecuniary damages (Special damages)

(i) Expenses relating to treatment, hospitalisation, medicines, transportation,
nourishing food, and miscellaneous expenditure.

(ii) Loss of earnings (and other gains) which the injured would have made had he not
been injured, comprising:

(a) Loss of earning during the period of treatment;

(b) Loss of future earnings on account of permanent disability.

(iii) Future medical expenses.

Non-pecuniary damages (General damages)

12

(iv) Damages for pain, suffering and trauma as a consequence of the injuries.

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

(v) Loss of amenities (and/or loss of prospects of marriage).

(vi) Loss of expectation of life (shortening of normal longevity).

In routine personal injury cases, compensation will be awarded only under heads (i), (ii)(a) and (iv).
It is only in serious cases of injury, where there is specific medical evidence corroborating the
evidence of the claimant, that compensation will be granted under any of the heads (ii)

(b), (iii), (v) and (vi) relating to loss of future earnings on account of permanent disability, future
medical expenses, loss of amenities (and/or loss of prospects of marriage) and loss of expectation of
life.”

17. In K. Suresh v. New India Assurance Co. Ltd., (2012) 12 SCC 274 : (2013) 2 SCC (Civ) 279 :
(2013) 4 SCC (Cri) 638, this Court held as follows: (SCC p. 276, para 2) “2. … There cannot be actual
compensation for anguish of the heart or for mental tribulations. The quintessentiality lies in the
pragmatic computation of the loss sustained which has to be in the realm of realistic approximation.
Therefore, Section 168 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (for brevity “the Act”) stipulates that there
should be grant of “just compensation”. Thus, it becomes a challenge for a court of law to determine
“just compensation” which is neither a bonanza nor a windfall, and simultaneously, should not be a
pittance.

********                 ********                 ********
Loss of earnings

20. Both the courts below have held that since the girl was a young child of 12 years only notional
income of Rs 15,000 p.a. can be taken into consideration. We do not think this is a proper way of
assessing the future loss of income. This young girl after studying could have worked and would
have earned much more than Rs 15,000 p.a. Each case has to be decided on its own evidence but
taking notional income to be Rs 15,000 p.a. is not at all justified. The appellant has placed before us
material to show that the minimum wages payable to a skilled workman is Rs 4846 per month. In
our opinion, this would be the minimum amount which she would have earned on becoming a
major. Adding 40% for the future prospects, it works to be Rs 6784.40 per month i.e. 81,412.80 p.a.
Applying the multiplier of 18, it works out to Rs 14,65,430.40, which is rounded off to Rs
14,66,000.”

37. In Neerupam Mohan Mathur v. New India Assurance Company, (2013) 14 SCC 15, this Court
considered the case of a victim, whose injury was assessed to 70% as loss of earning capacity for
amputation of the arm; he was a postgraduate diploma holder in mechanical engineering, 32 years
of age and earning about Rs. 3000/- per month. This Court held, approving the High Court's order
(which had adopted the formula from the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923 to determine 70% for
the purpose of deciding loss of earning capacity) as follows:

13

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

“12. In the present case, the percentage of permanent disability has not been
expressed by the doctors with reference to the full body or with reference to a
particular limb. However, it is not in dispute that the claimant suffered such a
permanent disability as a result of injuries that he is not in a position of doing the
specialised job of designing, refrigeration and air conditioning. For the said reason,
the claimant's services were terminated by his employer but that does not mean that
the claimant is not capable to do any other job including the desk job. Having
qualification of BSc degree and postgraduate diploma in Mechanical Engineering, he
can perform any job where application of mind is required than any physical work.

13. In view of the forgoing discussion we find no grounds made out to interfere with
the finding of the High Court which determined the percentage of loss of earning
capacity to 70% adopting the percentage of loss of earning capacity as per the
Workmen's Compensation Act. The total loss of income was thus rightly calculated by
the High Court at Rs 6,04,800.”

38. However, making a monetary assessment of the injury suffered is the only process devised to
compensate the victim. The process of making such an assessment, whether in case of death or
injury, is provided in Section 168 of the Act which requires that the tribunals constituted under the
Act determine compensation, which appears to be ‘just’. Thus, the Act vests a wide discretion upon
the tribunals. The decision of this Court in Divisional Controller, KSRTC v. Mahadeva Shetty and
Another, (2003) 7 SCC 197, needs mention here (para 15):

“15. ……It has to be borne in mind that compensation for loss of limbs or life can
hardly be weighed in golden scales. Bodily injury is nothing but a deprivation which
entitles the claimant to damages. The quantum of damages fixed should be in
accordance with the injury. An injury may bring about many consequences like loss
of earning capacity, loss of mental pleasure and many such consequential losses. A
person becomes entitled to damages for mental and physical loss, his or her life may
have been shortened or that he or she cannot enjoy life, which has been curtailed
because of physical handicap. The normal expectation of life is impaired. But at the
same time it has to be borne in mind that the compensation is not expected to be a
windfall for the victim. Statutory provisions clearly indicate that the compensation
must be “just” and it cannot be a bonanza; not a source of profit but the same should
not be a pittance. The courts and tribunals have a duty to weigh the various factors
and quantify the amount of compensation, which should be just. What would be
“just” compensation is a vexed question. There can be no golden rule applicable to all
cases for measuring the value of human life or a limb. Measure of damages cannot be
arrived at by precise mathematical calculations. It would depend upon the particular
facts and circumstances, and attending peculiar or special features, if any. Every
method or mode adopted for assessing compensation has to be considered in the
background of “just” compensation which is the pivotal consideration. Though by use
of the expression “which appears to it to be just”, a wide discretion is vested in the
Tribunal, the determination has to be rational, to be done by a judicious approach

14

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

and not the outcome of whims, wild guesses and arbitrariness.. …”

39. This Court in R.D. Hattangadi (supra), posited certain principles to be followed:

“9.……while fixing an amount of compensation payable to a victim of an accident, the
damages have to be assessed separately as pecuniary damages and special damages.
Pecuniary damages are those which the victim has actually incurred and which are
capable of being calculated in terms of money; whereas non-pecuniary damages are
those which are incapable of being assessed by arithmetical calculations. In order to
appreciate two concepts pecuniary damages may include expenses incurred by the
claimant: (i) medical attendance; (ii) loss of earning of profit up to the date of trial;

(iii) other material loss. So far non-pecuniary damages are concerned, they may
include (i) damages for mental and physical shock, pain and suffering, already
suffered or likely to be suffered in future; (ii) damages to compensate for the loss of
amenities of life which may include a variety of matters, i.e., on account of injury the
claimant may not be able to walk, run or sit; (iii) damages for the loss of expectation
of life, i.e., on account of injury the normal longevity of the person concerned is
shortened; (iv) inconvenience, hardship, discomfort, disappointment, frustration and
mental stress in life.”

40. In the case of Raj Kumar (supra) this Court has explained in the following terms the general
principles relating to compensation in injury cases and assessment of future loss of earnings due to
permanent disability:

“General principles relating to compensation in injury cases

5. The provision of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (“the Act”, for short) makes it clear
that the award must be just, which means that compensation should, to the extent
possible, fully and adequately restore the claimant to the position prior to the
accident. The object of awarding damages is to make good the loss suffered as a result
of wrong done as far as money can do so, in a fair, reasonable and equitable manner.
The court or the Tribunal shall have to assess the damages objectively and exclude
from consideration any speculation or fancy, though some conjecture with reference
to the nature of disability and its consequences, is inevitable. A person is not only to
be compensated for the physical injury, but also for the loss which he suffered as a
result of such injury. This means that he is to be compensated for his inability to lead
a full life, his inability to enjoy those normal amenities which he would have enjoyed
but for the injuries, and his inability to earn as much as he used to earn or could have
earned. [See C.K. Subramania Iyer v. T. Kunhikuttan Nair [(1969) 3 SCC 64 : AIR
1970 SC 376] , R.D. Hattangadi v. Pest Control (India) (P) Ltd. [(1995) 1 SCC 551 :
1995 SCC (Cri) 250] and Baker v. Willoughby [1970 AC 467 : (1970) 2 WLR 50 :

(1969) 3 All ER 1528 (HL)] .]

15

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

6. The heads under which compensation is awarded in personal injury cases are the
following:

Pecuniary damages (Special damages)

(i) Expenses relating to treatment, hospitalisation, medicines, transportation,
nourishing food, and miscellaneous expenditure.

(ii) Loss of earnings (and other gains) which the injured would have made had he not
been injured, comprising:

(a) Loss of earning during the period of treatment;

(b) Loss of future earnings on account of permanent disability.

(iii) Future medical expenses.

Non-pecuniary damages (General damages)

(iv) Damages for pain, suffering and trauma as a consequence of the injuries.

(v) Loss of amenities (and/or loss of prospects of marriage).

(vi) Loss of expectation of life (shortening of normal longevity).

In routine personal injury cases, compensation will be awarded only under heads (i), (ii)(a) and (iv).
It is only in serious cases of injury, where there is specific medical evidence corroborating the
evidence of the claimant, that compensation will be granted under any of the heads (ii)(b),

(iii), (v) and (vi) relating to loss of future earnings on account of permanent disability, future
medical expenses, loss of amenities (and/or loss of prospects of marriage) and loss of expectation of
life.

7. Assessment of pecuniary damages under Item (i) and under Item (ii)(a) do not pose much
difficulty as they involve reimbursement of actuals and are easily ascertainable from the evidence.
Award under the head of future medical expenses—Item (iii)—depends upon specific medical
evidence regarding need for further treatment and cost thereof. Assessment of non-pecuniary
damages—Items (iv),

(v) and (vi)—involves determination of lump sum amounts with reference to circumstances such as
age, nature of injury/deprivation/disability suffered by the claimant and the effect thereof on the
future life of the claimant. Decisions of this Court and the High Courts contain necessary guidelines
for award under these heads, if necessary. What usually poses some difficulty is the assessment of
the loss of future earnings on account of permanent disability—Item (ii)(a). We are concerned with

16

that assessment in this case.

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

Assessment of future loss of earnings due to permanent disability

8. Disability refers to any restriction or lack of ability to perform an activity in the manner
considered normal for a human being. Permanent disability refers to the residuary incapacity or loss
of use of some part of the body, found existing at the end of the period of treatment and
recuperation, after achieving the maximum bodily improvement or recovery which is likely to
remain for the remainder life of the injured. Temporary disability refers to the incapacity or loss of
use of some part of the body on account of the injury, which will cease to exist at the end of the
period of treatment and recuperation. Permanent disability can be either partial or total. Partial
permanent disability refers to a person's inability to perform all the duties and bodily functions that
he could perform before the accident, though he is able to perform some of them and is still able to
engage in some gainful activity. Total permanent disability refers to a person's inability to perform
any avocation or employment related activities as a result of the accident. The permanent
disabilities that may arise from motor accident injuries, are of a much wider range when compared
to the physical disabilities which are enumerated in the Persons with Disabilities (Equal
Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995 (“the Disabilities Act”, for
short). But if any of the disabilities enumerated in Section 2(i) of the Disabilities Act are the result of
injuries sustained in a motor accident, they can be permanent disabilities for the purpose of
claiming compensation.

9. The percentage of permanent disability is expressed by the doctors with reference to the whole
body, or more often than not, with reference to a particular limb. When a disability certificate states
that the injured has suffered permanent disability to an extent of 45% of the left lower limb, it is not
the same as 45% permanent disability with reference to the whole body. The extent of disability of a
limb (or part of the body) expressed in terms of a percentage of the total functions of that limb,
obviously cannot be assumed to be the extent of disability of the whole body. If there is 60%
permanent disability of the right hand and 80% permanent disability of left leg, it does not mean
that the extent of permanent disability with reference to the whole body is 140% (that is 80% plus
60%). If different parts of the body have suffered different percentages of disabilities, the sum total
thereof expressed in terms of the permanent disability with reference to the whole body cannot
obviously exceed 100%.

10. Where the claimant suffers a permanent disability as a result of injuries, the assessment of
compensation under the head of loss of future earnings would depend upon the effect and impact of
such permanent disability on his earning capacity. The Tribunal should not mechanically apply the
percentage of permanent disability as the percentage of economic loss or loss of earning capacity. In
most of the cases, the percentage of economic loss, that is, the percentage of loss of earning capacity,
arising from a permanent disability will be different from the percentage of permanent disability.
Some Tribunals wrongly assume that in all cases, a particular extent (percentage) of permanent
disability would result in a corresponding loss of earning capacity, and consequently, if the evidence
produced show 45% as the permanent disability, will hold that there is 45% loss of future earning
capacity. In most of the cases, equating the extent (percentage) of loss of earning capacity to the

17

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

extent (percentage) of permanent disability will result in award of either too low or too high a
compensation.

11. What requires to be assessed by the Tribunal is the effect of the permanent disability on the
earning capacity of the injured; and after assessing the loss of earning capacity in terms of a
percentage of the income, it has to be quantified in terms of money, to arrive at the future loss of
earnings (by applying the standard multiplier method used to determine loss of dependency). We
may however note that in some cases, on appreciation of evidence and assessment, the Tribunal may
find that the percentage of loss of earning capacity as a result of the permanent disability, is
approximately the same as the percentage of permanent disability in which case, of course, the
Tribunal will adopt the said percentage for determination of compensation. (See for example, the
decisions of this Court in Arvind Kumar Mishra v. New India Assurance Co. Ltd. [(2010) 10 SCC 254
:

(2010) 3 SCC (Cri) 1258 : (2010) 10 Scale 298] and Yadava Kumar v. National
Insurance Co. Ltd. [(2010) 10 SCC 341 :

(2010) 3 SCC (Cri) 1285 : (2010) 8 Scale 567] )

12. Therefore, the Tribunal has to first decide whether there is any permanent disability and, if so,
the extent of such permanent disability. This means that the Tribunal should consider and decide
with reference to the evidence:

(i) whether the disablement is permanent or temporary;

(ii) if the disablement is permanent, whether it is permanent total disablement or
permanent partial disablement;

(iii) if the disablement percentage is expressed with reference to any specific limb,
then the effect of such disablement of the limb on the functioning of the entire body,
that is, the permanent disability suffered by the person.

If the Tribunal concludes that there is no permanent disability then there is no question of
proceeding further and determining the loss of future earning capacity. But if the Tribunal
concludes that there is permanent disability then it will proceed to ascertain its extent. After the
Tribunal ascertains the actual extent of permanent disability of the claimant based on the medical
evidence, it has to determine whether such permanent disability has affected or will affect his
earning capacity.

13. Ascertainment of the effect of the permanent disability on the actual earning capacity involves
three steps. The Tribunal has to first ascertain what activities the claimant could carry on in spite of
the permanent disability and what he could not do as a result of the permanent disability (this is
also relevant for awarding compensation under the head of loss of amenities of life). The second step
is to ascertain his avocation, profession and nature of work before the accident, as also his age. The

18

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

third step is to find out whether (i) the claimant is totally disabled from earning any kind of
livelihood, or (ii) whether in spite of the permanent disability, the claimant could still effectively
carry on the activities and functions, which he was earlier carrying on, or (iii) whether he was
prevented or restricted from discharging his previous activities and functions, but could carry on
some other or lesser scale of activities and functions so that he continues to earn or can continue to
earn his livelihood.

14. For example, if the left hand of a claimant is amputated, the permanent physical or functional
disablement may be assessed around 60%. If the claimant was a driver or a carpenter, the actual loss
of earning capacity may virtually be hundred per cent, if he is neither able to drive or do carpentry.
On the other hand, if the claimant was a clerk in government service, the loss of his left hand may
not result in loss of employment and he may still be continued as a clerk as he could perform his
clerical functions; and in that event the loss of earning capacity will not be 100% as in the case of a
driver or carpenter, nor 60% which is the actual physical disability, but far less. In fact, there may
not be any need to award any compensation under the head of “loss of future earnings”, if the
claimant continues in government service, though he may be awarded compensation under the head
of loss of amenities as a consequence of losing his hand. Sometimes the injured claimant may be
continued in service, but may not be found suitable for discharging the duties attached to the post or
job which he was earlier holding, on account of his disability, and may therefore be shifted to some
other suitable but lesser post with lesser emoluments, in which case there should be a limited award
under the head of loss of future earning capacity, taking note of the reduced earning capacity.

15. It may be noted that when compensation is awarded by treating the loss of future earning
capacity as 100% (or even anything more than 50%), the need to award compensation separately
under the head of loss of amenities or loss of expectation of life may disappear and as a result, only a
token or nominal amount may have to be awarded under the head of loss of amenities or loss of
expectation of life, as otherwise there may be a duplication in the award of compensation. Be that as
it may.

16. The Tribunal should not be a silent spectator when medical evidence is tendered in regard to the
injuries and their effect, in particular, the extent of permanent disability. Sections 168 and 169 of the
Act make it evident that the Tribunal does not function as a neutral umpire as in a civil suit, but as
an active explorer and seeker of truth who is required to “hold an enquiry into the claim” for
determining the “just compensation”. The Tribunal should therefore take an active role to ascertain
the true and correct position so that it can assess the “just compensation”. While dealing with
personal injury cases, the Tribunal should preferably equip itself with a medical dictionary and a
handbook for evaluation of permanent physical impairment (for example, Manual for Evaluation of
Permanent Physical Impairment for Orthopaedic Surgeons, prepared by American Academy of
Orthopaedic Surgeons or its Indian equivalent or other authorised texts) for understanding the
medical evidence and assessing the physical and functional disability. The Tribunal may also keep in
view the First Schedule to the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923 which gives some indication
about the extent of permanent disability in different types of injuries, in the case of workmen.

19

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

17. If a doctor giving evidence uses technical medical terms, the Tribunal should instruct him to
state in addition, in simple non-medical terms, the nature and the effect of the injury. If a doctor
gives evidence about the percentage of permanent disability, the Tribunal has to seek clarification as
to whether such percentage of disability is the functional disability with reference to the whole body
or whether it is only with reference to a limb. If the percentage of permanent disability is stated with
reference to a limb, the Tribunal will have to seek the doctor's opinion as to whether it is possible to
deduce the corresponding functional permanent disability with reference to the whole body and, if
so, the percentage.

18. The Tribunal should also act with caution, if it proposed to accept the expert evidence of doctors
who did not treat the injured but who give “ready to use” disability certificates, without proper
medical assessment. There are several instances of unscrupulous doctors who without treating the
injured, readily give liberal disability certificates to help the claimants. But where the disability
certificates are given by duly constituted Medical Boards, they may be accepted subject to evidence
regarding the genuineness of such certificates. The Tribunal may invariably make it a point to
require the evidence of the doctor who treated the injured or who assessed the permanent disability.
Mere production of a disability certificate or discharge certificate will not be proof of the extent of
disability stated therein unless the doctor who treated the claimant or who medically examined and
assessed the extent of disability of the claimant, is tendered for cross- examination with reference to
the certificate. If the Tribunal is not satisfied with the medical evidence produced by the claimant, it
can constitute a Medical Board (from a panel maintained by it in consultation with reputed local
hospitals/medical colleges) and refer the claimant to such Medical Board for assessment of the
disability.

19. We may now summarise the principles discussed above:

(i) All injuries (or permanent disabilities arising from injuries), do not result in loss
of earning capacity.

(ii) The percentage of permanent disability with reference to the whole body of a
person, cannot be assumed to be the percentage of loss of earning capacity. To put it
differently, the percentage of loss of earning capacity is not the same as the
percentage of permanent disability (except in a few cases, where the Tribunal on the
basis of evidence, concludes that the percentage of loss of earning capacity is the
same as the percentage of permanent disability).

(iii) The doctor who treated an injured claimant or who examined him subsequently
to assess the extent of his permanent disability can give evidence only in regard to the
extent of permanent disability. The loss of earning capacity is something that will
have to be assessed by the Tribunal with reference to the evidence in entirety.

(iv) The same permanent disability may result in different percentages of loss of
earning capacity in different persons, depending upon the nature of profession,
occupation or job, age, education and other factors.”

20

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

41. Later, in another judgment, i.e., Jakir Hussein v. Sabir and Others, (2015) 7 SCC
252, this Court had to consider the correctness of a compensation assessment based
on the High Court's analysis of the injury to the victim (a driver who suffered
permanent injury to his arm, impairing movement as well as the wrist, which
rendered him incapable of driving any vehicle). The High Court had assessed
permanent disablement at 30%, even though the doctor had certified it to be 55%.

This Court, reversing the High Court order, observed inter alia that:

“15. …..Due to this injury, the doctor has stated that the appellant had great difficulty
to move his shoulder, wrist and elbow and pus was coming out of the injury even two
years after the accident and the treatment was taken by him. The doctor further
stated in his evidence that the appellant got delayed joined fracture in the humerus
bone of his right hand with wiring and nailing and that he had suffered 55% disability
and cannot drive any motor vehicle in future due to the same. He was once again
operated upon during the pendency of the appeal before the High Court and he was
hospitalised for 10 days. The appellant was present in person in the High Court and it
was observed and noticed by the High Court that the right hand of the appellant was
completely crushed and deformed. In view of the doctor's evidence in this case, the
Tribunal and the High Court have erroneously taken the extent of permanent
disability at 30% and 55%, respectively for the calculation of amount towards the loss
of future earning capacity. No doubt, the doctor has assessed the permanent
disability of the appellant at 55%. However, it is important to consider the relevant
fact, namely, that the appellant is a driver and driving the motor vehicle is the only
means of livelihood for himself as well as the members of his family. Further, it is
very crucial to note that the High Court has clearly observed that his right hand was
completely crushed and deformed.

16. In Raj Kumar v. Ajay Kumar [(2011) 1 SCC 343], this Court specifically gave the
illustration of a driver who has permanent disablement of hand and stated that the
loss of future earnings capacity would be virtually 100%. Therefore, clearly when it
comes to loss of earning due to permanent disability, the same may be treated as
100% loss caused to the appellant since he will never be able to work as a driver
again. The contention of the respondent Insurance Company that the appellant could
take up any other alternative employment is no justification to avoid their vicarious
liability. Hence, the loss of earning is determined by us at Rs 54,000 per annum.
Thus, by applying the appropriate multiplier as per the principles laid down by this
Court in Sarla Verma v. DTC [(2009) 6 SCC 121 : (2009) 2 SCC (Civ) 770 : (2009) 2
SCC (Cri) 1002], the total loss of future earnings of the appellant will be at Rs 54,000
× 16 = Rs 8,64,000.”

42. In Anthony alias Anthony Swamy v. Managing Director, Karnataka State Road
Transport Corporation, (2020) 7 SCC 161, where the victim was a painter by
profession, a three-Judge Bench had followed Raj Kumar (supra) and Nagarajappa v.

21

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

Divisional Manager, Oriental Insurance Company Limited, (2011) 13 SCC 323.

The High Court had assessed the injury to be 25% permanent disability, although the treating doctor
had said that the injury incurred by the bus passenger (who was earning Rs. 9000/- per month) was
75% of the left leg and 37.5% for the whole body. In Raj Kumar (supra), the physical disability of the
upper limb was determined as 68% in proportion to 22- 23% of the whole-body. The High Court had
assessed the injury as 25% and granted compensation. However, this Court assessed the injury on
the basis that the disability was 75%, stating as follows:

“8. PW 3 had assessed the physical functional disability of the left leg of the appellant
at 75% and total body disability at 37.5%. The High Court has considered it proper to
assess the physical disability at 25% of the whole body only. There is no discussion
for this reduction in percentage, much less any consideration of the nature of
permanent functional disability suffered by the appellant. The extent of physical
functional disability, in the facts of the case has to be considered in a manner so as to
grant just and proper compensation to the appellant towards loss of future earning.
The earning capacity of the appellant as on the date of the accident stands completely
negated and not reduced. He has been rendered permanently incapable of working as
a painter or do any manual work. Compensation for loss of future earning, therefore
has to be proper and just to enable him to live a life of dignity and not compensation
which is elusive. If the 75% physical disability has rendered the appellant
permanently disabled from pursuing his normal vocation or any similar work, it is
difficult to comprehend the grant of compensation to him in ratio to the disability to
the whole body. The appellant is therefore held entitled to compensation for loss of
future earning based on his 75% permanent physical functional disability
recalculated with the salary of Rs 5,500 with multiplier of 14 at Rs 6,93,000.”

43. The question of amount of compensation payable to one suffering injury as a
result of motor vehicle accident was considered in Syed Sadiq and Others v.
Divisional Manager, United India Insurance Company Limited, (2014) 2 SCC 735,
when this Court had to apply the correct standard for awarding compensation for loss
of future prospects for a vegetable vendor, whose right leg had to be amputated, as a
result of a motor accident. The High Court had considered the disability to be 65%.
This Court held as follows:

“7. Further, the appellant claims that he was working as a vegetable vendor. It is true
that a vegetable vendor might not require mobility to the extent that he sells
vegetables at one place. However, the occupation of vegetable vending is not confined
to selling vegetables from a particular location. It rather involves procuring
vegetables from the wholesale market or the farmers and then selling it off in the
retail market. This often involves selling vegetables in the cart which requires 100%
mobility. But even by conservative approach, if we presume that the vegetable
vending by the appellant claimant involved selling vegetables from one place, the
claimant would require assistance with his mobility in bringing vegetables to the

22

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

market place which otherwise would be extremely difficult for him with an
amputated leg. We are required to be sensitive while dealing with manual labour
cases where loss of limb is often equivalent to loss of livelihood. Yet, considering that
the appellant claimant is still capable to fend for his livelihood once he is brought in
the market place, we determine the disability at 85% to determine the loss of income.

8. The appellant claimant in his appeal further claimed that he had been earning Rs
10,000 p.m. by doing vegetable vending work. The High Court however, considered
the loss of income at Rs 3500 p.m. considering that the claimant did not produce any
document to establish his loss of income. It is difficult for us to convince ourselves as
to how a labour involved in an unorganised sector doing his own business is expected
to produce documents to prove his monthly income…..”

44. In Arvind Kumar Mishra (supra), the appellant at the time of accident was a final
year engineering (Mechanical) degree student in a reputed college. He was a brilliant
student and had passed all his semester examinations with distinction. He suffered
grievous injuries and remained in a coma for about two months; his studies were
disrupted as he was moved to different hospitals for surgeries. For many months, his
condition remained serious; his right hand was amputated and vision seriously
affected. This Court accepted his claim and held that he was permanently disabled to
the extent of 70%. In Mohan Soni v. Ram Avtar Tomar and Others, (2012) 2 SCC 267
(page 272), in a case of injury entailing loss of a leg, this Court held that medical
evidence of the extent of disability should not be mechanically scaled down:

“8. On hearing the counsel for the parties and on going through the materials on
record, we are of the view that both the Tribunal and the High Court were in error in
pegging down the disability of the appellant to 50% with reference to Schedule I of
the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923. In the context of loss of future earning, any
physical disability resulting from an accident has to be judged with reference to the
nature of work being performed by the person suffering the disability. This is the
basic premise and once that is grasped, it clearly follows that the same injury or loss
may affect two different persons in different ways. Take the case of a marginal farmer
who does his cultivation work himself and ploughs his land with his own two hands;
or the puller of a cycle-rickshaw, one of the main means of transport in hundreds of
small towns all over the country. The loss of one of the legs either to the marginal
farmer or the cycle-rickshaw- puller would be the end of the road insofar as their
earning capacity is concerned. But in case of a person engaged in some kind of desk
work in an office, the loss of a leg may not have the same effect. The loss of a leg (or
for that matter the loss of any limb) to anyone is bound to have very traumatic effects
on one's personal, family or social life but the loss of one of the legs to a person
working in the office would not interfere with his work/earning capacity in the same
degree as in the case of a marginal farmer or a cycle-rickshaw-puller.

******** ********* **********

23

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

10. This Court in K. Janardhan case [(2008) 8 SCC 518 : (2008) 2 SCC (L&S) 733],
set aside the High Court judgment and held that the tanker driver had suffered 100%
disability and incapacity in earning his keep as a tanker driver as his right leg was
amputated from the knee and, accordingly, restored the order passed by the
Commissioner of Workmen's Compensation. In K. Janardhan [(2008) 8 SCC 518 :
(2008) 2 SCC (L&S) 733] this Court also referred to and relied upon an earlier
decision of the Court in Pratap Narain Singh Deo v. Srinivas Sabata [(1976) 1 SCC
289 : 1976 SCC (L&S) 52] in which a carpenter who suffered an amputation of his left
arm from the elbow was held to have suffered complete loss of his earning capacity.

******** ********* **********

13. Any scaling down of the compensation should require something more tangible
than a hypothetical conjecture that notwithstanding the disability, the victim could
make up for the loss of income by changing his vocation or by adopting another
means of livelihood. The party advocating for a lower amount of compensation for
that reason must plead and show before the Tribunal that the victim enjoyed some
legal protection (as in the case of persons covered by the Persons with Disabilities
(Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995) or in
case of the vast multitude who earn their livelihood in the unorganised sector by
leading cogent evidence that the victim had in fact changed his vocation or the means
of his livelihood and by virtue of such change he was deriving a certain income.

14. The loss of earning capacity of the appellant, according to us, may be as high as
100% but in no case it would be less than 90%. We, accordingly, find and hold that
the compensation for the loss of the appellant's future earnings must be computed on
that basis. On calculation on that basis, the amount of compensation would come to
Rs 3,56,400 and after addition of a sum of Rs 30,000 and Rs 15,000 the total amount
would be Rs 4,01,400. The additional compensation amount would carry interest at
the rate of 9% per annum from the date of filing of the claim petition till the date of
payment.

The additional amount of compensation along with interest should be paid to the appellant without
delay and not later than three months from today.”

45. One more decision, Sandeep Khanuja v. Atul Dande and Another, (2017) 3 SCC 351, too had
dealt with the precise aspect of assessing the quantum of permanent disablement. The victim was
aged about 30 years, working as a chartered accountant for various institutions for which he was
paid professional fees. The injuries suffered by him resulted in severe impairment of movement; as
he had problems in climbing stairs, back trouble while sleeping, etc. A rod was implanted in his leg.
He suffered 70% permanent disability, and mental and physical agony. This Court enhanced the
compensation, observing the proper manner to calculate the extent of disability. This Court held as
under:

24

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

“13. In the last few years, law in this aspect has been straightened by this Court by
removing certain cobwebs that had been created because of some divergent views on
certain aspects. It is not even necessary to refer to all these cases. We find that the
principle of determination of compensation in the case of permanent/partial
disablement has been exhaustively dealt with after referring to the relevant case law
on the subject in Raj Kumar v. Ajay Kumar [(2011) 1 SCC 343 : (2011) 1 SCC (Civ) 164
: (2011) 1 SCC (Cri) 1161] in the following words: (SCC pp. 348-50, paras 8-11)
“Assessment of future loss of earnings due to permanent disability

8. xx xx xx

9. The percentage of permanent disability is expressed by the doctors with reference
to the whole body, or more often than not, with reference to a particular limb. When
a disability certificate states that the injured has suffered permanent disability to an
extent of 45% of the left lower limb, it is not the same as 45% permanent disability
with reference to the whole body. The extent of disability of a limb (or part of the
body) expressed in terms of a percentage of the total functions of that limb, obviously
cannot be assumed to be the extent of disability of the whole body. If there is 60%
permanent disability of the right hand and 80% permanent disability of left leg, it
does not mean that the extent of permanent disability with reference to the whole
body is 140% (that is 80% plus 60%). If different parts of the body have suffered
different percentages of disabilities, the sum total thereof expressed in terms of the
permanent disability with reference to the whole body cannot obviously exceed 100%.

10. Where the claimant suffers a permanent disability as a result of injuries, the
assessment of compensation under the head of loss of future earnings would depend
upon the effect and impact of such permanent disability on his earning capacity. The
Tribunal should not mechanically apply the percentage of permanent disability as the
percentage of economic loss or loss of earning capacity. In most of the cases, the
percentage of economic loss, that is, the percentage of loss of earning capacity,
arising from a permanent disability will be different from the percentage of
permanent disability. Some Tribunals wrongly assume that in all cases, a particular
extent (percentage) of permanent disability would result in a corresponding loss of
earning capacity, and consequently, if the evidence produced show 45% as the
permanent disability, will hold that there is 45% loss of future earning capacity. In
most of the cases, equating the extent (percentage) of loss of earning capacity to the
extent (percentage) of permanent disability will result in award of either too low or
too high a compensation.

11. What requires to be assessed by the Tribunal is the effect of the permanent
disability on the earning capacity of the injured; and after assessing the loss of
earning capacity in terms of a percentage of the income, it has to be quantified in
terms of money, to arrive at the future loss of earnings (by applying the standard
multiplier method used to determine loss of dependency).

25

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

We may however note that in some cases, on appreciation of evidence and assessment, the Tribunal
may find that the percentage of loss of earning capacity as a result of the permanent disability, is
approximately the same as the percentage of permanent disability in which case, of course, the
Tribunal will adopt the said percentage for determination of compensation.”

14. The crucial factor which has to be taken into consideration, thus, is to assess as to whether the
permanent disability has any adverse effect on the earning capacity of the injured. In this sense,
MACT approached the issue in the right direction by taking into consideration the aforesaid test.
However, we feel that the conclusion of MACT, on the application of the aforesaid test, is erroneous.
A very myopic view is taken by MACT in taking the view that 70% permanent disability suffered by
the appellant would not impact the earning capacity of the appellant. MACT thought that since the
appellant is a Chartered Accountant, he is supposed to do sitting work and, therefore, his working
capacity is not impaired. Such a conclusion was justified if the appellant was in the employment
where job requirement could be to do sitting/table work and receive monthly salary for the said
work. An important feature and aspect which is ignored by MACT is that the appellant is a
professional Chartered Accountant. To do this work efficiently and in order to augment his income,
a Chartered Accountant is supposed to move around as well. If a Chartered Accountant is doing
taxation work, he has to appear before the assessing authorities and appellate authorities under the
Income Tax Act, as a Chartered Accountant is allowed to practice up to Income Tax Appellate
Tribunal. Many times Chartered Accountants are supposed to visit their clients as well. In case a
Chartered Accountant is primarily doing audit work, he is not only required to visit his clients but
various authorities as well. There are many statutory functions under various statutes which the
Chartered Accountants perform. Free movement is involved for performance of such functions. A
person who is engaged and cannot freely move to attend to his duties may not be able to match the
earning in comparison with the one who is healthy and bodily abled. Movements of the appellant
have been restricted to a large extent and that too at a young age. Though the High Court recognised
this, it did not go forward to apply the principle of multiplier. We are of the opinion that in a case
like this and having regard to the injuries suffered by the appellant, there is a definite loss of earning
capacity and it calls for grant of compensation with the adoption of multiplier method…….

15. In Arvind Kumar Mishra case [Arvind Kumar Mishra v. New India Assurance Co. Ltd., (2010) 10
SCC 254 : (2010) 4 SCC (Civ) 153 : (2010) 3 SCC (Cri) 1258], after following the judgment in Kerala
SRTC v. Susamma Thomas [(1994) 2 SCC 176 : 1994 SCC (Cri) 335], the Court chose to apply
multiplier of 18 keeping in view the age of the victim, who was 25 years at the time of the accident.

16. In the instant case, MACT had quantified the income of the appellant at Rs 10,000 i.e. Rs
1,20,000 per annum. Going by the age of the appellant at the time of the accident, multiplier of 17
would be admissible. Keeping in view that the permanent disability is 70%, the compensation under
this head would be worked out at Rs 14,28,000. MACT had awarded compensation of Rs 70,000 for
permanent disability, which stands enhanced to Rs 14,28,000. For mental and physical agony and
frustration and disappointment towards life, MACT has awarded a sum of Rs 30,000, which we
enhance to Rs 1,30,000……..”

46. In the case of Arvind Kumar Mishra (supra), this Court observed as under:

26

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

“9. We do not intend to review in detail state of authorities in relation to assessment
of all damages for personal injury. Suffice it to say that the basis of assessment of all
damages for personal injury is compensation. The whole idea is to put the claimant in
the same position as he was insofar as money can. Perfect compensation is hardly
possible but one has to keep in mind that the victim has done no wrong; he has
suffered at the hands of the wrongdoer and the court must take care to give him full
and fair compensation for that he had suffered.

10. In some cases for personal injury, the claim could be in respect of lifetime's
earnings lost because, though he will live, he cannot earn his living. In others, the
claim may be made for partial loss of earnings. Each case has to be considered in the
light of its own facts and at the end, one must ask whether the sum awarded is a fair
and reasonable sum. The conventional basis of assessing compensation in personal
injury cases— and that is now recognised mode as to the proper measure of
compensation—is taking an appropriate multiplier of an appropriate multiplicand.”

47. In Pappu Deo Yadav v. Naresh Kumar and Others, AIR 2020 SCC 4424, it was held that courts
should not adopt a stereotypical or myopic approach, but instead, view the matter taking into
account the realities of life, both in the assessment of the extent of disabilities, and compensation
under various heads. In this case, the loss of an arm, in the opinion of the court, resulted in severe
income earning impairment upon the appellant. As a typist/data entry operator, full functioning of
his hands was essential to his livelihood. The extent of his permanent disablement was assessed at
89%; however, the High Court halved it to 45% on an entirely wrong application of some
‘proportionate’ principle, which was illogical and is unsupportable in law. What is to be seen, as
emphasized by decision after decision, is the impact of the injury upon the income generating
capacity of the victim. The loss of a limb (a leg or arm) and its severity on that account is to be
judged in relation to the profession, vocation or business of the victim; there cannot be a blind
arithmetic formula for ready application.

48. With the aforesaid broad principles in mind, we proceed to examine the appellant’s claim for
enhancement of the compensation awarded to him by the High Court.

MEDICAL EVIDENCE ON RECORD

49. Dr. Anil B. Patil (PW-2) who treated the appellant has issued a Disability Certificate (Ex. P-8)
wherein the following has been stated:

“This to certify that I have examined, Shri Sidram Raju Bhosle. Age-19 yrs/M of
Kulgod. OPD No-19441 Dated-18/07/2012 at Lakeview Hospital. He has come to me
for assessment of permanent physical disability certificate as per the record shown by
the patient, the injuries were noted. The patient had met with a road Traffic accident
on 18/7/2012 time around 1:30 pm at near Laxmeshwar cross Gokak Dist-Belgaum.
He was admitted in my Lakeview Hospital, Belgaum, for the treatment on 4/5/09
MLC NO - outward no-BHSLVH/MRD MLC No. 229 Dated 18/07/12 Date of

27

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

admission -18/7/2012 Date of discharged - 6/8/2012 Diagnosis Burst Fracture D 12
vertebra with paraplegia. Fracture 1 to 6 Ribs with Hydropneumothorax, surgical
emphysema.

X-Ray Report:

-Burst fracture D 12 vertebra. X-ray no.-9832 Dated on 23/07 /

-Fracture 1 to 6 ribs with Hydropneumothorax, surgical emphysema. X-ray no.- 753
dated 18/07/2012.

CT CHEST(PLAIN): on 18/07/2012

-Fracture of right 1st to 6th ribs along posterior/lateral aspect.

-Gross hydropneumothorax/hemothorax on the right side with pneumomediastinum
causing gross shift of mediastinum towards left side and partial collapse of right lung.

-Cystic lesions(two) in right upper lobe? post traumatic with fluid levels A/W patchy
opacities in right lung S/o contusions.

-burst anterior wedge compression fracture of D12 vertebral body involving both
pedicles with retropulsion.

Case Examination

1.History 2-On Clinical Examination 1-History At Present Patient Con1plaints

-Pain and weakness in both legs and back.

-lnability in squatting & sitting crossed leg.

-Inability to stand and \Valle 2-0n. Clinical Examination . .

Inspection:-Linear Scar extending fron1 DS to L5 present over spine.

-scar over anterior lateral aspect of right side of chest

-Unable to squat and sit cross leg.

-Movements of Left knee                     Right knee grade 3-4
Flexion grade 2
Extension grade 3
Muscle wasting
Calf and thigh muscles ++

28

X-ray Shows- x-ray no. 2852 dated 29.07.2013 Old fracture D12 with implants in situ.

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

Observed function disability

-Pain in the left knee & left leg and weakness in both the legs and inability to stand and walk.

-Unable to squat and sit cross leg.

Conclusion I am of the opinion that considering the clinical signs & radiological findings the patient
has got the total permanent physical disability of 45% to whole body in respect to D12 fracture and
neurological weakness with inability to stand, sit & walk.

Place-Belgaum”

50. Dr. Patil (PW-2) in his oral evidence has deposed as under:-

“I state that at present petitioner complains of pain and weakness in both legs and
back. Inability in squatting and sitting cross leg. Inability to stand and walk. And on
clinical examination of the petitioner it reveals that inspection linear scar extending
from D5 to L5 present over spine, there is scar over anterior lateral aspect of right
side of chest, unable to squat and sit cross leg.

I state that movements of left knee flexion grade-2, extension grade-3, right knee
grade 3-4 and movements of left foot, plantar-grade -1 dorsiflexion-grade-3 and left
foot grade 3-4 and muscle wasting calf and thigh muscle++ Further I state that X-ray
taken on 29-07-2013 reveals old fracture D12 with implants in situ, functional
disability observed to the petitioner are:- pain in the left knee and left leg and
weakness in both legs and inability to stand and walk, unable to squat and sit cross
leg.

Further I state that petitioner needs future medical expenses would be Rs.
2,50,000/-.

After considering the clinical signs and radiological finding, the petitioner has got the
total permanent physical disability of 45% to whole body in respect of D-12 fracture
and neurological weakness with inability to stand, sit and walk. I have issued the
disability certificate to the petitioner and it bears my signature and said disability
certificate is already marked as Ex.P-8 and now my signature is marked as EX.P-8

(a), (b), (c) respectively.”

51. In his cross-examination at the instance of the owner of the vehicle, he has deposed: -

29

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

“It is true that the age of the petitioner is 19 years at the time of assessment. It is not
true to suggest that heel process of the injuries is better than old age person. It is not
true to suggest that rib fractures 1 to 6 are not simple in nature. It is false to say that
the petitioner is of young age and the heeling process is better improvement. It is
false to say that disability given by me is on the higher side. It is false to say that after
removing implant the petitioner will be able to walk and stand properly. It is false to
say that future medical treatment expenses will Rs. 2,50,000/-. It is false to say that
the petitioner is able to walk, stand as earlier. It is false to say that to help the
petitioner I am deposing falsely.”

52. In the cross-examination at the instance of the insurance company, he has deposed:

“It is true that I am orthopedic surgeon and I am not neuro surgeon. It is false to
suggest that I am authorized to give disability certificate of paraplegia. It is true that I
have not received any court summons for this case. I don’t know the avocation of the
petitioner. It is true that the petitioner had met with a road traffic accident. It is false
that by birth this petitioner is having this type of injury. It is true that the petitioner
has taken proper treatment from our hospital. It is true that after well cured he was
discharged from our hospital. It is true that I have advised him to take follow-up
treatment. It is true that the petitioner has taken follow-up treatment. It is false to
say that for not taking follow-up treatment by the petitioner this injury has worsened.
It is false to say that from falling from the tree this type of injury may happen. It is
false that due to rib fracture paraplegia cannot be caused. Burst fracture D-12
vertebra has caused paraplegia. It is false to say that this injury is not accidental
injury. It is not true that to help the petitioner to get the compensation, I am
deposing falsely. It is false that I have seen X-ray before discharge and after
discharge. It is true that after seeing discharge X-ray there was improvement of the
petitioner. It is false to say that the petitioner has acted as stated in your chief
examination. It is true that basis of assessment I have referred ALIMCO.

It is false to say that petitioner is unable to walk, stand properly. It is false to say that
I have given higher side medical bills to help the petitioner. It is false that injuries are
simple in nature. It is true that I have given disability to the whole body and this is
higher side. It is false that whole body disability comes between 10% to 15% to help
the petitioner. I am deposing false to get the compensation.” THE PECUNIARY
EXPENSES (1) Loss of earning due to disability

53. The courts must apply the multiplier method, while ascertaining the compensation to be
awarded to the victim. This was so held by this Court in Sarla Verma (Smt) and Others v. Delhi
Transport Corporation and Another, (2009) 6 SCC 121. In Sarla Verma (supra), this Court quoted
the following observations from Kerala SRTC v. Susamma Thomas, (1994) 2 SCC 176:

“The multiplier method involves the ascertainment of the loss of dependency or the
multiplicand having regard to the circumstances of the case and capitalising the

30

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

multiplicand by an appropriate multiplier. The choice of the multiplier is determined
by the age of the deceased (or that of the claimants whichever is higher) and by the
calculation as to what capital sum, if invested at a rate of interest appropriate to a
stable economy, would yield the multiplicand by way of annual interest. In
ascertaining this, regard should also be had to the fact that ultimately the capital sum
should also be consumed-up over the period for which the dependency is expected to
last.

It is necessary to reiterate that the multiplier method is logically sound and legally
well established. There are some cases which have proceeded to determine the
compensation on the basis of aggregating the entire future earnings for over the
period the life expectancy was lost, deducted a percentage therefrom towards
uncertainties of future life and award the resulting sum as compensation. This is
clearly unscientific. For instance, if the deceased was, say 25 years of age at the time
of death and the life expectancy is 70 years, this method would multiply the loss of
dependency for 45 years─virtually adopting a multiplier of 45─and even if one-third
or one-fourth is deducted therefrom towards the uncertainties of future life and for
immediate lump sum payment, the effective multiplier would be between 30 and

34. This is wholly impermissible.”

54. The Tribunal held that although the appellant herein had claimed that he was earning Rs.
9,000/- per month from his business of selling of utensils, yet the appellant was not in a position to
adduce any documentary evidence in that regard. Although Dr. Anil B. Patil (PW-2) in his oral
evidence has deposed that the appellant suffered a permanent disability to the tune of 45%, yet the
Tribunal held that the appellant had suffered a permanent disability of only 30%. The Tribunal
applied the multiplier as explained in the case of Sarla Verma (supra). Accordingly, the
compensation awarded for the loss of earning capacity was determined as follows:

5000 x 12 x 18 x 30% = INR 3,24,000/-

55. The High Court enhanced the income to Rs. 7,000/- stating that the same was determined by the
Tribunal on a lower side. Further, the High Court held that having regard to the evidence of the
treating doctor, the permanent disability of the appellant should be determined at 40%. In such
circumstances, the High Court while applying the multiplier, enhanced the compensation to be
awarded under the head of loss of earning capacity to Rs. 7,000/-, as under:

7,000 x 12 x 18 x 40% = INR 6,04,800/-

56. The evidence on record indicates that the appellant suffered paraplegia due to the accident.
Paraplegia is a form of paralysis of lower body. It restricts everyday routine more particularly the
physical activity and leads to (i) deprivation of simple pleasures and amenities of life, (ii) 100% loss
of earning capacity, (iii) long term secondary complications requiring continuous care, medical
treatment and hospitalization, (iv) feeling of helplessness, depression, anger, stress, anxiety, etc. In

31

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

short, paraplegia impairs physical, mental and psychological health and has devastating impact on
the social and financial well being of the victim.

57. In the case on hand, the appellant was in the business of selling utensils and used to travel to
various villages to sell the same. With this disability in the form of paraplegia being suffered by the
appellant, it is not possible for him now to walk a long distance or stand for a long period. His
business could be said to have been gravely impacted. Further, the appellant at the time of accident
was just 19 years old. The High Court enhanced his notional income from Rs. 5,000/- to Rs. 7,000/-
per month. The appellant claimed that his notional income be determined at Rs. 9,000/-.

58. This Court in the case of Kirti and Another v. Oriental Insurance Company Limited, (2021) 2
SCC 166, while discussing the issue of proving the income of the victim, held as under:

“39. Taking the above rationale into account, the situation is quite clear with respect
to notional income determined by a court in the first category of cases outlined
earlier, those where the victim is proved to be employed but claimants are unable to
prove the income before the court. Once the victim has been proved to be employed
at some venture, the necessary corollary is that they would be earning an income……”

59. Thus, we are of the view, more particularly keeping in mind the dictum of this Court in the case
of Kirti (supra) that it is not necessary to adduce any documentary evidence to prove the notional
income of the victim and the Court can award the same even in the absence of any documentary
evidence. In the case of Kirti (supra) it was stated that the Court should ensure while choosing the
method and fixing the notional income that the same is just in the facts and circumstances of the
particular case, neither assessing the compensation too conservatively, nor too liberally.

60. In the overall view of the matter, we are convinced that we should determine the notional
income of the appellant herein at Rs. 8,000/- per month. The same would result in the
compensation being enhanced as under:

8000 x 12 x 18 x 45% = INR 7,77,600/-

(2) Loss of earning for 6 months

61. Compensation under the aforesaid head was awarded by the Tribunal and the High Court. The
Tribunal awarded only Rs. 40,000/- under this head. The High Court enhanced it to Rs. 42,000/-.

62. We uphold the payment towards loss of earning for six months as awarded by the High Court
and applying the revised income, enhance the same as under:

8000 x 6 = INR 48,000/-

(3) Medical Expenses

32

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

63. The appellant claims Rs. 2,00,000/- towards medical expenses. In this regard, the appellant
adduced documentary evidence in the form of medical bills/receipts to the tune of Rs.1,54,931/-, as
stated in the order of the Tribunal.

64. The Tribunal in its order dated 21.01.2014 held:

“Medical Expenses: The claimant submitted that he has taken treatment a Lake view
hospital, Belgaum and was indoor patient. He has produced the hospital bill and
medical bills to1 the tune of Rs.1,54,931/-. The same has been rounded to
Rs.1,50,000/- and the petitioner is entitled to Rs.1,50,000/-

under this head.” [Emphasis supplied]

65. The High Court in Para 11 of its impugned judgment, held:

“The compensation awarded under the head of pain and suffering, medical expenses,
conveyance, special diet, etc., loss of amenities in life and marriage prospects is just
and proper and same is not disturbed.”

66. In view of the aforesaid, we grant compensation of Rs. 1,55,000/-

towards medical expenses.

(4) Future Medical Expenses

67. At the outset, we may state that the “Future Medical Expenses” and “Attendant Charges” would
fall within the ambit of Pecuniary Expenses. In Abhimanyu Partap Singh v. Namita Sekhon and
Another, (2022) 8 SCC 489, this Court held:

“19. In view of the said legal position, the compensation can be assessed in pecuniary
heads i.e. the loss of future earning, medical expenses including future medical
expenses, attendant charges and also in the head of transportation including future
transportation. In the non-pecuniary heads, the compensation can be computed for
the mental and physical pain and sufferings in the present and in future, loss of
amenities of life including loss of marital bliss, loss of expectancy in life,
inconvenience, hardship, discomfort, disappointment, frustration, mental agony in
life, etc.”

68. The Tribunal has observed that the doctor has deposed that the appellant is likely to incur
expenses of Rs. 2,50,000/- towards future medical expenses. However, according to the Tribunal,
there was no sufficient and cogent evidence in that regard under this head. Accordingly, the
Tribunal awarded Rs. 25,000/-. The High Court thought fit not to award any amount for future
medical expenses as there was no evidence adduced by the appellant in regard to future treatment
that may be required. The High Court however, thought fit to clarify that in the event if the appellant

33

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

incurs any expenses towards any surgery or treatment in future on account of the injury suffered
and if he proves the same, then the insurer shall indemnify the same.

69. Dr. Anil B. Patil (PW-2) has deposed categorically that the appellant would require future
medical expenses to the tune of Rs. 2,50,000/-. We are of the view that having regard to the
evidence on record that the appellant would be incurring costs towards medical expenses in future
along with physiotherapy and nursing and considering that the appellant at the time of accident was
19 years old, today his age would be around 29 years, even if a bare minimum of Rs. 1000/- is spent
per month, then it comes to:

1000 x 12 x 18 = Rs. 2,16,000/-

70. In Vijaykumar Babulal Modi v. State of Gujarat (Deleted) & Gujarat State Road Transport
Corporation, 2011 SCC OnLine Guj 7349, the High Court of Gujarat had the occasion to consider this
aspect. The High Court held:

“So far as future medical expenses are concerned, the amount claimed in the petition
was to the tune of Rs. 2 lac, whereas the Tribunal has thought fit to award Rs.
25,000=00. We have noticed that the injured as on today is 100% disabled due to
paraplegia. He has no control over his bowels or bladder. In such type of cases,
treatment like physiotherapy, etc. needs to be given for a very very long period of
time. The importance of physiotherapy for persons injured in road accidents has been
elaborately stressed upon by the Supreme Court in the case of R.D. Hattangadi
(supra). It is hence important to account for all expenses incurred and likely to be
incurred and award reasonable sum for each head. It is also important to remember
the decreasing money value. The life expectancy of the injured is also to be kept in
mind. We feel that life expectancy of the victim in such a case can reasonably be
assumed to be atleast 55 years, given the advancement in medical science, etc. The
claimant's age on the date of the accident was 17 years, which means that the
remaining period of life expectancy from that date of accident would be 38 years i.e.
1991 to 2029. We, therefore, propose to assess future medical expenses at about Rs.
1,000=00 per month. In that case, the adequate amount which can be awarded for
future medical expenses would be Rs. 1 lac. We, therefore, enhance the amount of Rs.
25,000=00 awarded towards future medical expenses to Rs. 1 lac.”

71. In Sanjay Verma v. Haryana Roadways, (2014) 3 SCC 210, the claimant was 25-years-old and
suffered from total disability. This Court accordingly held:

“20. Insofar as “future treatment” is concerned we have no doubt that the claimant
will be required to take treatment from time to time even to maintain the present
condition of his health. In fact, the claimant in his deposition has stated that he is
undergoing treatment at Apollo Hospital at Delhi. Though it is not beyond our
powers to award compensation beyond what has been claimed (Nagappa v.
Gurudayal Singh [(2003) 2 SCC 274 : 2003 SCC (Cri) 523]), in the facts of the present

34

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

case we are of the view that the grant of full compensation, as claimed in the claim
petition i.e. Rs 3,00,000 under the head “future treatment”, would meet the ends of
justice. We, therefore, order accordingly.”

72. In view of the aforesaid, we award Rs. 2,16,000/- towards future medical expenses.

(5) Attendant Charges

73. So far as this head is concerned, neither the Tribunal nor the High Court thought fit to award
anything. The evidence on record indicates that the appellant is unable to stand, walk, sit or bend
his body or lift anything heavy. It is not in dispute that the appellant will not be able to work in the
same manner as he used to prior to the accident. Indisputably, the appellant has suffered from
paraplegia on account of the accident and requires an attendant throughout the day. According to
the claimant, the cost of keeping the attendant would be Rs. 4,500/- per month. We fix it at Rs.
2,000/- per month. As a result, we award the attendant charges as under:

2,000 x 12 x 18 = Rs. 4,32,000/-

74. In Abhimanyu Partap Singh (supra), the Claimant was suffering from 100% disability and this
Court held:

“16. The High Court in the impugned order [Abhimanyu Partap Singh v. Namita
Sekhon, 2019 SCC OnLine P&H 6271] observed that the claimant has now started
practice as an advocate, therefore, future loss of earning has been calculated only for
10 years, applying the multiplier of 16, without looking to the facts that the claimant
cannot perform the work of advocacy similar to the other advocates by attending the
cases in different courts. The attendant charges have been allowed only for 20 years
with one attendant. In fact, not only for determination of future loss of earning but
for attendant charges also the multiplier method should be followed.

17. The multiplier method has been recognised as most realistic and reasonable
because it has been decided looking to the age, inflation rate, uncertainty of life and
other realistic needs. Thus, for determination of just compensation to ensure justice
with the family of the deceased or the injured as the case may be the compensation
can be determined applying the said method. Therefore, in our view the Tribunal
while granting the compensation of future loss as well as earning only for 10 years
and attendant charges only for 20 years was not justified. In fact, the said amount
should be determined applying the multiplier method.

********* ********* *********

23. In the head of medical expenses, the MACT or the High Court has not awarded
any compensation presumably because the mother of the claimant, who was minor at
the time of accident, may have claimed the amount of medical expenses being an IAS

35

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

officer. But now the claimant has become major, and looking to the nature of injuries,
future medical expenses that includes the attendant charges, use of diapers due to
loss of urination senses is required to be calculated including future medical
expenses. The Tribunal awarded Rs 1,92,000 in the head of attendant charges @ Rs
1000 p.m. While the High Court proceeded on the premises that the rate of the
attendant charges is variable after every five years, however, the Court calculated the
amount @ Rs 2000 thereafter @ Rs 4000 p.m. for a period of 20 years and
accordingly determined Rs 9,00,000 making enhancement of Rs 7,08,000 in the said
head. As discussed, if we apply the multiplier method and in view of the judgment of
Kajal [Kajal v. Jagdish Chand, (2020) 4 SCC 413 : (2020) 3 SCC (Civ) 27 : (2020) 2
SCC (Cri) 577] , we accept the rate of attendant charges at Rs 5000 p.m. for 12 hours,
looking to the nature of injuries and disability the claimant is required two attendants
at least within 24 hours then the expenses in the head of attendant charges comes to
Rs 10,000 p.m. If we apply the multiplier of 18, the amount comes to Rs 21,60,000.”

75. In Vijaykumar Babulal Modi (supra), the Gujarat High Court had held:

“It is clear that the appellant will require an attendant to assist him in his daily
activities. However, we cannot accept the submission of the learned counsel for the
appellant who stated that this will require an expenditure of Rs. 3,000=00 per
month. The Tribunal has awarded a sum of Rs. 15,000=00, whereas the claim of the
claimant is Rs. 4 lac. As held in the case of R.D. Hattangadi (supra), the Court need
not be mathematical in calculating expenses on home attendant but ought to look
upon the circumstances prevailing in the society to decide the amount. The Supreme
Court in R.D. Hattangadi's case (supra) held as under:-

“9. xxx          xxx
10. xxx          xxx

11. In the case Ward v. James, 1965 (1) All ER 563, it was said:

“Although you cannot give a man so gravely injured much for his “lost years”, you
can, however, compensate him for his loss during his shortened span, that is, during
his expected “years of survival”. You can compensate him for his loss of earnings
during that time, and for the cost of treatment, nursing and attendance. But how can
you compensate him for being rendered a helpless invalid? He may, owing to brain
injury, be rendered unconscious for the rest of his days, or, owing to back injury, be
unable to rise from his bed. He has lost everything that makes life worthwhile. Money
is no good for him. Yet Judges and Juries have to do the best they can and give him
what they think is fair. No wonder they find it well nigh insoluble. They are being
asked to calculate the incalculable. The figure is bound to be for the most part a
conventional sum. The Judges have worked out a pattern, and they keep it in line
with the changes in the value of money.” In its very nature whenever a Tribunal or a
Court is required to fix the amount of compensation in cases of accident, it involves
some guess work, some hypothetical consideration, some amount of sympathy linked

36

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

with the nature of the disability caused. But all the aforesaid elements have to be
viewed with objective standards.”

12. The Supreme Court in the case of C.K. Subramonia Iyer v. T. Kunhikuttan Nair,
AIR 1970 SC 376, in connection with the Fatal Accidents Act has observed:

“In assessing damages, the Court must exclude all considerations of matter which
rest in speculation or fancy though conjecture to some extent is inevitable.”

13. In Halsbury's Laws of England, 4 th Edition, Vol. 12 regarding non-pecuniary loss
at page 446 it has been said:-

“Non-pecuniary loss: the pattern: Damages awarded for pain and suffering and loss
of amenity constitute a conventional sum which is taken to be the sum which society
deems fair, fairness being interpreted by the courts in the light of previous decisions.
Thus there has been evolved a set of conventional principles providing a provisional
guide to the comparative severity of different injuries, and indicating a bracket of
damages into which a particular injury will currently fall. The particular
circumstances of the plaintiff, including his age and any unusual deprivation he may
suffer, is reflected in the actual amount of the award.

The fall in the value of money leads to a continuing reassessment of these awards and
to periodic reassessments of damages at certain key points in the pattern where the
disability is readily identifiable and not subject to large variations in individual
cases.” We feel that the average cost of keeping a home attendant would be around
Rs. 1,000=00 per month for the period of life expectancy. Accordingly, the annual
expenses on an attendant works out to Rs. 12,000=00. We, therefore, propose to
enhance the sum awarded for attendant to Rs. 1 lac.”

76. Thus, we award an amount of Rs. 4,32,000/- towards the attendant charges.

(6) Litigation Expenses

77. The Tribunal thought fit not to award anything towards the litigation expenses. The High Court
took the view that the appellant is entitled to the amount of Rs. 20,000/- towards the litigation
expenses. The appellant claims Rs. 50,000/- towards the litigation expenses.

78. We take notice of the fact that the accident took place on 18.07.2012. The appellant is pursuing
this litigation for the past almost 10 years. The SLP before this Court was filed in 2018. It has been
four years since then.

79. In Govind Yadav (supra), this Court held:

37

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

“12. ……Sometimes the delay and litigation expenses make the award passed by the
Tribunal and even by the High Court (in appeal) meaningless…..”

80. In New India Assurance Company Limited v. Gopali and Others, (2012) 12 SCC 198, this Court
held:

“1. …India is acclaimed for achieving a flourishing constitutional order, an inventive
and activist judiciary, aided by a proficient Bar and supported by the State. However,
the courts and tribunals, which the citizens are expected to approach for redressal of
their grievance and protection of their fundamental, constitutional and legal rights,
are beset with the problems of delays and costs. In a country where 36% of the
population lives below the poverty line, these deficiencies in the justice-delivery
system prevent a large segment of the population from availing legal remedies. The
disadvantaged and the poor are deprived of access to justice because of the costs of
litigation, both in terms of actual expenses and lost opportunities, and the laudable
goal of securing justice—social, economic and political enshrined in the Preamble to
the Constitution of India remains an illusion for them.

2. The infrastructure of courts and the processes which govern them are simply
inaccessible to the poor. The State, which has been mandated by Article 39-A of the
Constitution to ensure that the operation of the legal system promotes justice by
providing free legal aid and that opportunities for securing justice are not denied to
any citizen by reason of economic or other disabilities, has not been able to create an
effective mechanism for making justice accessible to the poor, downtrodden and
disadvantaged. In the last two-and-a-

half decades the institution of the Legal Services Authorities has rendered yeoman's service in the
field of providing legal aid to the poor but a lot is required to be done for ensuring justice to
economically deprived section of the society and those who suffer from other disabilities like
illiteracy and ignorance.

3. We have prefaced the disposal of this petition, filed against the order dated 22-3-2007 [New India
Assurance Co.

Ltd. v. Sheo Chand, Special Appeal Civil (SAC) No. 49 of 2005, dated 22-3-2007 (Raj)] passed by
the Division Bench of the Rajasthan High Court whereby the special appeal filed by the appellant
against the judgment of the learned Single Judge was dismissed as not maintainable, by making the
aforementioned observations because in last almost 20 years the claimants—the aged parents, wife
and five children of Nanag Ram, who became a victim of road accident in 1992, must have exhausted
all their resources in prosecuting and contesting the litigation till the stage of the High Court and
they must not have been left with money sufficient for engaging an advocate in this Court and also
because in last almost five years, during which the special leave petition remained pending in this
Court, they must have lost all hopes to get justice.

38

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

4. The learned Single Judge of the High Court had allowed the appeal filed by the dependants of
Nanag Ram under Section 173 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (for short “the Act”) and enhanced
the compensation awarded by the Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal, Jaipur (for short “the
Tribunal”) by an amount of Rs 4,85,000 and directed the appellant to pay the enhanced
compensation with interest at the rate of 12% per annum from the date of filing the claim petition
till 31-12- 2000 and at the rate of 9% from 1-1-2001 till the payment thereof, but on account of ex
parte interim order passed by this Court on 23-7-2007 [New India Assurance Co. Ltd. v. Sheo
Chand, SLP (C) No. 11345 of 2007, order dated 23-7-2007 (SC)], the claimants could get only a
paltry sum of Rs 2 lakhs and they perhaps thought that it will not be worthwhile to spend money for
contesting the special leave petition filed by the appellant. This is perhaps the thinking of many
thousands of poor litigants, who succeed in the courts below and the High Courts, but cannot afford
the cost and expenses of contesting litigation in the highest court of the country and suffer silently in
the name of the Almighty God by treating it as their destiny.”

81. In Syed Sadiq v. Divisional Manager, United India Insurance Company Limited, (2014) 2 SCC
735, this Court held:

“14. Further, along with compensation under conventional heads, the appellant
claimant is also entitled to the cost of litigation as per the legal principle laid down by
this Court in Balram Prasad v. Kunal Saha [(2014) 1 SCC 384 : (2014) 1 SCC (Civ)
327]. Therefore, under this head, we find it just and proper to allow Rs 25,000.”

82. In view of the aforesaid, we award an amount of Rs. 50,000/- towards litigation expenses.

(7) Loss of Conveyance

83. Under this head, the Tribunal vide order dated 21.01.2014, held:

“15. Conveyance, special diet etc: The claimant was admitted to the hospital and
thereafter attended the hospital for further treatment. The claimant is also entitled
for special diet and nutrition. Therefore, I award an amount of Rs.20,000/- under
this head.”

84. The Tribunal awarded Rs. 20,000/- under this head. The High Court in Para 11 of its impugned
judgment dated 25.04.2018, held:

“The compensation awarded under the head of pain and suffering, medical expenses,
conveyance, special diet, etc., loss of amenities in life and marriage prospects is just
and proper and same is not disturbed”

85. The High Court thought fit to confirm Rs. 20,000/- as awarded by the Tribunal.

86. However, the appellant has claimed Rs. 50,000/- towards loss of conveyance.

39

87. This Court in Master Ayush (supra) held:

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

“14. The determination of damages in personal injury cases is not easy. The mental
and physical loss cannot be computed in terms of money but there is no other way to
compensate the victim except by payment of just compensation. Therefore, we find
that in view of the physical condition, the appellant is entitled to one attendant for
the rest of his life though he may be able to walk with the help of assistant device. The
device also requires to be replaced every 5 years. Therefore, it is reasonable to award
cost of 2 devices i.e. Rs 10 lakhs. The appellant has not only lost his childhood but
also adult life. Therefore, loss of marriage prospects would also be required to be
awarded. The learned Tribunal has rejected the claim of taxi expenses for the reason
that the taxi driver has not been produced. It is impossible to produce the numerous
taxi drivers. Still further, the Tribunal should have realised the condition of the child
who had complete sensory loss in the legs. Therefore, if the parents of the child have
taken him in a taxi, probably that was the only option available to them. Accordingly,
we award a sum of Rs 2 lakhs as conveyance charges.”

88. The High Court of Judicature at Allahabad in the New India Assurance Company Ltd. v. Amit
Kumar Yadav and Another, F.A.O. Nos. 1285 & 1489 of 2008 decided on March 23, 2022, held as
under:

“22. The question of determination of compensation directly came up before
Supreme Court in Raj Kumar Vs. Ajay Kumar and another, 2011 (1) SCC 343.
Therein, claimant sustained fracture of both bone of left leg and fracture of left radius
in a motor accident on 01.10.1991. Tribunal awarded compensation under the heads
of loss of future earning, pain and sufferings, loss of earning during period of
treatment, medical expenses, conveyance and special diet. He was awarded total
compensation of Rs. 94,700/- and 9% interest. His appeal for enhancement was
rejected by Tribunal and ultimately went in appeal to Supreme Court. It observed
that scheme of Act, 1988 shows that award must be "just", which means that
compensation should, to the extent possible, fully and adequately restore claimant to
the position prior to the accident. The object of awarding damages is to make good
the loss suffered as a result of wrong done as far as money can do so, in a fair,
reasonable and equitable manner. A person is not only to be compensated for
physical injury, but also for the loss which he suffered as a result of such injury. It
means that he is to be compensated for his inability to lead a full life, his inability to
enjoy those normal amenities which he would have enjoyed but for the injuries, and
his inability to earn as much as he used to earn or could have earned……”

89. Hence, we may grant the appellant loss of conveyance and special diet up to Rs 50,000/-
considering that after the accident at Kulgod- Gokak Road, the appellant was shifted to Lakeview
Hospital Belgaum wherein he was admitted as an indoor patient from 18.7.2012 to 6.8.2012 for 19
days, and took treatment for the injuries suffered by him, and continued to take the treatment after
getting discharged from the hospital as well.

40

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

90. In view of the aforesaid, we may award Rs. 50,000/- towards loss of conveyance and special
diet.

NON-PECUNIARY EXPENSES (8) Pain and Suffering

91. The High Court of Judicature at Allahabad in the case of Virendra Kumar v. Vijay Kumar and
Others, (2021) ILR 3 All 272, while discussing the distinction between pecuniary and non-pecuniary
damages held as under:

“9. The law with respect to the grant of compensation in injury cases is well-settled.
The injured is entitled to pecuniary as well as non-pecuniary damages. Pecuniary
damages also known as special damages are generally designed to make good the
pecuniary loss which is capable of being calculated in terms of money whereas
non-pecuniary damages are incapable of being assessed by arithmetical calculations.
The pecuniary or special damages, generally include the expenses incurred by the
claimants on his treatment, special diet, conveyance, cost of nursing/attending, loss
of income, loss of earning capacity and other material loss, which may require any
special treatment or aid to the insured for the rest of his life. The general damages or
the non-pecuniary loss include the compensation for mental or physical shock, pain,
suffering, loss of amenities of life, disfiguration, loss of marriage prospects, loss of
expected or earning of life, inconvenience, hardship, disappointment, frustration,
mental stress, dejectment and unhappiness in future life, etc.”

92. The Tribunal awarded a sum of Rs. 40,000/- for the pain and suffering. The High Court
affirmed the amount of Rs. 40,000/-. However, the appellant is seeking enhancement of Rs.
40,000/- to make it Rs. 1,00,000/- towards compensation for the pain and sufferings.

93. Pain and suffering would be categorized as a non-pecuniary loss as it is incapable of being
arithmetically calculated. Therefore, when compensation is to be awarded for pain and suffering,
special circumstances of the claimant have to be taken into account including the victim’s age, the
unusual deprivation the victim has suffered, the effect thereof on his or her future life. This Court in
the case of R.D. Hattangadi (supra), while discussing this aspect held that:

“10. It cannot be disputed that because of the accident the appellant who was an
active practising lawyer has become paraplegic on account of the injuries sustained
by him. It is really difficult in this background to assess the exact amount of
compensation for the pain and agony suffered by the appellant and for having
become a lifelong handicapped. No amount of compensation can restore the physical
frame of the appellant. That is why it has been said by courts that whenever any
amount is determined as the compensation payable for any injury suffered during an
accident, the object is to compensate such injury "so far as money can compensate"
because it is impossible to equate the money with the human sufferings or personal
deprivations. Money cannot renew a broken and shattered physical frame.

41

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

********* ********* *********

17. …..When compensation is to be awarded for pain and suffering and loss of
amenity of life, the special circumstances of the claimant have to be taken into
account including his age, the unusual deprivation he has suffered, the effect thereof
on his future life. The amount of compensation for non-

pecuniary loss is not easy to determine but the award must reflect that different circumstances have
been taken into consideration…….”

94. This Court in the case of Mahadeva Shetty (supra), while discussing the factors to be taken into
consideration while awarding compensation for pain and suffering held that:

“18. A person not only suffers injuries on account of accident but also suffers in mind
and body on account of the accident throughout his life and a feeling is developed
that he is no more a normal man and cannot enjoy the amenities of life as another
normal person can. While fixing compensation for pain and suffering as also for loss
of amenities of life, features like his age, marital status and unusual deprivation he
has undertaken in his life have to be reckoned.”

95. In another case of this Court in Nizam's Institute of Medical Sciences v. Prasanth S. Dhananka
and Others, (2009) 6 SCC 1, this Court granted a very high amount of Rs. 10,00,000/- on account of
the pain and suffering of the victim. That was a case of engineering student aged 20 years, who was
a victim of medical negligence. The case before this Court was of a young student who being the
victim of paraplegia was confined to wheelchair, and who pursued career in education and
ultimately got employed as I.T. engineer at a handsome salary.

96. This Court has awarded compensation for pain and suffering by looking into the circumstances
of the case. Therefore, considering that the appellant was only 19 years at the time of the accident
and suffered a permanent disability of 45%, he ought to be awarded compensation under this head.

97. Furthermore, the decision of this Court in Nagappa (supra), holds that there is no embargo in
awarding compensation more than that claimed by the Claimant.

98. In view of the aforesaid, we award an amount of Rs. 1,00,000/- towards pain and suffering.

(9) Marriage Prospects

99. The Tribunal held that the appellant was young, and due to the physical disability, his marriage
prospects are now almost nil. The Tribunal awarded to Rs. 20,000/- under this head. The High
Court upheld the amount of Rs. 20,000/-.

100. In Sanjay Kumar (supra), this Court observed as under:

42

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

“14… On the point of loss of marriage prospects, we feel that it is a major loss,
keeping in mind the young age of the appellant and the High Court has gravely erred
in not awarding adequate compensation separately under this head and instead
clubbed it under “loss of future enjoyment of life” and “pain and suffering”. We
thereby award Rs 75,000 towards loss of marriage prospects…”

101. In Ibrahim v. Raju and Others, (2011) 10 SCC 634, this Court held:

“19. On account of the injuries suffered by him, the prospects of the appellant's
marriage have considerably reduced. Rather, they are extremely bleak. In any case,
on account of the fracture of pelvis, he will not be able to enjoy the matrimonial life.
Therefore, the award of Rs 50,000 under this head must be treated as wholly
inadequate. In the facts and circumstances of the case, we feel that a sum of Rs 2
lakhs should be awarded to the appellant for loss of marriage prospects and
enjoyment of life.”

102. In Master Ayush (supra), this Court observed that the victim (5- year-old, paraplegic) was
entitled to Rs.3,00,000/-.

“14.… The appellant has not only lost his childhood but also adult life. Therefore, loss of marriage
prospects would also be required to be awarded…”

103. In view of the aforesaid, we award a sum of Rs. 3,00,000/- towards loss of marriage prospects.

(10) Loss of Amenities

104. The Tribunal held that an amount of Rs. 30,000/- should be awarded towards loss of
amenities. The High Court upheld the amount of Rs. 30,000/- as awarded by the Tribunal. The
claim of the appellant towards loss of amenities is Rs. 50,000/-.

105. This Court in the case of Pappu Deo Yadav (supra), observed:

“6. The principle consistently followed by this court in assessing motor vehicle
compensation claims, is to place the victim in as near a position as she or he was in
before the accident, with other compensatory directions for loss of amenities and
other payments. These general principles have been stated and reiterated in several
decisions.

[Govind Yadav v. New India Insurance Co.

Ltd. [Govind Yadav v. New India Insurance Co. Ltd., (2011) 10 SCC 683 .….]”

106. In R.D. Hattangadi (supra) it has been held:

43

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

“12. In its very nature whenever a tribunal or a court is required to fix the amount of
compensation in cases of accident, it involves some guesswork, some hypothetical
consideration, some amount of sympathy linked with the nature of the disability
caused. But all the aforesaid elements have to be viewed with objective standards.

x x x x

17. ……When compensation is to be awarded for pain and suffering and loss of
amenity of life, the special circumstances of the claimant have to be taken into
account including his age, the unusual deprivation he has suffered, the effect thereof
on his future life…..”

107. This Court in the case of Raj Kumar (supra) held:

“5. ….A person is not only to be compensated for the physical injury, but also for the
loss which he suffered as a result of such injury. This means that he is to be
compensated for his inability to lead a full life, his inability to enjoy those normal
amenities which he would have enjoyed but for the injuries, and his inability to earn
as much as he used to earn or could have earned…..”

108. In the case of Sri Laxman alias Laxman Mourya (supra), this Court observed:

“15. The ratio of the abovenoted judgments is that if the victim of an accident suffers
permanent or temporary disability, then efforts should always be made to award
adequate compensation not only for the physical injury and treatment, but also for
the pain, suffering and trauma caused due to the accident, loss of earning and the
victim's inability to lead a normal life and enjoy amenities, which he would have
enjoyed but for the disability caused due to the accident.”

109. This Court in Govind Yadav (supra) held:

“18. In our view, the principles laid down in Arvind Kumar Mishra v. New India
Assurance Co. Ltd. (2010) 10 SCC 254 and Raj Kumar v. Ajay Kumar (2011) 1 SCC
343 must be followed by all the Tribunals and the High Courts in determining the
quantum of compensation payable to the victims of accident, who are disabled either
permanently or temporarily. If the victim of the accident suffers permanent
disability, then efforts should always be made to award adequate compensation not
only for the physical injury and treatment, but also for the loss of earning and his
inability to lead a normal life and enjoy amenities, which he would have enjoyed but
for the disability caused due to the accident.”

110. Vijaykumar Babulal Modi (supra), the High Court of Gujarat observed as under:

44

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

“It appears that the claim under this head is to the tune of Rs.3 lac. However, the
Tribunal has not awarded any sum under the head 'loss of amenities'. We are of the
opinion that this head must take into account all aspects of a normal life that have
been lost due to the injury caused. As per R.D. Hattangadi's case (supra), this
includes a variety of matters such as the inability to walk, run or sit, etc. We include
here too the loss of childhood pleasure such as the ability to freely play, dance, run,
etc., the loss of ability to freely move or travel without assistance. Then, there is the
virtual impossibility of marriage as well as a complete loss of the ability to have sex
and to have and nurture children.”

111. In view of the aforesaid, we award an amount of Rs. 50,000/- for the loss of amenities taking
into consideration the fact that the appellant was 19 years old at the time of the accident, and also
considering the nature of injuries suffered by him and the extent of his disability.

112. The total compensation awarded by us under different heads is as under:

S.NO. COMPENSATION                         AMOUNT
(IN RUPEES)

(cid:12)   1        Loss of earning due to            7,77,600/-
disability
2.       Loss of earning for 6               48,000/-
months
3.       Medical expenses                  1,55,000/-
4.       Future medical expenses           2,16,000/-
5.       Attendant Charges                 4,32,000/-
6.       Litigation charges                 50,000/-
7.       Loss of conveyance                 50,000/-
8.       Pain and suffering                1,00,000/-
9.       Marriage prospects                3,00,000/-
10       Loss of amenities                  50,000/-

TOTAL                            21,78,600/-

113. Before we close this matter, it needs to be underlined, as observed in Pappu Deo Yadav (supra)
that Courts should be mindful that a serious injury not only permanently imposes physical
limitations and disabilities but too often inflicts deep mental and emotional scars upon the victim.
The attendant trauma of the victim's having to live in a world entirely different from the one she or
he is born into, as an invalid, and with degrees of dependence on others, robbed of complete
personal choice or autonomy, should forever be in the judge's mind, whenever tasked to adjudge
compensation claims. Severe limitations inflicted due to such injuries undermine the dignity (which
is now recognized as an intrinsic component of the right to life under Article 21) of the individual,
thus depriving the person of the essence of the right to a wholesome life which she or he had lived,
hitherto. From the world of the able bodied, the victim is thrust into the world of the disabled, itself
most discomfiting and unsettling. If courts nit-pick and award niggardly amounts oblivious of these

45

circumstances, there is resultant affront to the injured victim. [See: Pappu Deo Yadav (supra)]

Sidram vs The Divisional Manager United India ... on 16 November, 2022

114. We, therefore, direct the respondent No. 1 herein – insurance company to pay the
appellant-claimant the difference in the compensation awarded herein as against the amount of Rs.
9,26,800/- as awarded by the High Court. The amount awarded by this Court shall be deposited by
the respondent No. 1 – insurance company within a period of eight weeks from today after adjusting
the amount already deposited. The rate of interest at the enhanced amount is to be the same i.e., 6%
per annum.

115. In the result, the appeal is allowed to the aforesaid extent. There shall be no order as to costs.

116. Pending application, if any, stands disposed of accordingly.

….………………………..J. (SURYA KANT) …………………………..J. (J.B. PARDIWALA) NEW DELHI;

NOVEMBER 16, 2022

46