Sk Nausad Rahaman vs Union Of India on 10 March, 2022

Sk Nausad Rahaman vs Union Of India on 10 March, 2022

Author: D.Y. Chandrachud

Bench: D.Y. Chandrachud, Surya Kant, Vikram Nath

Reportable

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

Civil Appeal No. 1243 of 2022

SK Nausad Rahaman & Ors.                                   .…Appellants

Versus

Union of India and Ors.                                    …Respondents

With Civil Appeal Nos. 1246-1248 of 2022 With Civil Appeal Nos. 1244-1245 of 2022 With Civil
Appeal No. 1249 of 2022 With Civil Appeal No. 1250 of 2022 With Civil Appeal Nos. 1251-1265 of
2 0 2 2   W i t h   A n d   W i t h   J U D G M E N T   D r   D h a n a n j a y a   Y   C h a n d r a c h u d ,   J   A
Facts....................................................................................................................4 B Relevant circulars
and notifications ..............................................................10 B.1 Executive Instructions issued by
DoPT ..................................................10 B.2 Circulars issued by Department of Revenue, Ministry of
Finance .......14 C Submissions.....................................................................................................19 D
Analysis ............................................................................................................26 PART A A Facts 1 A
Division Bench of the High Court of Kerala dealt with a batch of petitions under Article 226 of the
Constitution challenging the orders of the Central Administrative Tribunal on the issue of the
withdrawal of Inter-Commissionerate Transfers 1. The High Court has come to the conclusion that
the Central Excise and Customs Commissionerates Inspector (Central Excise, Preventive Officer and
Examiner) Group ‘B’ Posts Recruitment Rules 2016 2 do not contain any provision for ICTs and, on
the contrary, stipulate that each Cadre Controlling Authority 3 will have its own separate cadre,
unless otherwise directed by the Central Board of Excise and Customs. The High Court held that
ICTs would violate the unique identity of each cadre envisaged under Rule 5 of RR 2016 and hence
the circular withdrawing ICTs is not invalid. The judgment of the High Court has given rise to the
batch of civil appeals.

2 The appellants are Inspectors of the Central Excise and Land Customs or, as the case may be,
Goods and Services Tax Administration, who were allocated to different CCAs. Section 4 of the
Customs Act 1962 provides that the Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs 4 may appoint
such persons as it thinks fit to be officers of customs. A similar provision is contained in Section 4 of

1

the Central Goods and Services Tax Act 2017 5, which states that:

Sk Nausad Rahaman vs Union Of India on 10 March, 2022

“ICT” “Recruitment Rules 2016” or “RR 2016” “CCA” “CBIC” “CGST Act” PART A “4.
(1) The Board may, in addition to the officers as may be notified by the Government
under section 3, appoint such persons as it may think fit to be the officers under this
Act.

(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the Board may, by order,
authorise any officer referred to in clauses (a) to (h) of section 3 to appoint officers of
central tax below the rank of Assistant Commissioner of central tax for the
administration of this Act.” The expression ‘Board’ is defined in Section 2(16) of the
CGST Act as the Central Board of Excise and Customs 6 constituted under the Central
Boards of Revenue Act 1963.

3 On 29 November 2002, the Central Excise and Land Customs Department Inspector (Group C
posts) Recruitment Rules 2002 7 were notified. RR 2002 trace the source of power to the proviso to
Article 309 of the Constitution. Rule 4 was in the following terms:

“4. Special provision. - (i) Each Commissionerate shall have its own separate cadre
unless otherwise directed by the Central Board of Excise and Customs ∗

(ii) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1), the jurisdictional Chief
Commissioner of Central Excise may, if he considers to be necessary or expedient in
the public interest so to do and subject to such conditions as he may determine
having regard to the circumstances of the case and for reasons to be recorded in
writing, order any post in the Commissionerate of Central Excise to be filled by
absorption of persons holding the same or comparable posts but belonging to the
cadre another Commissionerate or Directorate under the Central Board of Excise and
Customs.” “CBEC” “Recruitment Rules 2002” or “RR 2002” ∗ Now referred to as
Centra Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs (CBIC) PART A

4 RR 2002 were superseded and substituted by RR 2016. Rule 5 of RR 2016 provides that:

“5. Special Provision.– Each Cadre Controlling Authority (CCA) shall have its own
separate cadre, unless otherwise directed by the Central Board of Excise and
Customs.”

5 A comparison of Rule 4 of RR 2002 with Rule 5 of RR 2016 would indicate that Rule 5 is similar to
Rule 4(i) of the erstwhile Rules. Rule 4(i) stipulates that each Commissionerate shall have its own
separate cadre, unless otherwise directed by the CBIC. Rule 5 of RR Rules 2016 substitutes the
expression “CCA” for the expression “Commissionerate”. Significantly, Rule 4 (ii) of RR 2002 does
not find place in Rule 5 of RR 2016. Rule 4(ii) contained a non-obstante provision under which a
jurisdictional Chief Commissioner of Central Excise had enabling power to allow the absorption of
persons from another Commissionerate under the CBIC in the public interest, and subject to

2

Sk Nausad Rahaman vs Union Of India on 10 March, 2022

conditions as would be determined. Rule 4(ii) of RR 2002 which contains an express provision for
ICTs was not incorporated in Rule 5 when RR 2016 were notified.

6 On 20 September 2018, the CBIC issued a circular 8 stating that since RR 2016 do not contain any
provision for recruitment by absorption, no application for ICTs could be considered after the
enforcement of those rules. The circular forms the genesis of the dispute in the present case and is
hence extracted below:

F. No. A-22015/117/2016-Ad.IIIA dated 20 September 2018 PART A “CIRCULAR
Subject: Instructions in respect of Inter Commissionerate Transfer (ICT) in the light
of new Recruitment Rules, 2016- regarding.

These instructions are being issued in terms of "Central Excise and Customs
Commissionerate Inspector (Central Excise, Preventive Officer and Examiner) Group
B Posts Recruitment Rules, 2016"

2. Any executive instruction in contravention of the Recruitment Rules will be void in
accordance with the ratio of the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in
the case of UOI & others Vs. Somasundran1 Viswanath & Ors. dated 22.09.1988
(1990 SC 166 (10) which held as follows: -

(1) "It is well settled that the norms regarding recruitment and promotion of officers
belonging to the Civil Services can be laid down either by a law made by appropriate
Legislature or by rules made under the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of
India or by means of executive instructions issued under article 73 of the Constitution
of India in the case of Civil Services under the Union of India and under Article 162 of
the constitution of India in the case of Civil Services under the State Governments. If
there is a conflict between the executive instructions and the rules made under the
proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India, the rules made under proviso to
Article 309 of the Constitution of India prevail.” Thus, the Recruitment Rules
formulated under Article 309 will prevail over any executive instruction that may be
contradictory to it"

3. It has come to the notice of this office that various CCAs (Cadre Control Authorities) are taking
divergent stands on the issue of Inter Commissionerate Transfers (!CT) of officers in the cadre of
Inspector on the basis of guidelines issued vide F.No. A 22015/23/2011-AD IIIA dated 27.10.2011.
The issue of Inter Commissionerate Transfer under “Central Excise and Customs Commissionerate
Inspector (Central Excise, Preventive Officer and Examiner) Group B Posts Recruitment Rules,
2016” has been examined by the Board and following has been observed.

4. The ICT applications were being considered under Rule 4 of erstwhile Central Excise and Land
Customs PART A Department Inspector (Group 'C' Posts) Recruitment Rules, 2002 which stated
that:

3

Sk Nausad Rahaman vs Union Of India on 10 March, 2022

“Rule 4. Special provision. - (i) Each Cadre controlling Authority (CCA) shall have its
own separate cadre unless otherwise directed by the Central Board of Excise and
Customs

(ii) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1), the jurisdictional Chief
Commissioner of Central Excise may, if he considers to be necessary or expedient in
the public interest so to do and subject to such conditions as he may determine
having regard to the circumstances of the case and for reasons to be recorded in
writing, order any post in the Commissionerate of Central Excise to be filled by
absorption of persons holding the same or comparable posts but belonging to the
cadre another Commissionerate of Directorate under the Central Board of Excise and
Customs.

However, under Recruitment Rules, 2016 the corresponding provision containing the special
provision under Rule 5 provides that "Each Cadre Controlling Authority (CCA) shall have its own
separate cadre unless otherwise directed by the Central Board of Excise and Customs."

5. From the above, it is clear that Recruitment Rules, 2016 do not have any provision for
recruitment by absorption and accordingly, no ICT application can be considered after coming into
force of the Recruitment Rules, 2016.

6. In exceptional circumstances depending upon the merit of each case such as extreme
compassionate grounds, such transfers may be allowed on case to case on loan basis alone keeping
in view the administrative requirements of transferee and transferred Cadre Controlling Authority.
However, maximum tenure of such transfer will be three years and can be extended with the specific
approval of the Board for a further period of two years depending upon the administrative
requirement. It is further reiterated that the officials transferred on the loan basis shall not be
considered for promotion unless they re-join their parent cadre.

7. Now, therefore, it is hereby clarified that an office order for Inter Commissionerate Transfer in
the Grade of Inspectors issued on or after 26.12.2016 (i.e. from the date of enactment of RR, 2016)
will be non-est and accordingly any officer who has joined another zone in pursuance of such order
shall be treated as a deemed case on loan basis w.e.f. 26.12.2016. These officers shall be on deemed
loan till PART A 31.03.2019, on which date the officers shall stand relieved and be reverted to their
parent Zones. […]” 7 While clarifying that under RR 2016, there is no specific provision allowing for
ICTs, the circular notes that Rule 5 stipulates that each CCA will have its own separate cadre, unless
otherwise directed by the Board. Rule 5 has been construed to mean that given that each CCA is to
have its own cadre, ICTs, which involve a transfer from one Commissionerate to another would no
longer be permissible and accordingly all orders for such transfers which were issued on or after 26
December 2016 (the date on which RR 2016 were notified) would be non-est. The circular, however,
allows that in exceptional circumstances, depending upon the merits of each case and on extreme
compassionate grounds, such transfers may be allowed on ‘case to case on loan basis’ keeping in
view the administrative requirements of the transferee and the transferred CCAs. However, the
maximum tenure of such transfer has been fixed as three years which can be extended by a further

4

period of two years.

Sk Nausad Rahaman vs Union Of India on 10 March, 2022

8 The validity of the circular dated 20 September 2018 was challenged before the Central
Administrative Tribunal. The challenge was upheld by the Tribunal. The High Court, in the exercise
of its jurisdiction under Article 226, reversed the decision of the Tribunal.

(cid:12)                                                                                   PART B

B       Relevant circulars and notifications

9       In order to appreciate the controversy in its entirety, it would be necessary to

deal with the circulars and office memoranda 9 which have held the field in the past. There are two
sets of executive instructions: (i) the first set concerns those instructions which were issued by the
Department of Personnel and Training 10 and

(ii) the second set concerns executive instructions which were issued by the Department of Revenue.

B.1     Executive Instructions issued by DoPT

10      The following executive instructions have been issued by the DoPT regarding

ICTs:

(i)     On 3 April 1986, an OM11 was issued by DoPT. The subject of the OM was:

“Posting of husband and wife at the same station”. The OM dealt with the posting of employees of
the Central Government and underscored that within administrative constraints, it was the policy of
the Government that spouses should be posted at the same station as far as possible. Paragraph 2 of
the circular indicated its rationale in the following terms.

“2. The Govt. of India have given the utmost importance to the enhancement of women’s status in
all sectors and all walks of life. Strategies and policies are being formulated and implemented by
different Ministries of the Central Govt. to achieve this end. It is also considered necessary to have a
policy which can enable women employed under the Govt and the public sector and undertaking to
discharge their responsibilities as wife/mother on the one hand and productions workers on the
other, more-effectively. It is the policy of the Govt. that as far as possible and within the “OM”
“DoPT” No. 28036/7/86-Estt(A) PART B constraints of administrative feasibility, the husband and
wife should be posted at the same station to enable them to lead a normal family life and to ensure
the education and welfare of their children.” Paragraph 4 of the circular envisaged various

5

Sk Nausad Rahaman vs Union Of India on 10 March, 2022

situations, depending upon the service to which spouses may belong and illustrated the following
eventualities:

“4. The classes of cases that may arise, and the guidelines for dealing with each class
of case, are given below: -

(i) Where the spouse belong to the same All India Service or two of the All India
Service namely IAS, IPSA and Indian Forest Services (Group-A).

(ii) Where one spouse belongs to one of the All India Service and the other spouse
belongs to one of the Central Services: -

The cadre controlling authority of the Central Service may post the officer to the
station or if there is no post in that station to the State where the other spouse
belonging to the All India Service is posted.

(iii) Where the spouse belong to the same central service:

The cadre controlling authority may post the spouses to the same station.

(iv) Where the spouse belongs to one Central Service and the other spouse belongs to
another Central Service: -

The spouse with the longer service at a station may apply to the appropriate cadre
controlling authority and the said authority may post the said officer to the station, or
if there is no post in that station to the State where the other spouse belonging to the
other central service is posted.

(v) Where one spouse belongs to an All India Service and the other spouse belongs to
a public sector:

The spouse employed under the public sector undertaking may apply to the
competent authority and said authority may post the said officer to the station, or if
there is no post under the PSU in that station, to the State where the other spouse is
posted.

(vi) Where one spouse belongs to a central service and other spouse belongs to PSU:

The spouse employed under the PSU may apply to the competent authority and the
said authority may post the officer to the station, to the State where the other spouse
is posted. If, however, the request cannot be granted because the PSU has no post in
the said station/State, then the spouse belonging to the central services may apply to
the appropriate cadre controlling authority and the said authority may post the said
officer to the station or if there is no post in that station, to the state where the spouse

6

Sk Nausad Rahaman vs Union Of India on 10 March, 2022

employed under PSU is posted.

PART B

(vii) Where one spouse is employed under the Central Govt. and the other spouse is
employed under the State Govt.:

The spouse employed under the central Govt. may apply to the competent authority
may post the said officer to the station or if there is no post in that station to the State
where the other spouse posted.” While recognising that the above illustrations would
not cover every case, the OM envisaged that each case not covered by the guidelines
would be considered bearing in mind the underlying object of ensuring that spouses
are, as far as possible and within the constraints of administrative convenience,
posted at the same station.

(ii) An OM 12 dated 29 May 1986 was issued by the DoPT which dealt with the
seniority of the persons absorbed after being on deputation;

(iii) An OM 13 was issued on 12 June 1997 which dealt with the “posting of husband
and wife at the same station” after the report of the Fifth Central Pay Commission.
The OM reiterated the guidelines contained in the earlier OM dated 3 April 1986 for
deciding requests for posting of spouses at the same station and envisaged that it
should be ensured that such posting is invariably done until the children attain the
age of 10 years if a vacancy exists in the organization at the same station and no
administrative problem arises as a consequence;

(iv) By an OM 14 dated 23 August 2004, it was noted that the instructions contained
i n   t h e   O M s   d a t e d   3   A p r i l   1 9 8 6   a n d   1 2   J u n e   1 9 9 7   w e r e   n o t   b e i n g   N o .
2 0 0 2 0 / 7 / 8 0 - E s t t . D   N o .   2 8 0 3 4 / 2 / 9 7 - E s t t . ( A )   N e w   D e l h i
No.28034/23/2004-Estt.(A) PART B followed in letter and spirit by the Ministries
and Departments even in the absence of administrative constraints. Accordingly, the
OM sought to impress upon all Ministries/Departments “that the guidelines laid
down in the aforesaid office memorandum are strictly followed while deciding the
request for posting of husband and wife at the same station”. The OM further stated
that “the policy of the Government has been to give utmost importance to the
enhancement of women’s status in all sectors and all walks of life”;

(v) On 8 July 2009, an OM15 was issued indicating that the Union Government had
taken several steps towards “advancement, development and empowerment of
women”, while being conscious of the fact that “women employees play a positive role
in their families as well as at their workplace”.

The annexure to the OM summarised the policies which have been formulated by the Union
Government towards achieving this objective and among them was a provision for posting of

7

spouses at the same station. In that context, the annexure stated:

Sk Nausad Rahaman vs Union Of India on 10 March, 2022

“Posting of husband & wife at the same station. The Govt. of India has issued detailed
instructions to its offices to ensure the posting of the husband and wife at the same
station so as to enable them to lead a normal family life and to ensure the education
and welfare of their children (O.M. No.28034/2/27-Estt-A dated 3.4.1986 &
12.6.1997). To facilitate posting of couples in the same station, it has been approved
that in case of a woman officer whose husband is posted under the Govt. of India, the
‘cooling off’ period may be valued up to six months so that she may get a posting at
the station where her husband is posted.” No.13018/4/2009-Estt.(L) PART B

(vi) By an OM 16 dated 30 September 2009, the earlier guidelines were consolidated
and it was stipulated that when both spouses are in the Central Government or work
in the same Department and if posts are available, they must invariably be posted
together. Paragraph 5 of the OM stated that:

“5. Complaints are sometimes received that even if posts are available in the station
of posting of the spouse, the administrative authorities do not accommodate the
employees citing administrative reasons. In all such cases, the cadre controlling
authority should strive to post the employee at the station of the spouse and in case of
inability to do so, specific reasons, therefor, may be communicated to the employee.”

(vii) By an OM 17 dated 31 December 2010, the guidelines were notified for
amendments in or for relaxation of the recruitment rules.

B.2 Circulars issued by Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance 11 The following circulars have
been issued by the Department of Revenue regarding ICTs:

(i) On 13 May 1998, a circular 18 was issued by the Ministry of Revenue to all the
Chief Commissioners of Customs and Central Excise on the subject of Inter-

Commissionerate Transfers. The circular stipulated that:

“The issue of Inter Commissionerate Transfer has been considered by Board and it
has been decided that for the present only 75% portion out of the total DP quota
vacancies should be filled up by Inter Commission transfer by CCE, Delhi.

2. It has also been decided that a committee may be formed which may decide on
inter Commissionerate transfer after considering the matter in totally but generally
on first come first salary basis. The committee can also consider the hardship cases,
like couple cases, “Medical Emergency No.F.No.28034/9/2009-Estt.(A) No.
AB.14017/48/2010-Estt..(RR) No.F.No.22015/11/98 Ad. IIIA PART B Cases” and
other cases like “Only s[o]n separate from parents” on merits.”

8

Sk Nausad Rahaman vs Union Of India on 10 March, 2022

(ii) On 16 January 2003, a circular19 was issued by the Department of Revenue to
the:

(a)       Chief Commissioners of Central Excise;

(b)       Chief Commissioners of Customs; and

(c)       Commissioners of Central Excise/Customs.

The circular notified that the Board had decided that all the powers which were being
exercised by the respective Commissioners as CCAs would henceforth be exercised by
the respective Chief Commissioners. However, it was stipulated that there would be
no merger or bifurcation of the existing cadres and the functions of the each CCA
would be exercised separately and independently by the Chief Commissioner. Hence,
it was stipulated that this in effect would imply that the independent entity of each
cadre shall remain intact and unchanged.

(iii) On 19 February 2004, the Department of Revenue addressed a communication 20 to all Chief
Commissioners and Commissioners of Customs and Central Excise amongst others for the
discontinuance of ICTs. The circular noted that ICTs had been taking place for Group ‘B’, ‘C’ and ‘D’
employees on compassionate grounds. However, ICTs caused administrative difficulties resulting in
protracted litigation. The matter was reviewed by the Board and it was directed that:

No. F.No.A-11013/04/2002-Ad.IV F. No.A.22015/3/2004-ad.IIIA PART B
“Accordingly, in supersession of all the previous instructions issued on the subject in
the past, it has been decided that henceforth no inter-Commissionerate transfer shall
be allowed for any Group B, C, D employee. Instead, in exceptional circumstances
depending upon the merits of each case where it is considered necessary to accept
such requests on extreme compassionate grounds, such transfers shall be allowed on
deputation basis for a period of three years subject to the approval of the transferor
and transferee cadre controlling authorities. Further extension of deputation period
can be made up to one year by the Commissioner and for a further period of one year
by Chief Commissioners concerned on mutually agree[d] basis. Such transfers shall
be with the specific condition that no deputation allowance shall be admissible for
deputation period including extended period, if any. Wherever required, necessary
amendments in Recruitment Rules are under approval and shall be issued
subsequently.”

(iv) A circular 21 was issued on 27 March 2009 by the CBEC by which the earlier ban
on ICTs was partially relaxed in order to facilitate the posting of spouses at the same
station “in line with the instructions of the DoPT”. The circular specifically referred to
the DoPT OMs dated 3 April 1986, 12 June 1997 and 23 August 2004. The circular,
insofar as is material, is extracted below:

9

Sk Nausad Rahaman vs Union Of India on 10 March, 2022

“I am directed to refer to the Board’s Circular F.No.22015/3/2014-Ad.IIIA dated
19.02.2004, as modified vide letter dated 09.03.2004, vide which the inter-
Commissionerate Transfers of Groups-B,C and D officers were banned. Although the
term used was ‘Inter- Commissionerate Transfers’, the ban was actually confined to
transfers from one Cadre Controlling Authority to another. There was no ban on
transfers amongst the Commissionerates having common cadre, where no loss of
seniority was involved, as was clarified vide letter dated 09.03.2004 referred to
above.

2. However, it has been pointed out that the instructions of the DoPT (contained in
their OM No.28034/7/86-Estt(A) dated 03.04.1986 as amended by OM dated
12.06.1997 and 23.08.2004), provide that “a husband and wife are, as far as possible,
and within the constraints of administrative convenience, posted at the same
station”.

3. The Board deliberated upon the issue in its meeting held on 04.03.2009 and have
decided to partially relax the F.No.A.22015/19/2006-Ad.IIIA PART B earlier
instructions of the Board as referred to above, in order to facilitate posting of
husband and wife at the same station in line with the instructions of the DoPT.
Accordingly, it has now been decided to permit inter-Commissionerate transfers of
Group B, C and D Officers beyond the Commissionerates having common cadres, i.e.
from one Cadre Controlling Authority to another, without any loss of seniority,
subject to the following conditions: -

(a) The transfer/change of cadre shall be permissible only in cases where the spouse
is employed with either the Central Government or a State Government or a Public
Sector Undertaking of the Central Government/ a State Government.

(b) The option for change of cadre must be exercised within six months of the initial
appointment of the officer, if the officer is married at the time of such initial
appointment. In case of marriage taking place subsequent to the initial appointment,
the option must be exercised within six months of the marriage. Further, as far as the
past cases are concerned, the option must be exercised within six months of the issue
of these instructions.

4. The procedure for change of cadre will be same as stipulated in the Board’s instructions dated
19.02.2004 referred to above i.e. the change of cadre will take place with the approval of the
transferor and transferee Cadre Controlling Authorities. There will be no need to seek approval of
the Boards for this purpose.”

(v) On 27 October 2011, a circular 22 was issued by the CBEC noting that the ban on ICTs which was
imposed by the earlier communication dated 19 February 2004 for Group B, C and D employees,
was subsequently relaxed in phases to cover cases involving spouses, compassionate appointments
and physically handicapped employees by circulars dated 27 March 2009, 29 July 2009 and 9

10

Sk Nausad Rahaman vs Union Of India on 10 March, 2022

February 2011. It recorded that such relaxation was allowed without loss of seniority and subject to
specific conditions. By the communication, CBEC notified that it had lifted the ban on ICTs with
immediate effect. Para 2 of the circular stipulated as follows:

“2. On consideration of all aspects in the matter of ICT, it has been decided by the
Board now to lift the ban on ICT with F.No.A.22015/23/2011-Ad.IIIA PART B
immediate effect. Accordingly, any willing Group ‘B’\‘C’ employee and the erstwhile
Group ‘D’ employee may apply for transfer from the jurisdiction of one Cadre
Controlling Authority (CCA) to another. CCA subject to availability of vacancy and on
the following terms & conditions:

i. The concerned two Cadre Controlling Authorities should agree to the transfer, ii.
The transferee will be placed below all officers appointed regularly to that pots/grade
on the date of his/her appointment on transfer basis in terms of Para 3.5 of DOP&T’s
G.M. dated 03.07.1986. In other words, such a transferee will be junior to those
regularly appointed officers prior to his/her transfer. However, such transferred
officer will retain his/her eligibility of the parent Commissionerate for his/her
promotion to the next higher grade, etc. iii. On transfer he/she will not be considered
for promotion in the old Commissionerate.

iv. He/she will not be entitled to any joining time and transfer travelling allowance;

v. Under no circumstances, request for ICT should be entertained till the officer
appointed in a particular Commissionerate/post completes the prescribed probation
period.

vi. The seniority of the officers who were allowed ICT earlier by the various Cadre
C o n t r o l l i n g   A u t h o r i t i e s   o n   t h e   b a s i s   o f   B o a r d ’ s   l e t t e r s
F.No.A.22015/19/2006-Ad.III.A dated 27.03.2009, F.No. A.22015/11/2008-Ad.III.A
dated 29.07.2009 and F.No. A.22015/15/2010-Ad.IIIA dated 09.02.2011 shall be
fixed as per the present instructions.

vii. Officers who are presently working on deputation basis from their parent Commissionerate to
any other Commissionerate/ Directorate and are willing to avail of the ICT in future will have to
revert back to their parent Commissionerate first and apply afresh for ICT. The officers who have
been continuously on deputation and have been absorbed on ICT during the interim period from
19.02.2004 (i.e. the date from which the ban became effective) till date, their seniority will be fixed
from the date of their joining on deputation in the transferred Zone/Commissionerate. viii. A
written undertaking (in the enclosed format) to abide by the requisite terms and conditions will be
obtained from the officers before the transfers are actually affected.

ix. All pending Court cases where seniority protection/ICT has been challenged may be handled
appropriately in terms of these instructions and necessary compliance furnished to the Board in due
course.” PART C

11

Sk Nausad Rahaman vs Union Of India on 10 March, 2022

(vi) On 20 September 2018, CBIC issued a circular (extracted above earlier in this judgment) stating
that:

(a) RR 2016 contain no provision for recruitment by absorption;

(b) Rule 5 of RR 2016 stipulates that each CCA shall have its own separate cadre
unless otherwise directed by the CBEC;

(c) There is no provision which corresponds to Rule 4(ii) of RR 2002 in Rule 5 of RR
2016;

(d) Any executive instructions contrary to RR 2016 would be void;

(e) After the enforcement of RR 2016, there is no enabling provision for the grant of
ICTs;

(f) In exceptional circumstances employees could be transferred on a loan basis for a
maximum period of three years extendable by a further period of two years; and

(g) All ICTs in the grade of Inspectors issued on or after 26 December 2016 would be
withdrawn and those employees would be deemed to be on a loan basis.

C      Submissions

12     We have heard Mr Maninder Singh, Ms Vibha Datta Makhija, Mr PN

Ravindran, Mr Narender Hooda and Mr Rana Mukherjee, senior counsel in support
of the appeals and intervention applications and Mr Rishi Kapoor and Mr Umakant
PART C Misra, learned counsel who have adopted their submissions. Mr KM Nataraj,
Additional Solicitor General 23 has appeared on behalf of the respondents.

13 Mr Maninder Singh, learned senior counsel has urged the following submissions:

(i) The Division Bench of the High Court of Kerala has held that with the non-

inclusion of the provisions of Rule 4(ii) of the RR 2002 in RR 2016, ICTs are not permissible.
However, Rule 5 of RR 2016 which stipulates that each CCA will have a separate cadre,
contemplates that the CBEC can provide otherwise;

(ii) CBEC’s instructions of 27 October 2011 lifted the ban on ICTs which was imposed on 19
February 2004;

(iii) The decision by CBEC to lift the ban on ICTs must be treated as a decision which relaxes the
norm that each CCA will have a separate cadre; and

12

Sk Nausad Rahaman vs Union Of India on 10 March, 2022

(iv) The basic premise of the circular dated 20 September 2018 is that there is no provision for
recruitment by absorption in RR 2016. This premise is fallacious because even after the
non-inclusion of Rule 4(ii) of RR 2002 in Rule 5 of RR 2016, the Board has retained its power to
issue directions ‘otherwise’ and a circular which had been issued by the Board must be treated as
being an exercise of such a power.

“ASG” PART C 14 Ms Vibha Datta Makhija, learned senior counsel has addressed the court on two
broad issues:

(i) Whether RR 2016 place a blanket prohibition on ICTs; and

(ii) Whether the circular dated 20 September 2018 which imposes a blanket
prohibition on ICTs is violative of the fundamental rights conferred by Articles 14 and
21 of the Constitution.

15 Ms Makhija has assailed the blanket prohibition on ICTs insofar as it relates to
applications made on “spousal grounds”. In this backdrop, learned senior counsel
urged:

(i) In the absence of a specific provision in RR 2016 for ICTs, the OMs issued by
DoPT will fill up the gaps in delegated legislation. Hence, in the absence of a specific
rule to the contrary, the OMs issued by DoPT will govern the Central Government
service unless specifically excluded by a regulatory provision.

DoPT has a longstanding policy for posting of spouses at the same station. While Rule 4(ii) of RR
2002 contained a specific provision for ICTs, there is no corresponding provision in RR 2016. The
absence of a specific provision will not alter the situation;

(ii) ICTs were governed by OMs/circulars of the DoPT and Department of Revenue. While framing
RR 2016, the Board sent the proposal to DoPT and DoPT approved the non-inclusion of Rule 4(ii) of
RR 2002 on the basis that such a provision is generally not made in the recruitment rules. From this
PART C background, it becomes clear that the non-inclusion of Rule 4(ii) while framing RR 2016
was allowed on the premise that no prohibition for ICTs on compassionate and spousal grounds was
required in the proposed rules. The circulars of the Board in 2004, 2009 and 2011 would clearly
indicate that ICTs in relation to Group B,C and D employees have never been the subject matter of
recruitment rules and have fallen in the domain of administrative instructions. Once the ICTs were
governed by executive instructions, the High Court has erred in coming to the conclusion that the
absence of a provision corresponding to Rule 4(ii) of RR 2002 in RR 2016 would bar ICTs. Since RR
2016 are silent with respect to ICTs, such transfers remain within the domain of administrative
instructions;

(iii) DoPT has issued its circulars in furtherance of the constitutional object of maintaining equality
and women’s empowerment as embodied in Article 15(3) of the Constitution;

13

Sk Nausad Rahaman vs Union Of India on 10 March, 2022

(iv) In terms of the provisions contained under The Government of India (Transaction of Business
Rules) 1961, any conflict between the policy of the DoPT and Department of Revenue would have to
be resolved by giving primacy to the former on matters of recruitment, service conditions and cadre
management of the central services;

(v) The circular dated 20 September 2018 was brought into force without the approval of DoPT and
is hence contrary to The Government of India (Transaction of Business Rules) 1961;

PART C

(vi) The circular dated 20 September 2018 banning ICTs violates the provisions of Articles 14 and
16(1) of the Constitution by bringing about discrimination at two levels:

(a) It discriminates between Group ‘A’ and Group ‘B’/’C’ employees;

(b) It discriminates vis-à-vis other services under the Central Government to which
the DoPT circulars apply;

(vii) The impugned circular results in indirect discrimination and denies equality of
opportunity to women guaranteed under Articles 15(1) and 16(1) of the Constitution;
and

(viii) The circular banning ICTs does not satisfy an integrated proportionality
analysis.

16 Mr Vikas Singh, learned senior counsel urged that the consequence of the non-inclusion of a
provision corresponding to Rule 4(ii) of RR 2002, while framing RR 2016 is that the power to effect
ICTs which was given to the Commissionerate has now been entrusted to the Board. Though the
power had been taken away from the Commissionerate level, it continues to vest with the Board. 17
Mr PN Ravindran, learned senior counsel submitted that:

(i) The circular dated 20 September 2018 proceeds on the sole basis that there is no
provision in RR 2016 for ICTs whereas ICTs have always been governed by executive
instructions;

PART C

(ii) Following the decision of the Kerala Central Administrative Tribunal, a provision for ICTs was
issued but it was cancelled in the course of barely a week; and

(iii) The non-inclusion of Rule 4(ii) while framing RR 2016 was on the ground that such a provision
is generally not made in the recruitment rules. Hence, the non-inclusion of erstwhile Rule 4(ii) in
RR 2016 would be of no practical significance.

14

18 Mr Narendra Hooda, learned senior counsel has urged that:

Sk Nausad Rahaman vs Union Of India on 10 March, 2022

(i) The circular dated 20 September 2018 ignores that the advice of DoPT- which led
to the non-inclusion of Rule 4(ii) - was merely that such a stipulation was a
surplusage in the recruitment rules;

(ii) Under RR 2016, 90% of the cadre strength is for direct recruitment. Since an ICT
is against the direct recruitment quota, no promotional avenues get affected; and

(iii) Since 1958, ICTs have always been governed by executive instructions.

19 Mr Rana Mukherjee, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the intervenors submitted
that in the alternative, if this Court upholds the decision of the High Court, it may at least protect
persons whose transfers have already taken place albeit after RR 2016 were notified.

20 The arguments urged by Ms Makhija have been adopted by Mr Rishi Kapoor while Mr Umakant
Misra has adopted the arguments of Mr Maninder Singh. PART C 21 On behalf of the respondents,
Mr KM Nataraj, learned ASG has urged the following submissions:

(i) No employee can assert a fundamental right or a vested right to transfer.

Transfer as condition of service is always a matter which is governed by the applicable rules;

(ii) Rule 4 of RR 2002 while stipulating that each Commissionerate would have a separate cadre
contained a specific provision in Rule 4(ii), allowing for absorption from the cadre of one
Commissionerate to another Commissionerate;

(iii) Rule 5 of RR 2016 contains a specific stipulation that there will be a separate cadre for each
CCA;

(iv) A cadre means a definite sanctioned strength which is stated in the separate unit;

(v) In the absence of a specific provision in Rule 5 of RR 2016 to bring a person from one cadre to
another cadre by absorption, there is no legal power to absorb a person from outside the cadre;

(vi) The non-inclusion of Rule 4(ii) when RR 2016 were framed, was designed to curb a specific
mischief. The provision for ICTs was being abused by employees as, for instance, for the purpose of
seeking a promotion and reverting to the original cadre;

PART D

(vii) The entire concept of a cadre and cadre strength would be negated if ICTs are permitted in the
absence of an enabling provision such as Rule 4(ii) of the erstwhile RR 2002;

15

Sk Nausad Rahaman vs Union Of India on 10 March, 2022

(viii) DoPT circulars cannot override statutory rules which have been framed under Article 309 of
the Constitution; and

(ix) Providing any kind of transfer including ICTs is a matter of policy and cannot be claimed as a
matter of right.

22 The rival submissions would now fall for analysis.

D        Analysis

23       While analyzing the rival submissions, certain basic precepts of service

jurisprudence must be borne in mind.

24       First and foremost, transfer in an All India Service is an incident of service.

Whether, and if so where, an employee should be posted are matters which are governed by the
exigencies of service. An employee has no fundamental right or, for that matter, a vested right to
claim a transfer or posting of their choice. 25 Second, executive instructions and administrative
directions concerning transfers and postings do not confer an indefeasible right to claim a transfer
or posting. Individual convenience of persons who are employed in the service is subject to the
overarching needs of the administration. 26 Third, policies which stipulate that the posting of
spouses should be preferably, and to the extent practicable, at the same station are subject to the
PART D requirement of the administration. In this context, Justice JS Verma (as the learned Chief
Justice then was) speaking for a three-judge Bench of this Court in Bank of India v. Jagjit Singh
Mehta 24 held :

“5. There can be no doubt that ordinarily and as far as practicable the husband and
wife who are both employed should be posted at the same station even if their
employers be different. The desirability of such a course is obvious. However, this
does not mean that their place of posting should invariably be one of their choice,
even though their preference may be taken into account while making the decision in
accordance with the administrative needs. In the case of all-India services, the
hardship resulting from the two being posted at different stations may be
unavoidable at times particularly when they belong to different services and one of
them cannot be transferred to the place of the other's posting. While choosing the
career and a particular service, the couple have to bear in mind this factor and be
prepared to face such a hardship if the administrative needs and transfer policy do
not permit the posting of both at one place without sacrifice of the requirements of
the administration and needs of other employees. In such a case the couple have to
make their choice at the threshold between career prospects and family life. After
giving preference to the career prospects by accepting such a promotion or any
appointment in an all-India service with the incident of transfer to any place in India,
subordinating the need of the couple living together at one station, they cannot as of

16

Sk Nausad Rahaman vs Union Of India on 10 March, 2022

right claim to be relieved of the ordinary incidents of all-India service and avoid
transfer to a different place on the ground that the spouses thereby would be posted
at different places. […] No doubt the guidelines require the two spouses to be posted
at one place as far as practicable, but that does not enable any spouse to claim such a
posting as of right if the departmental authorities do not consider it feasible. The only
thing required is that the departmental authorities should consider this aspect along
with the exigencies of administration and enable the two spouses to live together at
one station if it is possible without any detriment to the administrative needs and the
claim of other employees.” (1992) 1 SCC 306 PART D

27 The above principle was cited with approval in Union of India v. SL Abbas 25 where the Court
held that transfer is an incident of service:

“7. Who should be transferred where, is a matter for the appropriate authority to
decide. Unless the order of transfer is vitiated by mala fides or is made in violation of
any statutory provisions, the court cannot interfere with it. While ordering the
transfer, there is no doubt, the authority must keep in mind the guidelines issued by
the Government on the subject. Similarly if a person makes any representation with
respect to his transfer, the appropriate authority must consider the same having
regard to the exigencies of administration. The guidelines say that as far as possible,
husband and wife must be posted at the same place. The said guideline however does
not confer upon the Government employee a legally enforceable right.”

28 Fourth, norms applicable to the recruitment and conditions of service of officers belonging to the
civil services can be stipulated in:

(i) A law enacted by the competent legislature;

(ii) Rules made under the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution; and

(iii) Executive instructions issued under Article 73 of the Constitution, in the case of
civil services under the Union and Article 162, in the case of civil services under the
States.

Fifth, where there is a conflict between executive instructions and rules framed under Article 309,
the rules must prevail. In the event of a conflict between the rules framed under Article 309 and a
law made by the appropriate legislature, the law (1993) 4 SCC 357 PART D prevails. Where the rules
are skeletal or in a situation when there is a gap in the rules, executive instructions can supplement
what is stated in the rules. 26 29 Sixth, a policy decision taken in terms of the power conferred
under Article 73 of the Constitution on the Union and Article 162 on the States is subservient to the
recruitment rules that have been framed under a legislative enactment or the rules under the
proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution. 27 30 RR 2002 contained in Rule 4 a “Special Provision”.
Rule 4(i) envisaged that each Commissionerate shall have its own separate cadre unless otherwise
directed by the CBEC. Rule 4(ii) commenced with a non-obstante provision in terms of which, the

17

Sk Nausad Rahaman vs Union Of India on 10 March, 2022

jurisdictional Chief Commissionerate of Central Excise was empowered to order that any post in the
Commissionerate may be filled up by absorption of persons holding the same or comparable post
belonging to the cadre of another Commissionerate under the CBEC. The non-obstante provision
was necessary because Rule 4(i) contained a mandate for each Commissionerate to have its own
separate cadre unless the CBEC directed otherwise. The plain consequence of each Commissionerate
having its own cadre was to preclude the appointment of a person belonging to the cadre of another
Commissionerate by way of absorption. The bar on the absorption of persons from outside the cadre
was lifted as a consequence of Rule 4(ii), which by embodying a non-obstante provision allowed the
jurisdictional Chief Commissionerate to allow a post in the Commissionerate to be filled by Union of
India and Others v. Somasundaram Viswanath and Others, (1989) 1 SCC 175, para 6 State of Orissa
and Others v. Prasana Kumar Sahoo (2007) 15 SCC 129, para 12 PART D persons holding the same
or comparable post but belonging to the cadre of another Commissionerate.

31 In RR 2016 as notified, Rule 5 states that each CCA shall have its own separate cadre, unless
otherwise directed by the CBEC. The ‘Commissionerate’ in the erstwhile Rule 4(ii) was substituted
by the expression “Cadre Controlling Authority” in Rule 5 of RR 2016. The clear intent of Rule 5 is
that there would be a separate cadre for each CCA and only CBEC is entrusted with the authority to
direct otherwise. Hence only CBEC could direct the constitution of a joint cadre for more than one
C o m m i s s i o n e r a t e .   T h e   e n a b l i n g   p o w e r   w h i c h   w a s   c o n f e r r e d   o n   j u r i s d i c t i o n a l   C h i e f
Commissionerate in Rule 4(ii) of RR 2002 is conspicuously absent in Rule 5 of RR 2016. The central
submission which has been urged on behalf of the appellant is that since in RR 2016 there is no
provision corresponding to Rule 4(ii) of RR 2002, there is a silence on the subject of the absorption
of persons belonging to the cadre of another Commissionerate and this silence or gap can be
supplemented by executive instructions. The executive instructions, it was submitted, would be
those which are embodied in the OMs which have been issued by DoPT or the instructions which
have been issued by the Department of Revenue from time to time.

32 There is a fundamental fallacy in the submission which has been urged on behalf of the
appellants. Administrative instructions, it is well-settled, can supplement rules which are framed
under the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution in a manner which does not lead to any
inconsistencies. Executive PART D instructions may fill up the gaps in the rules. But supplementing
the exercise of the rule making power with the aid of administrative or executive instructions is
distinct from taking the aid of administrative instructions contrary to the express provision or the
necessary intendment of the rules which have been framed under Article 309. RR 2016 have been
framed under the proviso to Article 309. Rule 5 of RR 2016 contains a specific prescription that each
CCA shall have its own separate cadre. The absence of a provision for filling up a post in the
Commissionerate by absorption of persons belonging to the cadre of another Commissionerate
clearly indicates that the cadre is treated as a posting unit and there is no occasion to absorb a
person from outside the cadre who holds a similar or comparable post. 33 In JS Yadav v. State of UP
28, a two judge bench of this Court observed that the expression ‘cadre’ generally “denotes a
strength of a service or a part of service sanctioned as a separate unit. It also includes sanctioned
strength with reference to grades in a particular service. Cadre may also include temporary,
supernumerary and shadow posts created in different grades”. Recently, a three-judge Bench of this
Court in Jarnail Singh v. Lacchmi Narain Gupta 29, while dealing with the scope of the expression

18

‘cadre’ referred to various judicial pronouncements. The Bench noted:

Sk Nausad Rahaman vs Union Of India on 10 March, 2022

“24. […] The dispute that arose for consideration of this Court in Dr. Chakradhar
Paswan v. State of Bihar [(1988) 2 SCC 214] relates to the posts of Director and three
Deputy Directors in the Directorate of Indigenous Medicines, Department of Health,
State of Bihar being grouped together (2011) 6 SCC 570 2022 SCC OnLine SC 96
PART D for the purpose of implementing the policy of reservation under Article 16(4)
of the Constitution of India. […] It was held that the term “cadre” has a definite legal
connotation in service jurisprudence. This Court referred to Fundamental Rule 9(4)
which defines the word “cadre” to mean the strength of a service or part of a service
sanctioned as a separate unit. […]

25. […] The meaning of “cadre” fell for consideration of this Court again in Union of
India v. Pushpa Rani [(2008) 9 SCC 242]. “Cadre” in the 1985 edition of the Railway
Establishment Code is defined as the strength of a service or a part of a service
sanctioned as a separate unit. This Court held that the posts sanctioned in different
grades would constitute independent cadres, even for the purpose of implementing
the roster. The reason for giving an enlarged meaning to the term “cadre” was that
the posts in the railway establishment are sanctioned with reference to grades. Even
temporary, work-charged, supernumerary and shadow posts created in different
grades can constitute part of the cadre.

[…]

28. It is clear from the above statutory regime and the law laid down by this Court that civil posts
under the Government are organised into different services. A service constitutes ‘classes’/‘groups’
of posts. A ‘class’/‘group’ is further bifurcated into grades. Though the nomenclature might be
different, the structure of services under the Union and the States is similar. According to the
instructions issued by the Union of India, cadres are constituted for each grade. At the cost of
repetition, the Union of India submitted that there are 3800 cadres in 44 Ministries/Departments.
Fundamental Rule 9(4) defines “cadre” to mean the strength of a service or part of a service
sanctioned as a separate unit. It is the choice of a State to constitute cadres. The entire service
cannot be considered to be a cadre for the purpose of promotion from one post to a higher post in a
different grade. Promotion is made from one grade to the next higher grade, in relation to which
cadres are constituted. This Court in Dr. Chakradhar Paswan (supra) has categorically stated that
the post of Director and Deputy Director cannot form one cadre. A cadre is constituted by the
Government by taking into account several factors within its sole discretion.” (emphasis supplied)
PART D 34 Rule 5 of RR 2016 postulates that each CCA has a separate cadre and does not contain a
provision for bringing in, by way of absorption, persons from outside the cadre. Inducting persons
from outside the cadre by absorption requires a specific provision in the subordinate legislation for
the simple reason that the concept of a cadre would otherwise militate against bringing in those
outside the cadre. That is the reason why Rule 4(ii) of the erstwhile RR 2002 contained a specific
provision to this effect. That provision has however not been included when RR 2016 were framed.
If the authority entrusted with the power of framing rules under Article 309 of the Constitution did

19

Sk Nausad Rahaman vs Union Of India on 10 March, 2022

so on the ground that the provision was subject to misuse and was contrary to the interests of the
administration, no employee can assert a vested right to claim an ICT.

35 Another submission which has been urged on behalf of the appellants is based on The
Government of India (Transaction of Business) Rules 1961, which have been framed pursuant to
Article 77(3) of the Constitution. Rule 4(4) provides for consultation with the DoPT on specified
matters and reads as follows:

“4. Inter-Departmental Consultations.-

(1) When the subject of a case concerns more than one department, no decision be
taken or order issued until all such departments have concurred, or, failing such
concurrence, a decision thereon has been taken by or under the authority of the
Cabinet.

Explanation- Every case in which a decision, if taken in one Department, is likely to affect the
transaction of business allotted to another department, shall be deemed to be a case the subject of
which concerns more than one department. (2) Unless the case is fully covered by powers to
sanction expenditure or to appropriate or re-appropriate funds, conferred by any general or special
orders made by the Ministry of Finance, no department shall, without the previous PART D
concurrence of the Ministry of Finance, issue any orders which may-

(a) involve any abandonment of revenue or involve any expenditure for which no provision has been
made in the appropriation act;

(b) involve any grant of land or assignment of revenue or concession, grant, lease or licence of
mineral or forest rights or a right to water power or any easement or privilege in respect of such
concession;

(c) relate to the number or grade of posts, or to the strength of a service, or to the pay or allowances
of Government servants or to any other conditions of their service having financial implications; or

(d) otherwise have a financial bearing whether involving expenditure or not;

Provided that no orders of the nature specified in clause (c) shall be issued in respect of the Ministry
of Finance without the previous concurrence of the Department of Personnel and Training.

(3) The Ministry of Law shall be consulted on-

(a) proposals for legislation;

(b) the making of rules and orders of a general character in the exercise of a statutory power
conferred on the Government; and

20

(c) the preparation of important contracts to be entered into by the Government.

Sk Nausad Rahaman vs Union Of India on 10 March, 2022

(4) Unless the case is fully covered by a decision or advice previously given by the Department of
Personnel and Training that Department shall be consulted on all matters involving-

(a) the determination of the methods of recruitment and conditions of service of general application
to Government servants in civil employment; and

(b) the interpretation of the existing orders of general application relating to such recruitment or
conditions of service.

(5) Unless the case is fully covered by the instructions issued or advice given by that Ministry, the
Ministry of External Affairs shall be consulted on all matters affecting India's external relations.”
PART D In terms of Rule 4(4), the DoPT has to be consulted on the determination of the methods of
recruitment and conditions of service of general application to government servants and on the
interpretation of existing orders of general application relating to recruitment or the conditions of
service. 36 The Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules 1961 have also been framed
under Article 77(3) of the Constitution. Rule 2 envisages that the business of the Government of
India shall be transacted in the Ministries, Departments, Secretariats and Offices specified in the
First Schedule. Under Rule 3, the distribution of subjects is specified in the Second Schedule. The
distribution of subjects to the Department of Revenue includes:

“C. DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE (RAJASWA VIBHAG)

1. All matters relating to-

(a)     Central Board of Excise and Customs;
(b)     Central Board of Direct Taxes”

37    In other words, all matters which relate to CBEC and CBDT were assigned to

the Department of Revenue. Matters which are assigned to DoPT under the Ministry
of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pension include:

“ A .   D E P A R T M E N T   O F   P E R S O N N E L   A N D   T R A I N I N G   ( K A R M I K   A U R
PRASHIKSHAN VIBHAG) I. RECRUITMENT, PROMOTION, AND MORALE OF
SERVICES [...] PART D

2. General questions relating to recruitment, promotion and seniority pertaining to
Central Services except Railways Services and services under the control of
Department of Atomic Energy, the erstwhile Department of Electronics, the
Department of Space and the Scientific and Technical Services under the Department
of Defence Research and Development.

21

[...]

Sk Nausad Rahaman vs Union Of India on 10 March, 2022

18. Advising Ministries on proper management of various cadres under their control.

[…] IV. SERVICE CONDITIONS

21. General questions (other than those which have a financial bearing including Conduct Rules
relating to All India and Union Public Services except in regard to services under the control of the
Department of Railways, the Department of Atomic Energy, the erstwhile Department of Electronics
and the Department of Space.)

22. Conditions of service of Central Government employees (excluding those under the control of
the Department of Railways, the Department of Atomic Energy, the erstwhile Department of
Electronics and the Department of Space and the Scientific and Technical personnel under the
Department of Defence Research and Development, other than those having a financial bearing and
in so far as they raise points of general service interests).

23. (a) The administration of all service rules including F.Rs S.Rs and C.S.Rs (but excluding those
relating to Pension and other retirement benefits) except-

(i) proposals relating to revisions of pay structure of employees;

(ii) proposals for revisions of pay scales of Central Government employees;

(iii) appointment of Pay Commission, processing of the recommendations and implementation
thereof;

(iv) dearness allowance and other compensatory allowances and travelling allowances;

(v) any new facility to Government employees by way of service conditions or fringe benefits which
involve significant recurring financial implications; and PART D

(vi) matters relating to amendments to service rules having a predominantly financial character;
[…]” 38 Undoubtedly, while all matters pertaining to the CBEC and CBDT are under the domain of
the Department of Revenue, there has to be a harmonious construction with the subjects which are
assigned to the DoPT. In fact, the need for a harmonious reading is emphasized, as we have seen
earlier, in Rule 4(4) of The Government of India (Transaction of Business) Rules 1961, which
requires the advice of DoPT to be sought on methods of recruitment and conditions of service and
on the interpretation of existing orders relating to recruitment and conditions of service. The
executive instructions which have been issued by the DoPT cannot however prevail over the specific
provisions which are contained in the rules which have been framed under the proviso to Article 309
of the Constitution. Faced with this difficulty, the appellants have sought to urge that Rule 4(ii) of
RR 2002 was not included while RR 2016 were being framed on the advice of the DoPT on the
ground that such a provision is generally not made in the recruitment rules. This submission is

22

Sk Nausad Rahaman vs Union Of India on 10 March, 2022

based on the disclosure made by the Department of Revenue under the Right to Information Act
2005 on 3 July 2018. The attachment with the RTI disclosure contains the following tabulation:

“4. D/o Revenue has further suggested for following changes in the draft RRs
approved by the Department for which DoPT’s observations has been mentioned
against them:-

SI.    Proposal                           DoPT’s observations
No.
(i)    Col. 12    Addition of   Asstt.    The reasons available in the file for addition of
Programmer (DEO Grade D) (PB-2     Asstt. Programmer (only 5 in No.) is to provide the

(cid:12)                                                                                            PART D

GP Rs. 4200) and Steno Gr. I (PB-      promotion avenue in Ministerial/executive side
2 GP Rs. 4200) as feeder grade for     instead of technical side (p.11/c). No reason has
Insp (C&E); Insp. (PO) and Insp        been given for addition of Steno Gr.I. As the
(Exam)                                 justification is not adequate or not given, we may
not agree for the addition of both posts in the
feeder grade.
(ii)    Col. 12 The requirement for age        This was suggested by this Department earlier, But
limit  for   appearing  in   the       due to justification given, DoPT agreed while
departmental exam has been done        approving the proposal for keeping the age limit for
away with                              promotion (p.76-83/N of L/F). Now in view of a
Court decision, D/o Revenue has suggested the
proposal. We may agree for the same.
(iii)   Note 2 in Col. 12 The requisite        It may be mentioned that D/o Revenue has insisted
height is being dispensed with for     for keeping the provision for physical tests and
those who have been recruited          physical standards for considering promotion due to
without such criteria                  the job of Inspector being arduous in nature. As the
circumstances remain same, we may not agree to
the proposal.
(iv)    The provision in Rule 4                As such provision is generally not made in the
(notification part) for describing     RRs, we may agree.
Inter-Commissionerate
deputation without deputation
allowance has been suggested
for deletion
(v)     The col. 7 related to added years of   It may be deleted.
service
(vi)    Col. 10 (renumbered 9)                 2 years of DR and promotees (except those who
are already holding posts in Group B), since

probation is applicable if there is change of Group.

(vii)   Col. 11 (renumbered 10)                Col. 11(renumbered 10)
…                                      …
33 1/3 % by promotion                  33 1/3 % by promotion through Departmental

23

Sk Nausad Rahaman vs Union Of India on 10 March, 2022

Qualifying Exam. Since, Departmental exam for promotion is either qualifying (not
linked to vacancies) or competitive (linked to vacancies) Consequential changes in
Col. 12 (renumbered 11) (emphasis supplied) PART D

39 The above tabulation indicates that the proposal which was under

consideration was the provision for Inter-Commissionerate deputation without
deputation allowance. This was suggested for deletion. DoPT observed that such a
provision is generally not made in the recruitment rules and thus, the proposal may
be agreed to. But apart from this, the Department of Revenue did not deem it fit to
adopt the specific provision which was contained in Rule 4(ii) of RR 2002 under
w h i c h   a b s o r p t i o n   o f   p e r s o n s   f r o m   o t h e r   c a d r e s   w a s   e n v i s a g e d   a t   t h e
Commissionerate level, when Rule 5 of RR 2016 was framed. In the absence of a
specific provision to that effect, an employee from outside the cadre under the control
of a CCA cannot claim an ICT based on executive instructions. The executive
instructions which have been issued by DoPT in the form of OMs will not prevail over
RR 2016 which have been framed under the proviso to Article 309.

Similarly, the instructions which were issued by the Department of Revenue on 27
March 2009, relaxing the ban on ICT, which was imposed on 19 February 2004 and
the subsequent instructions dated 27 October 2011 were issued at the time when RR
2016 were yet to be framed. These instructions will not govern or prevail when the
regime envisaged under RR 2016 came into force.

40 On behalf of the appellants, reliance was sought to be placed on the decision of a two judge
Bench of this Court in Prabir Banerjee v. Union of India and Others 30. In that case, the Jabalpur
Bench of the Central Administrative Tribunal had been moved for challenging an order of transfer
from Indore to Nagpur on the (2007) 8 SCC 793 PART D ground that an inter-zonal transfer was
prohibited in the Department of Central Excise and Customs. The petitioner was appointed as an
Inspector of Central Excise and was promoted as a Superintendent in the Bhopal Zone which
comprised the Commissionerates of Bhopal, Indore and Raipur. On 19 February 1994, the
Department of Revenue issued instructions for the discontinuance of ICTs for Group B, C and D
employees while stipulating that in exceptional circumstances, transfers were allowed on deputation
for a period of three years, extendable by one year on extreme compassionate grounds. The above
circular was amended on 9 March 2004 envisaging that ICTs among Commissionerates having a
common cadre may be allowed to continue as hitherto where there was no loss of seniority involved.
Thereafter, together with a batch of other officers, the petitioner was transferred from the Indore
Commissionerate to the Nagpur Commissionerate which was sought to be challenged on the ground
that inter-zonal transfers continued to be proscribed. The Tribunal dismissed the OA and the High
Court disposed of the writ petition, with permission to the petitioner to submit a representation to
the competent authority. While the petitioner relied on the prohibition on inter-zonal transfers, the
Additional Solicitor General appearing on behalf of the Union of India relied on the instructions of
the Board dated 24 August 2004 indicating that pending a decision on the demand for bifurcation of
Group B, C cadres relating to Nagpur and Indore Collectorates, it had been decided that the cadre

24

Sk Nausad Rahaman vs Union Of India on 10 March, 2022

control of the two Collectorates would be distributed between the Collectors of Nagpur Zone and
Indore Zone. The Collector of Central Excise of Nagpur Zone was made the CCA of Group B and C
employees belonging to the Ministerial cadre while the Collector of Central Excise, PART D Indore
was made the CCA in respect of the Group B and C officers in the executive cadres. Since the post of
Superintendent was a Group B post in the executive cadre and in respect of two Collectorates, the
Collector of Central Excise Indore became the CCA of such employees in the Collectorates. It was in
this backdrop, that this Court held that it was inclined to agree with the stand of the respondent that
while transfer is an incident of service under the Central Service Rules, the petitioner had no cause
to complain of his transfer from the Bhopal Zone to the Nagpur Zone as the order of transfer was
issued by the Chief Commissionerate of Central Excise, Bhopal Zone under the powers vested in him
by the Board by its circular dated 16 January 2003. This Court held:

“22. No doubt transfer is an incident of service in an all-India service and under the
Central Service Rules the controlling authority was competent to transfer the
petitioner to any place in India, where it considered expedient to do so. But apart
from the above, we also have to take into consideration the decision of the Central
Board of Excise and Customs in its communication dated 24-8-1984 by which
pending decision on the demand for bifurcation of Group ‘B’ and ‘C’ cadres relating to
Nagpur and Indore Collectorates the Board took a decision that cadre control of the
said two Collectorates would be distributed between the two Collectors as indicated
in the said communication. As mentioned hereinabove, while the Collector of Central
Excise, Nagpur, was made the Cadre Controlling Authority of Group ‘B’ and ‘C’
ministerial cadres, the Collector of Central Excise, Indore was made the Cadre
Controlling Authority of executive cadres of Group ‘B’ and ‘C’. We are alive to the fact
that the decision taken by the Board was an administrative decision, but in the
absence of any direct rule relating to transfer between two Collectorates under the
Central Board of Excise and Customs, the said administrative instruction would have
to be implemented insofar as inter-Collectorate transfers between the Nagpur and
Indore Collectorates was concerned. In fact, by subsequent Circular dated 16-1-2003
the Board further declared that the Chief Commissioner of Central PART D
Excise/Customs in a Commissionerate would be the Cadre Controlling Authority up
to Group ‘B’-level staff, and its functions would include monitoring the
implementation of the Board's instructions with regard to the transfers and equitable
d i s t r i b u t i o n   o f   m a n p o w e r   a n d   m a t e r i a l   r e s o u r c e s   b e t w e e n   t h e
Commissionerates/zones.”

41 The judgment in Prabir Banerjee (supra) was hence, on completely different facts.

42 For the above reasons, we have arrived at the conclusion that the High Court was justified in
coming to the conclusion that:

(i) RR 2002 contained a specific provision for ICTs;

25

Sk Nausad Rahaman vs Union Of India on 10 March, 2022

(ii) There is an absence of a provision comparable to Rule 4(ii) of RR 2002 in RR
2016;

(iii) On the contrary, Rule 5 of RR 2016 specifically stipulates that each CCA shall
have its own separate cadre unless directed by the CBEC;

(iv) Any ICT would violate the unique identity of each cadre envisaged in Rule 5;

(v) Any ICT order would transgress a field which is occupied by the rules which have
been framed in terms of the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution;

(vi) The circular dated 20 September 2018 makes it absolutely clear that RR 2016 do
not have any provision for recruitment by absorption and no ICT application could be
considered after the coming into force of RR 2016;

(vii) Transfer is a condition of service and it is within the powers of the employer to
take a policy decision either to grant or not to grant ICTs to employees; and PART D

(viii) The power of judicial review cannot be exercised to interfere with a policy
decision of that nature.

43 The realm of policy making while determining the conditions of service of its employees is
entrusted to the Union for persons belonging to the Central Civil Services and to the States for
persons belonging to their civil services. This Court in the exercise of judicial review cannot direct
the executive to frame a particular policy. Yet, the legitimacy of a policy can be assessed on the
touchstone of constitutional parameters. Moreover, short of testing the validity of a policy on
constitutional parameters, judicial review can certainly extend to requiring the State to take into
consideration constitutional values when it frames policies. The State, consistent with the mandate
of Part III of the Constitution, must take into consideration constitutional values while designing its
policy in a manner which enforces and implement those values.

44 There are three areas where the circular dated 20 September 2018 has been challenged on the
grounds of constitutionality. The first is on the ground that the impugned circular bans ICTs with
respect to different classes of posts within the same service, and hence it is discriminatory between
Group A, B and C employees. We are unable to accept this ground as there is no material on record
to indicate that all three groups are pari materia with each other. It may be the case that the
instances of abuse of ICTs is higher with respect to employees in Group B, as opposed to the other
groups. Such decisions are taken keeping in mind the strength of the service and the needs of the
administration. PART D 45 The impugned circular has further been challenged on the aspect of
gender equality and need for equal treatment of disabled persons. We will briefly deal with both
these issues.

46 In a recent judgment of a two-judge Bench of this Court in Lt. Col. Nitisha and Others v. Union of
India 31, of which one of us (Justice DY Chandrachud) is a part, the Court emphasized that

26

Sk Nausad Rahaman vs Union Of India on 10 March, 2022

discrimination both direct and indirect is contrary to the vision of substantive equality under
Articles 14, 15 and 16 of the Constitution. Elaborating on the doctrine of substantive equality and its
engagement with discrimination both in its direct and indirect form, the judgment of the Court takes
due account of ground realities founded on the socio-economic structure of our society. In Nitisha
(supra), this Court held:

“57. Recognizing that certain groups have been subjected to patterns of
discrimination and marginalization, this conception provides that the attainment of
factual equality is possible only if we account for these ground realities. This
conception eschews the uncritical adoption of laws and practices that appear neutral
but in fact help to validate and perpetuate an unjust status quo.

58. Indirect discrimination is closely tied to the substantive conception of equality
outlined above. The doctrine of substantive equality and anti-stereotyping has been a
critical evolution of the Indian constitutional jurisprudence on Article 14 and 15(1).
The spirit of these tenets have been endorsed in a consistent line of authority by this
Court. To illustrate, in Anuj Garg v. Hotel Association of India [(2008) 3 SCC 1], this
Court held that laws premised on sex-based stereotypes are constitutionally
impermissible, in that they are outmoded in content and stifling in means. The Court
further held that no law that ends up perpetuating the oppression of women could
pass scrutiny. Barriers that prevent women from enjoying full and equal citizenship,
it was held, must be dismantled, as 2021 SCCOnline SC 261 PART D opposed to being
cited to validate an unjust status quo. In National Legal Services Authority v. Union
of India [(2014) 5 SCC 438], this Court recognized how the patterns of discrimination
and disadvantage faced by the transgender community and enumerated a series of
remedial measures that can be taken for their empowerment. In Jeeja Ghosh v.
Union of India [(2016) 7 SCC 761 and Vikash Kumar v. Union Public Service
Commission [2021 SCC OnLine SC 84] this Court recognized reasonable
accommodation as a substantive equality facilitator.”

47 The Court emphasized that discrimination is not always a function or product of a conscious
design or intent. Discrimination may result by an unconscious bias or a failure to recognize unequal
impacts which are produced by the underlying societal structure. In paragraph 83 of the judgment
in Nitisha (supra), the Court held:

“83. A study of the above cases and scholarly works gives rise to the following key
learnings. First, the doctrine of indirect discrimination is founded on the compelling
insight that discrimination can often be a function, not of conscious design or
malicious intent, but unconscious/implicit biases or an inability to recognize how
existing structures/institutions, and ways of doing things, have the consequence of
freezing an unjust status quo. In order to achieve substantive equality prescribed
under the Constitution, indirect discrimination, even sans discriminatory intent,
must be prohibited.

27

Sk Nausad Rahaman vs Union Of India on 10 March, 2022

84. Second, and as a related point, the distinction between direct and indirect
discrimination can broadly be drawn on the basis of the former being predicated on
intent, while the latter is based on effect (US, South Africa, Canada). Alternatively, it
can be based on the fact that the former cannot be justified, while the latter can (UK).
We are of the considered view that the intention effects distinction is a sound
jurisprudential basis on which to distinguish direct from indirect discrimination. This
is for the reason that the most compelling feature of indirect discrimination, in our
view, is the fact that it prohibits conduct, which though not intended to be
discriminatory, has that effect. As the Canadian Supreme Court put it in Ontario HRC
(supra) [Ontario Human Rights Commission v.

Simpsons-Sears [1985] 2 SCR 53], requiring proof of intention to establish discrimination puts an
“insuperable PART D barrier in the way of a complainant seeking a remedy.” It is this barrier that a
robust conception of indirect discrimination can enable us to counteract.” 48 This Court has spoken
about the systemic discrimination on account of gender at the workplace which encapsulates the
patriarchal construction that permeates all aspects of a woman’s being from the outset, including
reproduction, sexuality and private choices, within an unjust structure. The OMs which have been
issued by DoPT from time to time recognized that in providing equality and equal opportunity to
women in the workplace of the State, it becomes necessary for the Government to adopt policies
through which it produces substantive equality of opportunity as distinct from a formal equality for
women in the workplace. Women are subject to a patriarchal mindset that regards them as primary
caregivers and homemakers and thus, they are burdened with an unequal share of family
responsibilities. Measures to ensure substantive equality for women factor in not only those
disadvantages which operate to restrict access to the workplace but equally those which continue to
operate once a woman has gained access to the workplace. The impact of gender in producing
unequal outcomes continues to operate beyond the point of access. The true aim of achieving
substantive equality must be fulfilled by the State in recognizing the persistent patterns of
discrimination against women once they are in the work place. The DoPT OMs dated 3 April 1986,
23 August 2004, 8 July 2009 and 30 September 2009 recognised the impact of underlying social
structures which bear upon the lives of women in the work place and produce disparate outcomes
coupled with or even without an intent to PART D discriminate. The provision which has been made
for spousal posting is in that sense fundamentally grounded on the need to adopt special provisions
for women which are recognized by Article 15(3) of the Constitution. The manner in which a special
provision should be adopted by the State is a policy choice which has to be exercised after balancing
out constitutional values and the needs of the administration. But there can be no manner of doubt
that the State, both in its role as a model employer as well as an institution which is subject to
constitutional norms, must bear in mind the fundamental right to substantive equality when it crafts
the policy even for its own employees.

49 The other ground of challenge which has been raised is that the impugned circular does not take
into account the needs of disabled persons in the State’s workforce. The Rights of Persons with
Disabilities Act 2016 is a statutory mandate for recognizing the principle of reasonable
accommodation for the disabled members of society. This obligation has been elaborated upon in
several decisions of this Court including Vikash Kumar v. Union Public Service Commission and

28

Sk Nausad Rahaman vs Union Of India on 10 March, 2022

Others 32, Avni Prakash v. National Testing Agency and Others 33 and Ravinder Kumar Dhariwal
and Another v. Union of India and Others 34. In Vikash Kumar (supra), this Court observed that:

“63. In the specific context of disability, the principle of reasonable accommodation
postulates that the conditions which exclude the disabled from full and effective
participation as equal members of society have to give way to an (2021) 5 SCC 370
2021 SCC OnLine SC 1112 2021 SCC OnLine SC 1293 PART D accommodative society
which accepts difference, respects their needs and facilitates the creation of an
environment in which the societal barriers to disability are progressively answered.
Accommodation implies a positive obligation to create conditions conducive to the
growth and fulfilment of the disabled in every aspect of their existence — whether as
students, members of the workplace, participants in governance or, on a personal
plane, in realising the fulfilling privacies of family life. The accommodation which the
law mandates is “reasonable” because it has to be tailored to the requirements of each
condition of disability. The expectations which every disabled person has are unique
to the nature of the disability and the character of the impediments which are
encountered as its consequence.” The formulation of a policy therefore, must take
into account the mandate which Parliament imposes as an intrinsic element of the
right of the disabled to live with dignity.

50 The State’s interference in the rights of privacy, dignity, and family life of persons must be
proportional. This Court in Akshay N. Patel v. Reserve Bank of India35, held that the framing of
policy must meet an integrated proportionality analysis which answers whether the measure is:

(i)       in furtherance of a legitimate aim;

(ii)      suitable for achieving the aim;

(iii)     necessary for achieving the aim; and

(iv)      adequately balanced with the rights of the individual.

2021 SCC OnLine SC 1180

(cid:12)                                                                                 PART D

51     The State in the present case has been guided by two objectives: first, the

potential for abuse of ICTs and second, the distortion which is caused in service leading to plethora
of litigation. The State while formulating a policy for its own employees has to give due
consideration to the importance of protecting family life as an element of the dignity of the person

29

Sk Nausad Rahaman vs Union Of India on 10 March, 2022

and a postulate of privacy. How a particular policy should be modulated to take into account the
necessities of maintaining family life may be left at the threshold to be determined by the State. In
crafting its policy however the State cannot be heard to say that it will be oblivious to basic
constitutional values, including the preservation of family life which is an incident of Article 21.

52 The circular dated 20 September 2018 has taken into account, what it describes “exceptional
circumstances” such as “extreme compassionate grounds”. Leaving these categories undefined, the
circular allows for individual cases to be determined on their merits on a case by case basis, while
prescribing that transfers on a “loan basis” may be allowed subject to administrative requirements
with a tenure of three years, extendable by a further period of two years. While proscribing ICTs
which envisage absorption into a cadre of a person from a distinct cadre, the circular permits a
transfer for a stipulated period on a loan basis. Whether such a provision should be suitably
enhanced to specifically include cases involving

(i) postings of spouses;

(ii) disabled persons; or PART D

(iii) compassionate transfers, is a matter which should be considered at a policy level by the Board.

53 In considering whether any modification of the policy is necessary, they must bear in mind the
need for a proportional relationship between the objects of the policy and the means which are
adopted to implement it. The policy above all has to fulfill the test of legitimacy, suitability, necessity
and of balancing the values which underlie a decision making process informed by constitutional
values. Hence while we uphold the judgment of the Division Bench of the Kerala High Court, we
leave it open to the respondents to revisit the policy to accommodate posting of spouses, the needs
of the disabled and compassionate grounds. Such an exercise has to be left within the domain of the
executive, ensuring in the process that constitutional values which underlie Articles 14, 15 and 16
and Article 21 of the Constitution are duly protected. The appeals shall be disposed of in the above
terms. 54 Pending application(s), if any, stand disposed of.

. . … … … … . . . … . . . … . . . . . . . … … … … … … . . . . . . . . J .   [ D r   D h a n a n j a y a   Y   C h a n d r a c h u d ]
…..…..…....…........……………….…........J. [Vikram Nath] New Delhi;

March 10, 2022

30