Som Dutt vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 4 April, 2022

Som Dutt vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 4 April, 2022

Author: Bela M. Trivedi

Bench: Bela M. Trivedi, Sanjiv Khanna

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO……. OF 2022
(Arising Out of SLP (Crl) NO. 7831 OF 2021)

SOM DUTT & ORS.                            .......APPELLANTS

VERSUS

THE STATE OF HIMACHAL
PRADESH                                     ......RESPONDENT

JUDGMENT

BELA M. TRIVEDI, J.

1. Special leave is granted.

2. The appellants (original accused) have assailed the order dated 06.08.2021 passed by the High
Court of Himachal Pradesh, Shimla in the Criminal Revision Petition No. 149 of 2012 filed by the
appellants, dismissing the same.

3. Class, Karsog, District Mandi Himachal Pradesh for the offence under Section 379 read with
Section 34 of IPC in the Criminal Case No. 381 of 2009, and were directed to undergo simple
imprisonment for a period of three months and pay fine of Rs. 3000/- in default thereof, to undergo
further simple imprisonment for one month, vide the judgment and order dated 20.01.2012. The
said judgment was affirmed by the Additional District and Sessions Judge, Mandi, camp at Karsog
vide judgment and order dated 08.06.2012 passed in Criminal Appeal No. 11 of 2012. Being
aggrieved by the said order passed by the appeallate Court, the appellants had preferred the
Revision Petition being No. 149 of 2012, which came to be dismissed by the High Court of Himachal

1

Pradesh vide the impugned order dated 06.08.2021

Som Dutt vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 4 April, 2022

4. As per the case of prosecution, on 18.09.2008, a Police party was patrolling at the place Dungru
Nallah, when one red colour Indigo car came from Phegal road without having any number plate.
The car was stopped by the Police party. It was driven by Manoj Kumar alias Manoj Kaushal
(Accused no. 5 now deceased), and Bula Ram (Accused no.4) was sitting in the car. On being asked
they told the Police party that they were going to Sundernagar for remoulding the tyres of the tractor
which was being brought behind the car. A tractor trolly also reached on the spot, which was being
driven by Daleep Kumar (Accused no. 2); and Som Dutt (Accused no. 1) and Ranjan Kumar
(Accused no. 3) were sitting on the tractor. The Accused no. 1 Som Dutt told the Police that the
tractor belonged to him and the documents of the tractor were with Accused no. 4 Bula Ram.
However, on checking the tractor and trolly documents, it was found that the registration numbers
were different. Hence an FIR was registered against all the five accused for the offence under
Section 379 read with Section 34 of IPC. After the investigation was over, the case was tried against
all the accused for the offence under Section 379 read with Section 34 of IPC and were convicted and
sentenced as stated earlier.

5. Though the learned Advocate appearing for the appellants had sought to challenge the impugned
order passed by the High Court maintaining the conviction and the sentence imposed on the
appellants, we were not inclined to interfere with the concurrent findings of facts recorded by the
three courts below holding the appellants guilty of the offence under Section 379 of Section

34. The learned Advocate for the appellants, however had submitted that the courts below should
have considered the case of the appellants for granting them the benefit of releasing them on
probation under Section 361 of the Cr.P.C read with Sections 3 and 4 of the Probation of Offenders
Act, 1958. We therefore considering the said submission had issued the notice to the
respondent-State. Learned Advocate Mr. Satish Kumar for the respondent-State though has filed the
reply, has not much resisted to the submission of the learned Advocate for releasing the appellants
on probation.

6. Section 3 and 4 of the Probation of Offenders Act empower the courts to release the offenders on
probation of good conduct in the cases and circumstances mentioned therein. Similarly, Sections
360 and 361 of the Cr.P.C also empower the courts to release the offenders on probation of good
conduct in the cases and circumstances mentioned therein. Hence, having regard to sentence
imposed by the courts below on the appellants for the offence under Section 379 read with Section
34 of IPC, and having regard to the fact there are no criminal antecedents against the appellants, the
court is inclined to give them the benefit of releasing them on probation of good conduct. In that
view of the matter, while maintaining the conviction and sentence imposed on the appellants, it is
directed that the appellants shall be released on probation of good conduct, on each of the
appellants furnishing a personal bond of Rs. 25,000/- with surety of the like amount, and on further
furnishing an undertaking to keep the peace and good behaviour for a period of three years, to the
satisfaction of the concerned trial court. It is further directed that if the appellants failed to comply
with the said directions or commit breach of the undertaking given by them, they shall be called
upon to undergo the sentence imposed by the trial court.

2

7. Subject to the aforesaid directions, the Appeal stands allowed.

Som Dutt vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 4 April, 2022

…..…………………J.
(SANJIV KHANNA)

NEW DELHI                                                  …..…………………J.
04.04.2022                                                 (BELA M. TRIVEDI)

3