Sri Biswanath Banik vs Sulanga Bose on 14 March, 2022

Sri Biswanath Banik vs Sulanga Bose on 14 March, 2022

Author: M.R. Shah

Bench: B.V. Nagarathna, M.R. Shah

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1848 OF 2022

Sri Biswanath Banik & Anr.                                …Appellant(s)

Versus

Smt. Sulanga Bose & Ors.                                  …Respondent(s)

JUDGMENT

M.R. SHAH, J.

1. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment and order passed by the High
Court of Calcutta in C.O. No. 1417 of 2017 by which the High Court has allowed the said petition and
has quashed and set aside the order passed by the trial court refusing to reject the plaint in exercise
of powers under Order VII Rule 11 of Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC) and consequently has
rejected the plaint under Order VII Rule 11 CPC mainly on the ground that the suit is barred by
limitation and that a suit for a declaration simpliciter under Section 53A of the Transfer of Property
Act would not be maintainable as against the actual owner, the original plaintiffs have preferred the
present appeal.

2. The facts leading to the present appeal in nutshell are as under:-

2.1 That the respondents herein – original plaintiffs had instituted a Title Suit No.
166 of 2010 against the respondents herein (original defendants) in the Court of Civil
Judge, Sr. Division, Sealdah. The plaintiffs in the suit prayed for the following
reliefs:-

“a) For declaration of right, title interest in the suit property and for confirmation of
plaintiff's possession as part performance of contract dated 28.4.1995 as provided
under Section 53A of the T.P. Act.

aa) for enforcement of the agreement dated 28.4.1995 directing the Principal
defendant to execute and register Deed of conveyance in favour of the plaintiffs;

1

Sri Biswanath Banik vs Sulanga Bose on 14 March, 2022

b) For a decree for permanent order of injunction restraining the aforesaid defendant
and his men and agent from causing any interference and/or any obstruction to the
peaceful enjoyment and possession of the suit property and further restraining the
defendant from making any attempt to dispossess the plaintiffs forcefully and
illegally from the suit property;

c) For temporary injunction with ad-interim Rule on similar effect in terms of prayer
(b);

xxxxxxxxxx” 2.2 Having served with the suit notice, the defendants submitted an application before
the trial court requesting to reject the plaint under Order VII Rule 11 CPC mainly on the ground that
the suit is barred by limitation and that the suit for a declaration simpliciter under Section 53A of
the Transfer of Property Act would not be maintainable. That the trial court rejected the said
application and refused to reject the plaint in exercise of powers under Order VII Rule 11 CPC.

2.3 Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the order passed by the trial court refusing to reject the
p l a i n t   u n d e r   O r d e r   V I I   R u l e   1 1   C P C ,   t h e   o r i g i n a l   d e f e n d a n t s   p r e f e r r e d   r e v i s i o n
application/application before the High Court. By the impugned judgment and order, the High
Court has quashed and set aside the order passed by the trial court and consequently has allowed
the application under Order VII Rule 11 CPC and has rejected the plaint on the ground that the suit
is barred by limitation and that the suit for a declaration simpliciter under Section 53A of the
Transfer of Property Act would not be maintainable against the actual owner.

2.4 Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment and order passed by the High
Court allowing the application under Order VII Rule 11 CPC and rejecting the plaint on the ground
that the suit is barred by limitation as well as the suit for a declaration simpliciter under Section 53A
of the Transfer of Property Act would not be maintainable against the original owner, the original
plaintiffs have preferred the present appeal.

3. Shri Ankur Sood, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants has vehemently
submitted that in the facts and circumstances of the case, the High Court has erred in allowing the
application under Order VII Rule 11 CPC and rejecting the plaint on the ground that the suit is
barred by limitation. It is submitted that while holding that the suit would be barred by limitation,
the High Court has not at all considered the entire suit averments and has not considered the
averments in the plaint as a whole.

3.1 It is contended that as per the averments in the plaint, the cause of action had arisen on
10.08.2010 / 24.08.2010 on which date the advertisement was given in the newspapers with an
intent to transfer the property by a third party. It is submitted that as such in the facts and
circumstances of the case, it can be said that the issue with respect to limitation is a mixed question
of law and facts and therefore, the High Court ought not to have rejected the plaint on the ground
that it is barred by limitation.

2

Sri Biswanath Banik vs Sulanga Bose on 14 March, 2022

3.2 It is further submitted that the High Court has not at all properly appreciated the fact that the
plaintiffs claimed the relief in the suit invoking Section 53A of the Transfer of Property Act and also
prayed for the relief of permanent injunction. It is urged that whether the plaintiffs would succeed in
getting the relief/reliefs under Section 53A of the Transfer of Property Act would have to be
considered at the time of trial. It is submitted that however, it cannot be said that a suit for
declaration under Section 53A of the Transfer of Property Act would not be maintainable at all.

3.3 Making above submissions and relying upon the decision of this Court in the case of Ram
Prakash Gupta Vs. Rajiv Kumar Gupta and Ors., (2007) 10 SCC 59, it is vehemently submitted that
in the present case, the High Court has exceeded its jurisdiction to reject the plaint under Order VII
Rule 11 CPC.

4. Shri Suman Kumar Dutt, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the original defendants has
supported the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court.

4.1 It is submitted that in the facts and circumstances of the case, the High Court has not committed
any error in rejecting the plaint on the ground that the suit is barred by limitation. It is contended
that even according to the plaintiffs the cause of action had arisen in the year 2004 as averred in
paragraph 4 of the plaint. It is submitted that therefore when the cause of action had arisen in the
month of April / May, 2004 and when the suit was filed in the year 2010, the same is clearly barred
by law of limitation. It is submitted that when once the suit was barred by limitation, the same is
liable to be rejected under Order VII Rule 11(d) of CPC.

4.2 Relying upon the decision of this Court in the case of Delhi Motor Company Vs. U.A. Basrurkar,
AIR 1968 SC 794 in which this Court relied upon the Privy Council judgment, it is submitted that the
suit for a declaration simpliciter under Section 53A of the Transfer of Property Act would not be
maintainable. It is urged that the High Court has not committed any error in allowing the
application under Order VII Rule 11 CPC and in rejecting the plaint.

5. We have heard the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respective parties at length.

6. At the outset, it is required to be noted that the trial court rejected the application under Order
VII Rule 11 CPC and refused to reject the plaint. However, the High Court by the impugned
judgment and order has set aside the order passed by the trial court and allowed the application
under Order VII Rule 11 CPC and has rejected the plaint on the ground that the suit is barred by
limitation as well as the suit for a declaration simpliciter under Section 53A of the Transfer of
Property Act would not be maintainable.

7. Now, so far as the issue whether the suit can be said to be barred by limitation or not, at this stage,
what is required to be considered is the averments in the plaint. Only in a case where on the face of
it, it is seen that the suit is barred by limitation, then and then only a plaint can be rejected under
Order VII Rule 11(d) CPC on the ground of limitation. At this stage what is required to be considered
is the averments in the plaint. For the aforesaid purpose, the Court has to consider and read the
averments in the plaint as a whole. As observed and held by this Court in the case of Ram Prakash

3

Sri Biswanath Banik vs Sulanga Bose on 14 March, 2022

Gupta (supra), rejection of a plaint under Order VII Rule 11(d) CPC by reading only few lines and
passages and ignoring the other relevant parts of the plaint is impermissible. In the said decision, in
paragraph 21, it is observed and held as under:-

“21. As observed earlier, before passing an order in an application filed for rejection
of the plaint under Order 7 Rule 11(d), it is but proper to verify the entire plaint
averments. The abovementioned materials clearly show that the decree passed in Suit
No. 183 of 1974 came to the knowledge of the plaintiff in the year 1986, when Suit No.
424 of 1989 titled Assema Architect v. Ram Prakash was filed in which a copy of the
earlier decree was placed on record and thereafter he took steps at the earliest and
filed the suit for declaration and in the alternative for possession. It is not in dispute
that as per Article 59 of the Limitation Act, 1963, a suit ought to have been filed
within a period of three years from the date of the knowledge. The knowledge
mentioned in the plaint cannot be termed as inadequate and incomplete as observed
by the High Court. While deciding the application under Order 7 Rule 11, few lines or
passage should not be read in isolation and the pleadings have to be read as a whole
to ascertain its true import. We are of the view that both the trial court as well as the
High Court failed to advert to the relevant averments as stated in the plaint.” 7.1
From the aforesaid decision and even otherwise as held by this Court in a catena of
decisions, while considering an application under Order VII Rule 11 CPC, the Court
has to go through the entire plaint averments and cannot reject the plaint by reading
only few lines/passages and ignoring the other relevant parts of the plaint.

7.2 Applying the law laid down by this Court in the case of Ram Prakash Gupta
(supra) to the facts of the case on hand and on going through the entire plaint
averments, it cannot be said at this stage that the suit is barred by limitation on the
face of it. The necessary averments in the plaint on the cause of action are in
paragraphs 6, 7 and 10, which read as under:-

“6. That the aforesaid defendant now consequent upon the escalation of the land
value of the area has been more aggrieve to drive out the plaintiffs from the suit
property by hook and crook and various insertion in the newspapers dated 10.8.2010,
24.8.2010 at the Ananda Bazar Patrika and on 22.8.2010 at The Telegraph, coming
up from the different parts with intent to purchase and get transfer of the property by
the third party.

7. That the aforesaid defendant and his men and agent concretely on 29.8.2010 tried
to forcefully enter into the suit property and manhandle the "Durwan" but owing to
the resistance the defendant did not succeed in their attempt to dispossess, but
defendant with his associate is determined to dispossess the plaintiffs from his lawful
possession by any means even by using force and violence. That the proforma
defendants have made parties in the suit without any claim against them but for
proper adjudication of the said matter.

4

Sri Biswanath Banik vs Sulanga Bose on 14 March, 2022

10. That the cause of action for this suit arose on 29.08.2010 at Premises No. 3/3A,
formerly 3, Gurudas Dutta Garden Lane, P.S. Ultadanga, Kolkata- 700067, which is
within the jurisdiction of this Ld. Court.” 7.3 In the present case, while holding that
the suit is barred by limitation, the High Court has considered only the averments
made in paragraph 4 and has not considered the entire plaint averments.

7.4 While rejecting the plaint, the High Court has also observed and held that the suit
for a declaration simpliciter under Section 53A of the Transfer of Property Act against
the original owner would not be maintainable and for that reliance is placed upon the
decision of this Court in the case of Delhi Motor Company (supra). However, it is
required to be noted that even the plaintiffs have also prayed for the decree for a
permanent injunction claiming to be in possession and the declaration and
permanent injunction as such invoking Section 53A of the Transfer of Property Act.
When the suit is for a decree of permanent injunction and it is averred that the
plaintiffs are in possession of the suit property pursuant to the agreement and
thereafter, they have developed the land and that they are in continuous possession
since more than twelve years and they are also paying taxes to the Corporation, the
cause of action can be said to have arisen on the date on which the possession is
sought to be disturbed. If that be so, the suit for decree for permanent injunction
cannot be said to be barred by limitation. It is the settled proposition of law that the
plaint cannot be rejected partially.

Even otherwise, the reliefs sought are interconnected. Whether the plaintiffs shall be entitled to any
relief under Section 53A of the Transfer of Property Act or not has to be considered at the time of
trial, but at this stage it cannot be said that the suit for the relief sought under Section 53A would
not be maintainable at all and therefore the plaint is liable to be rejected in exercise of powers under
Order VII Rule 11 CPC.

8. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the High Court has committed a grave error
in allowing the application under Order VII Rule 11 CPC and rejecting the plaint. The High Court
has exceeded in its jurisdiction in rejecting the plaint while exercising the powers under Order VII
Rule 11 CPC. The impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court is unsustainable both, on
law as well as on facts.

9. For the reasons stated hereinabove, the present appeal succeeds. The impugned judgment and
order passed by the High Court allowing the C.O. and quashing and setting aside the order passed
by the trial court refusing to reject the plaint under Order VII Rule 11 CPC and consequently
rejecting the plaint under Order VII Rule 11 CPC is hereby quashed and set aside. The application
submitted by the original defendants to reject the plaint under Order VII Rule 11 CPC stands
dismissed. The order passed by the trial court stands restored. Now, the trial to proceed further in
accordance with law and on its own merits. However, it is observed that whatever observations are
made by this Court in the present order shall be confined to deciding the application under Order
VII Rule 11 CPC only and the trial court to finally decide and dispose of the suit in accordance with
law and on its own merits and on the basis of the evidence led.

5

Sri Biswanath Banik vs Sulanga Bose on 14 March, 2022

Present appeal is allowed accordingly. However, in the facts and circumstances of the case, there
shall be no order as to costs.

………………………………….J.
[M.R. SHAH]

NEW DELHI;                              ………………………………….J.
MARCH 14, 2022.                            [B.V. NAGARATHNA]

6