Sunil Kumar Maity vs State Bank Of India on 21 January, 2022

Sunil Kumar Maity vs State Bank Of India on 21 January, 2022

Author: Bela M. Trivedi

Bench: Bela M. Trivedi, Sanjiv Khanna

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL 432 OF 2022
(Arising out of SLP (CIVIL) No. 21711 of 2019)

SUNIL KUMAR MAITY                                      .... APPELLANT

VERSUS

STATE BANK OF INDIA AND ANR.                           .... RESPONDENT

JUDGMENT

BELA M. TRIVEDI, J.

1. Leave granted.

2. The National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission (hereinafter referred to as “the National
Commission”) on 07th June 2019 had passed the following order in the Revision Petition No. 483 of
2018 filed by the respondent-SBI.

“The revision petition is allowed. The complaint is dismissed, with liberty to the complainant to
approach a competent civil court as per the law.

It goes without saying that, if the complainant chooses to bring action in a civil court, he is free to
file an application under section 5 of the Limitation Act, 1963, and, in such contingency, the
chronological facts and proceedings in the consumer protection fora would be material and relevant
towards making such application.

Learned counsel for the revisionist State Bank of India submits that it will not press the issue of
limitation if action is brought by the complainant in a civil court. Reasoned judgment to follow.”

1

Sunil Kumar Maity vs State Bank Of India on 21 January, 2022

3. The National Commission passed impugned judgement on 14th June, 2019, allowing the said
Revision Petition. Being aggrieved by the said judgement and order, the appellant (original
complainant) has filed the present appeal.

4. The short facts giving rise to the present appeal are that the appellant-

complainant had filed the consumer case being no. 08 of 2014 before the Consumer Disputes
Redressal Forum, Purba Medinipur (hereinafter referred to as “the Consumer Forum”) alleging
inter-alia that the appellant i.e., Sunil Kr. Maity had a saving account number 01190010167 with the
respondent-bank since January, 2000. On 24.02.2010, the said account number was changed to
number 10140478732. On 15.09.2012, the appellant went to deposit a sum of Rs. 500/- in the said
account, when a staff of respondent-bank informed him that the account number had again been
changed and wrote account number being 32432609504 on his passbook. The said amount was
deposited in the said account number. Thereafter, on 16.01.2013, appellant deposited a cheque
being no. 670013 for Rs. 3,00,000/- drawn on SBI of the said Branch issued by one Prabir Pradhan
having an SBI account number 030608507950. When the appellant went to update his passbook on
11.12.2013, he noticed that his passbook showed the balance of Rs. 59/- only, though he had not
made any transaction between 16.01.2013 to 11.12.2013. On the enquiry having been made, the
respondent-bank informed the appellant that there was another customer by the name Sunil Maity
(the respondent no. 2 herein) whose account number was 32432609504 and the said account
number was wrongly given to the appellant whose name was Sunil Kr Maity on 15.09.2012. The said
Sunil Maity (respondent no. 2) on 25.01.2013 and 28.01.2013 had withdrawn the sum of Rs.
1 , 0 0 , 0 0 0 / -   a n d   R s .   2 , 0 0 , 0 0 0 / -   r e s p e c t i v e l y   f r o m   t h e   s a i d   a c c o u n t   n u m b e r .   T h e
appellant-complainant therefore wrote letters to the respondent-bank but in vain. He thereafter
filed the complaint before the Consumer Forum against the respondent-SBI and the said Sunil
Maity.

5. Both the respondents had entered their appearance and filed their respective replies to the
complaint filed by the appellant-complainant. The Consumer Forum after appreciating all the
documents filed by the appellant as well as by the respondents in the light of their pleadings,
allowed the complaint vide the order dated 14.05.2014.

6. Being aggrieved by the said order, the respondent-bank had preferred the First Appeal being No.
784 of 2014 before the State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, West Bengal (hereinafter
referred to as State Commission), which by the order dated 25 October, 2017 partly allowed the
appeal. The State Commission while confirming the rest of the order passed by the Consumer
Forum, modified it to the extent that the order for fine @ Rs. 100/- per diem was struck off. The
State Commission after a closer scrutiny of the documents on record, observed in the said order as
under:

“On closer scrutiny of the documents on record, following facts emerge.

First, we find that there was complete parity in the signature being put on the deposit
slip pertaining to the disputed cheque for an amount of Rs. 3,00,000/- vis-à-

2

Sunil Kumar Maity vs State Bank Of India on 21 January, 2022

contained in the official record of the bank.

Secondly, documents on record show that the Respondent No. 1 signs in English;
whereas, ‘Sunil Maity’, account-holder of saving account no. 32432609504 signs in
Bengali. Significant here to note that while depositing the cheque for Rs. 3,00,000/-,
the depositor signed in English and the name of the depositor was mentioned as
‘Sunil Kr. Maity’.

Thirdly, it seems that the Respondent No. 1 voluntarily disclosed the source
wherefrom did he get the said cheque. On the other hand, the Respondent No. 2,
stated to be a salaried person, has not uttered any word in this regard. Since, Rs.
3.00.000/- is quite a considerable sum, reluctance of the Respondent No. 2 to
disclose the source wherefrom did he receive the said cheque, if at all received, does
raise eyebrows.

Fourthly, it is only natural that one would write his name properly while filling up the
deposit slip. There is no reason to believe that ‘Sunil Maity’ (Respondent No.

1) would write his name in the deposit slip as ‘Sunil Kumar Maity’.

Fifthly, since banks quite meticulously check the name, account no., amount, date etc. before/while
crediting proceeds of cheques/demand drafts etc., it was but natural that while the disputed cheque
was issued in the name of ‘Sunil Kr. Maity’, the Respondent No. 2 would impress upon the issuer of
the said cheque to correctly write his name as ‘Sunil Maity’ by issuing another cheque. The amount
being quite substantial, the Respondent No. 2 could hardly afford such leaving anything to chances.

Sixthly, there is nothing to show that Respondent No. 2 can write his name in English. Therefore,
questions survives, how he signed the deposit slip while depositing the cheque in English.

Seventhly, it appears from the WV submitted by the appellant that when the Respondent No. 1
lodged complaint with it, the Appellant, on several occasions, asked the Respondent No. 2 to meet
its Branch Manager. However, on one pretext or the other, the Respondent No. 2 avoided meeting
him. An honest person never fight shy of proving his bona fide.

Lastly, the Respondent No. 2 has not placed on record any counter part of deposit slip to show that
the said amount were indeed deposited by him.

All these emerging facts induce us to hold that the disputed cheque indeed belonged to the
Respondent No.

1. ………….

Given that it is virtually impossible for one to know the account number of another person, and
more so, as passbook is stated to be updated by Group ‘D’ staff of the bank, it would be myopic not

3

Sunil Kumar Maity vs State Bank Of India on 21 January, 2022

to believe that the goof up created at the end of the Appellant itself. Besides this, since the Appellant
made a great blunder while crediting the amount of the cheque to the account of Respondent No. 2,
we feel, the Appellant must own up due responsibility in this regard.”

7. The respondent-bank being aggrieved by the said order had preferred the Revision Petition before
the National Commission under Section 21 (b) of the Consumer Protection Act (hereinafter referred
to as “the said Act”). The National Commission allowed the said revision application vide the
impugned order as stated hereinabove.

8. It is pertinent to note that pending the revision application, the National Commission had called
for a report on the whole matter from the SBI. Accordingly, a report dated 19th March, 2019 was
filed by the Regional Manager of the SBI. Relying upon the said report, the National Commission
allowed the revision application filed by the bank, by observing inter-alia that though revisional
jurisdiction of the Commission under section 21(b) of the Act, 1986 has a defined purview and
ambit, it does allow interference if grave misappreciation of evidence or superficial appraisal of a
case is discernible on the part of the two fora below. This court is at a loss to understand as to how
the National Commission could have sought for a report at the revisional stage, that too from an
officer of the party which already had an opportunity to submit all the documents necessary for the
purpose of defending itself before the Consumer Forum, and as to how such a report in the form of
an additional evidence produced at the revisional stage could be relied upon, in respect of which the
two fora below had no opportunity to deal with.

9. It is needless to say that the revisional jurisdiction of the National Commission under Section
21(b) of the said Act is extremely limited. It should be exercised only in case as contemplated within
the parameters specified in the said provision, namely when it appears to the National Commission
that the State Commission had exercised a jurisdiction not vested in it by law, or had failed to
exercise jurisdiction so vested, or had acted in the exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with
material irregularity. In the instant case, the National Commission itself had exceeded its revisional
jurisdiction by calling for the report from the respondent-bank and solely relying upon such report,
had come to the conclusion that the two fora below had erred in not undertaking the requisite
in-depth appraisal of the case that was required. In the opinion of the Court, both the State
Commission as well as the Consumer Forum had elaborately appreciated the documents on record
and passed the reasoned orders. The report that tries to absolve the respondent-bank of its liability
is based on surmises and conjectures as it abstrusely and without evidence holds that the bank has
every reason to believe that wrong account number was intentionally inserted by the appellant
himself for reasons best known to the appellant or on account of negligence by the appellant by not
keeping the passbook in his safe and proper custody. The suppositions are contradictory as well as
incredulous and fanciful. The appellant did not know the second respondent and would not have
known his account number unless given to him by a bank officer. There was no way that the
appellant would have known that the second respondent, namely Sunil Maity had an account in the
same branch. No sane person would deposit cash or cheque meant to be deposited in his account in
an account number belonging to another person with similar name. On the other hand, the bank
should have been extra cautious given the fact that accounts of the appellant, Sunil Kumar Maity,
and the second respondent, Sunil Maity, were with the same bank branch. What is rather surprising

4

Sunil Kumar Maity vs State Bank Of India on 21 January, 2022

is that the National Commission for setting aside the findings and conclusion recorded by the
District and State Forum, simply reproduced the report by one of the officers of the party in
litigation with the appellant. The National Commission has not adverted and delved into the sound
reasoning given by the State Commission as quoted above.

10. Though a party can produce additional evidence at the appellate stage, the same has to be within
the four corners of law, that is as contemplated in order-41, R.27. The party has to establish that
notwithstanding the exercise of due diligence, such evidence was not within its knowledge or could
not even after due diligence, be produced by it at the time when the decree appealed against was
passed. Apart from the fact that there is a vast difference between the exercise of appellate
jurisdiction and the revisional jurisdiction, no such application was filed by the respondent-bank
before the National Commission. Under the circumstances, calling for the report by the National
Commission on its own from the officer of the bank was absolutely unwarranted.

11. Further, it is also well settled legal position1 that requirement of leading detailed evidence could
not be a ground to shut the doors of any forum created under the Act like the Consumer Protection
Act. The anvil on which entertainability of a complaint by a forum under the Act is to be determined,
is whether the 1 CCI Chambers Coop. Hsg. Society Ltd. vs. Development Credit Bank Ltd. (2003) 7
SCC 233 questions, though complicated they may be, are capable of being determined by summary
enquiry.

12. The National Commission therefore has grossly erred in observing in the impugned order that
the appellant-complainant would be at liberty to seek remedy in the competent Civil Court and that
if he chooses to bring an action in a Civil Court, he is free to file an application under Section 5 of the
Limitation Act, 1963, recording the statement of Ld. Counsel for the SBI that it will not press the
issue of limitation if action is brought by the complainant in a Civil Court. Such an
observation/order passed by the National Commission is in utter ignorance of the provisions of the
Limitation Act, in as much as Section 5 of the Limitation Act does not apply to the institution of civil
suit in the Civil Court. Be that as it may, the impugned order passed by the National Commission
solely relying upon the suo-moto report called for from the respondent-bank during the pendency of
the revision application, being highly erroneous, deserves to be set aside and is accordingly set
aside. The order passed by the State Commission is restored. The appeal stands allowed accordingly.

.................................J.
[SANJIV KHANNA]

NEW DELHI                                                 ..............................J.
21.01.2022                                              [BELA M. TRIVEDI]

5

Sunil Kumar Maity vs State Bank Of India on 21 January, 2022

6