The State Of Maharashtra vs Greatship (India) Ltd. on 20 September, 2022

The State Of Maharashtra vs Greatship (India) Ltd. on 20
September, 2022

Author: M.R. Shah

Bench: B.V. Nagarathna, M.R. Shah

REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4956 OF 2022

The State of Maharashtra and Others                      …Appellants

Versus

Greatship (India) Limited                                …Respondent

JUDGMENT

M.R. SHAH, J.

1. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment and order dated 30.04.2021
passed by the High Court of Judicature at Bombay in Writ Petition (Stamp) No. 92630 of 2020, by
which the High Court has, in exercise of powers under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, set
aside the assessment order passed by the assessing authority and also the belated notice of demand,
the State of Maharashtra and others have preferred the present appeal.

2. That the respondent – original writ petitioner was subjected to proceedings under the
Maharashtra Value Added Tax, 2002 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘MVAT Act’) and Central Sales
Tax Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘CST Act’). The Assessing Officer issued notice of
assessment dated 01.02.2018 calling upon the assessee to produce relevant documents and also to
show cause as to why it should not be assessed under the relevant provisions of Section 23 of the
MVAT Act.

2.1 According to the writ petitioner, the writ petitioner submitted the required documents and also
showed cause vide letter dated 03.05.2018. That a personal hearing was fixed on 16.03.2020.
However, on 16.03.2020 the Assessing Officer was not available and therefore no hearing took

1

The State Of Maharashtra vs Greatship (India) Ltd. on 20 September, 2022

place. According to the writ petitioner, multiple telephone calls were made to the Assessing Officer
on 17.03.2020, 18.03.2020 and 19.03.2020 for personal hearing, but no such hearing materialised.
According to the writ petitioner, vide letter dated 20.03.2020 it was submitted before the Assessing
Officer that for the financial year under consideration the relevant documents had already been
submitted and personal hearing was requested. The Assessing Officer passed an order on
20.03.2020 determining the tax liability along with interest and penalty under the MVAT Act and
CST Act. 2.2 That without preferring any appeal before the first appellate authority, the respondent
– assessee – original writ petitioner filed a writ petition before the High Court challenging the
assessment order passed under the provisions of the MVAT Act and CST Act alleging inter alia that
no order was passed on 20.03.2020 and it was passed in the month of July, 2020, which was
beyond the period of limitation. The High Court has entertained the said writ petition against the
assessment order under Article 226 of the Constitution of India and has passed the impugned
judgment and order quashing and setting aside the assessment order and the demand notice.

2.3 Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment and order passed by the High
Court, the State of Maharashtra and others have preferred the present appeal.

3. Number of submissions have been made by the counsel appearing for the respective parties on
merits and on the assessment order passed by the Assessing Officer. However, for the reasons given
hereinbelow, we are of the opinion that against the assessment order, the High Court ought not to
have entertained the writ petition and ought to have relegated the assessee to prefer a first appeal
before the first appellate authority. Therefore, we are not elaborating the submissions on merits.

4. Shri Sachin Patil, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants has vehemently
submitted that against the assessment order passed by the Assessing Officer under the provisions of
the MVAT Act and CST Act, the High Court ought not to have entertained the writ petition under
Article 226 of the Constitution of India. 4.1 It is next submitted by the learned counsel appearing on
behalf of the appellants that the assessee had a statutory alternative remedy available by way of
appeal before the first appellate authority and the said remedy ought to have been pursued, more so
because, there were very serious disputed facts as to whether the assessment order was passed on
20.03.2020 or on 14.07.2020 (as alleged by the assessee). 4.2 Making the above submissions and
relying upon the decisions of this Court in the case of Titaghur Paper Mills Co. Ltd. v. State of Orissa
(1983) 2 SCC 433; Punjab National Bank v. O.C. Krishnan (2001) 6 SCC 569; Raj Kumar Shivhare v.
Directorate of Enforcement (2010) 4 SCC 772; and United Bank of India v. Satyawati Tondon and
others (2010) 8 SCC 110, it is prayed to allow the present appeal.

5. Shri Rafique Dada, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the respondent has submitted
that considering the material on record, the High Court has observed that the assessment order was
not passed on 20.03.2020 and must have been passed subsequently, i.e., beyond 31.03.2020 and
therefore as the assessment order was passed beyond the period of limitation prescribed under the
Act, the High Court was justified in entertaining the writ petition and quashing and setting aside the
assessment order.

2

The State Of Maharashtra vs Greatship (India) Ltd. on 20 September, 2022

5.1 Shri Rafique Dada, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the respondent – assessee
has relied upon the following decisions of this Court in support of his submission that the High
Court has rightly entertained the writ petition against the order of assessment,

1. M/s Filterco & Another v. Commissioner of Sales Tax, Madhya Pradesh and Another, (1986) 2
SCC 103;

2. Assistant Commissioner (CT) LTU & Another v. Amara Raja Batteries Limited, (2009) 8 SCC 209;
and

3. Whirlpool Corporation v. Registrar of Trademarks, Mumbai, (1998) 8 SCC 1 5.2 Learned Senior
Advocate appearing on behalf of the original writ petitioner has further submitted that in the
present case for an earlier assessment order, there was a decision against the assessee by the first
appellate authority on merits and therefore it may be a formality to prefer an appeal before the first
appellate authority and hence the original writ petitioner rightly filed the writ petition before the
High Court.

6. We have heard the learned counsel for the respective parties at length.

At the outset, it is required to be noted that against the assessment order passed by the Assessing
Officer under the provisions of the MVAT Act and CST Act, the assessee straightway preferred writ
petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. It is not in dispute that the statutes provide
for the right of appeal against the assessment order passed by the Assessing Officer and against the
order passed by the first appellate authority, an appeal/revision before the Tribunal. In that view of
the matter, the High Court ought not to have entertained the writ petition under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India challenging the assessment order in view of the availability of statutory remedy
under the Act. At this stage, the decision of this Court in the case of Satyawati Tondon (supra) in
which this Court had an occasion to consider the entertainability of a writ petition under Article 226
of the Constitution of India by by-passing the statutory remedies, is required to be referred to. After
considering the earlier decisions of this Court, in paragraphs 49 to 52, it was observed and held as
under:

“49. The views expressed in Titaghur Paper Mills Co. Ltd. vs. State of Orissa (1983) 2
SCC 433 were echoed in CCE v. Dunlop India Ltd. (1985) 1 SCC 260 in the following
words: (SCC p. 264, para 3) “3. … Article 226 is not meant to short-circuit or
circumvent statutory procedures. It is only where statutory remedies are entirely
ill-suited to meet the demands of extraordinary situations, as for instance where the
very vires of the statute is in question or where private or public wrongs are so
inextricably mixed up and the prevention of public injury and the vindication of
public justice require it that recourse may be had to Article 226 of the Constitution.
But then the Court must have good and sufficient reason to bypass the alternative
remedy provided by statute.

3

The State Of Maharashtra vs Greatship (India) Ltd. on 20 September, 2022

Surely matters involving the revenue where statutory remedies are available are not such matters.
We can also take judicial notice of the fact that the vast majority of the petitions under Article 226 of
the Constitution are filed solely for the purpose of obtaining interim orders and thereafter prolong
the proceedings by one device or the other. The practice certainly needs to be strongly discouraged.”

50. In Punjab National Bank v. O.C. Krishnan (2001) 6 SCC 569 this Court considered the question
whether a petition under Article 227 of the Constitution was maintainable against an order passed
by the Tribunal under Section 19 of the DRT Act and observed: (SCC p. 570, paras 5-6) “5. In our
opinion, the order which was passed by the Tribunal directing sale of mortgaged property was
appealable under Section 20 of the Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act,
1993 (for short ‘the Act’). The High Court ought not to have exercised its jurisdiction under Article
227 in view of the provision for alternative remedy contained in the Act. We do not propose to go
into the correctness of the decision of the High Court and whether the order passed by the Tribunal
was correct or not has to be decided before an appropriate forum.

6. The Act has been enacted with a view to provide a special procedure for recovery of debts due to
the banks and the financial institutions. There is a hierarchy of appeal provided in the Act, namely,
filing of an appeal under Section 20 and this fast-track procedure cannot be allowed to be derailed
either by taking recourse to proceedings under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution or by filing a
civil suit, which is expressly barred. Even though a provision under an Act cannot expressly oust the
jurisdiction of the Court under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution, nevertheless, when there is
an alternative remedy available, judicial prudence demands that the Court refrains from exercising
its jurisdiction under the said constitutional provisions. This was a case where the High Court
should not have entertained the petition under Article 227 of the Constitution and should have
directed the respondent to take recourse to the appeal mechanism provided by the Act.”

51. In CCT v. Indian Explosives Ltd. [(2008) 3 SCC 688] the Court reversed an order passed by the
Division Bench of the Orissa High Court quashing the show-cause notice issued to the respondent
under the Orissa Sales Tax Act by observing that the High Court had completely ignored the
parameters laid down by this Court in a large number of cases relating to exhaustion of alternative
remedy.

52. In City and Industrial Development Corpn. v. Dosu Aardeshir Bhiwandiwala [(2009) 1 SCC 168]
the Court highlighted the parameters which are required to be kept in view by the High Court while
exercising jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution. Paras 29 and 30 of that judgment
which contain the views of this Court read as under: (SCC pp. 175-76) “29. In our opinion, the High
Court while exercising its extraordinary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution is
duty-bound to take all the relevant facts and circumstances into consideration and decide for itself
even in the absence of proper affidavits from the State and its instrumentalities as to whether any
case at all is made out requiring its interference on the basis of the material made available on
record. There is nothing like issuing an ex parte writ of mandamus, order or direction in a public law
remedy. Further, while considering the validity of impugned action or inaction the Court will not
consider itself restricted to the pleadings of the State but would be free to satisfy itself whether any
case as such is made out by a person invoking its extraordinary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the

4

Constitution.

The State Of Maharashtra vs Greatship (India) Ltd. on 20 September, 2022

30. The Court while exercising its jurisdiction under Article 226 is duty- bound to consider whether:

(a) adjudication of writ petition involves any complex and disputed questions of facts
and whether they can be satisfactorily resolved;

(b) the petition reveals all material facts;

(c) the petitioner has any alternative or effective remedy for the resolution of the
dispute;

(d) person invoking the jurisdiction is guilty of unexplained delay and laches;

(e) ex facie barred by any laws of limitation;

(f) grant of relief is against public policy or barred by any valid law; and host of other
factors.

The Court in appropriate cases in its discretion may direct the State or its instrumentalities as the
case may be to file proper affidavits placing all the relevant facts truly and accurately for the
consideration of the Court and particularly in cases where public revenue and public interest are
involved. Such directions are always required to be complied with by the State. No relief could be
granted in a public law remedy as a matter of course only on the ground that the State did not file its
counter-affidavit opposing the writ petition. Further, empty and self-defeating affidavits or
statements of Government spokesmen by themselves do not form basis to grant any relief to a
person in a public law remedy to which he is not otherwise entitled to in law.”

53. In Raj Kumar Shivhare v. Directorate of Enforcement [(2010) 4 SCC 772] the Court was dealing
with the issue whether the alternative statutory remedy available under the Foreign Exchange
Management Act, 1999 can be bypassed and jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution could
be invoked. After examining the scheme of the Act, the Court observed: (SCC p. 781, paras 31-32)
“31. When a statutory forum is created by law for redressal of grievance and that too in a fiscal
statute, a writ petition should not be entertained ignoring the statutory dispensation. In this case the
High Court is a statutory forum of appeal on a question of law. That should not be abdicated and
given a go-by by a litigant for invoking the forum of judicial review of the High Court under writ
jurisdiction. The High Court, with great respect, fell into a manifest error by not appreciating this
aspect of the matter. It has however dismissed the writ petition on the ground of lack of territorial
jurisdiction.

32. No reason could be assigned by the appellant's counsel to demonstrate why the appellate
jurisdiction of the High Court under Section 35 of FEMA does not provide an efficacious remedy. In
fact there could hardly be any reason since the High Court itself is the appellate forum.”

5

The State Of Maharashtra vs Greatship (India) Ltd. on 20 September, 2022

7. Applying the law laid down by this Court in the aforesaid decision, the High Court has seriously
erred in entertaining the writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India against the
assessment order, by- passing the statutory remedies.

8. Now so far as the reliance placed upon the decisions of this Court by the learned Senior Advocate
appearing on behalf of the respondent, referred to hereinabove, are concerned, the question is not
about the maintainability of the writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution, but the question
is about the entertainability of the writ petition against the order of assessment by-passing the
statutory remedy of appeal. There are serious disputes on facts as to whether the assessment order
was passed on 20.03.2020 or 14.07.2020 (as alleged by the assessee). No valid reasons have been
shown by the assessee to by-pass the statutory remedy of appeal. This Court has consistently taken
the view that when there is an alternate remedy available, judicial prudence demands that the court
refrains from exercising its jurisdiction under constitutional provisions.

9. In view of the above and in the facts and circumstances of the case, the High Court has seriously
erred in entertaining the writ petition against the assessment order. The High Court ought to have
relegated the writ petitioner – assessee to avail the statutory remedy of appeal and thereafter to
avail other remedies provided under the statute.

10. Under the circumstances, the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court is hereby
quashed and set aside. The writ petition filed before the High Court challenging the assessment
order and consequential notice of demand of tax is hereby dismissed. The respondent – assessee is
relegated to avail the statutory remedy of appeal and other remedies available under the MVAT Act
and CST Act. It is directed that if such a remedy is availed within a period of four weeks from today,
the appellate authority shall decide and dispose of the same on its own merits in accordance with
law without raising any question of limitation, however, subject to fulfilling the other conditions, if
any, under the statute. It is made clear that we have not expressed any opinion on the merits of the
case in favour of either of the parties and it is for the appellate authority and/or appropriate
authority to consider the appeal/proceedings on its/their own merits and without being influenced
in any way by any of the observations made by the High Court which otherwise have been set aside
by the present order. The present appeal is allowed in the aforesaid terms. However, in the facts and
circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.

…………………………………..J.
[M.R. SHAH]

NEW DELHI;                           …………………………………..J.
SEPTEMBER 20, 2022.                  [B.V. NAGARATHNA]

6

The State Of Maharashtra vs Greatship (India) Ltd. on 20 September, 2022

7