The State Of Punjab vs Anshika Goyal on 25 January, 2022

The State Of Punjab vs Anshika Goyal on 25 January, 2022

Author: M.R. Shah

Bench: B.V. Nagarathna, M.R. Shah

REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 317 OF 2022

The State of Punjab                                      …Appellant
Versus

Anshika Goyal and others                                 …Respondents

WITH
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 318 OF 2022
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 319-320 OF 2022

JUDGMENT

M.R. SHAH, J.

1. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned common judgment and order dated
26.07.2019 and 08.08.2019 passed by the High Court of Punjab & Haryana at Chandigarh in CWP
No.17248/2019 and CWP No. 18989 of 2019, by which the High Court has allowed the said writ
petitions and has directed the State to issue a fresh notification providing for 1% reservation/quota
for children/grand children of terrorist affected persons/Sikh riots affected persons in all private
unaided non- minority Medical/Dental institutions in the State of Punjab and further directed that
the said reservation/quota shall apply to management quota seats as well and further directed that
the fresh notification shall also provide for a sports quota of 3% in Government Medical/Dental
Colleges, the State of Punjab has preferred the present appeals.

2. The facts leading to the present appeals in a nutshell are as under:

The State of Punjab enacted the Punjab Private Health Sciences Educational
Institutions (Regulation of Admission, Fixation of fee and making of Reservation)
Act, 2006 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘2006 Act’) for the regulation of admission,
fixation of fee and making of reservation in Private Health Sciences Educational
Institutions in the State of Punjab. Section 6 of the 2006 Act provides for reservation

1

The State Of Punjab vs Anshika Goyal on 25 January, 2022

of seats and as per the said Section, all private health sciences educational
institutions shall reserve seats for admission in open merit category and management
category, for advancement of socially and educationally backward classes of citizens
or for the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes to such extent, as may be notified by
the State Government in the official gazette from time to time.

2.1 The State of Punjab framed its Sports Policy in the year 2018 which provided that
3% reservation in admissions will be provided for graded sports persons. Clause 10 of
the said policy also provided that the said Sports Policy shall prevail on all the
Departments and Organizations of Government of Punjab, however, if any other
department wishes to have specific policy, it will be finalised in consultation with the
Department of Sports. It appears that by order dated 25.07.2019, a conscious
decision was taken by the Government of Punjab to provide 1% reservation for sports
persons. The said order was passed taking into consideration Clause 10 of the Sporty
Policy, 2018.

2.2 For the academic year 2018-19, the State Government issued notification dated
6.2.2018 for admission in Medical/Dental Colleges.

Clause 16 of the said notification provided for reservation in Government Medical/Dental Colleges
and Clause 17 provided for admission to private institutes. However, it appears that though 1% seats
were reserved for sports persons and the children/grand children of terrorist affected persons so far
as the State quota seats in Government Institutions are concerned, similar reservation was not
provided for admission to private institutes even with respect to government quota seats in the
private institutes.

2.3 A bunch of writ petitions were filed before the High Court for quashing Clause 17 of notification
dated 6.2.2018 to the extent of not providing the reservation for sports persons and children/grand
children of terrorist affected persons in the private institutes which as such were provided for the
State quota seats in government institutions. 2.4 By judgment and order dated 23.08.2018, the High
Court allowed the said writ petitions partially and declared that reservation that is applicable to
Government institutes shall extend to the private institutes as well. The judgment and order passed
by the High Court in the case of Bani Suri and others was challenged before this Court by way of a
special leave petition (civil) no.28491/2018 and this Court vide order dated 12.11.2018 dismissed the
said special leave petition by specifically observing that the order passed by the High Court shall not
be treated as a precedent in any other case.

2.5 Subsequently, for the academic year 2019-20, the State Government issued a notification dated
6.6.2019, which subsequently came to be modified vide corrigendum dated 11.07.2019. Clauses 15 &
16 provided for reservation in Government Medical/Dental Colleges as well as admission to private
institutes respectively. Clause 15 provided for 1% reservation for sports persons; 1% reservation for
children/grand children of terrorist affected persons and 1% reservation for children/grand children
of Sikh riot affected persons in the State quota seats in government institutions. Clause 16 provided
for 1% reservation for sports persons, children/grand children of terrorist affected persons,

2

The State Of Punjab vs Anshika Goyal on 25 January, 2022

children/grand children of Sikh riot affected persons and 1% for wards of defence personnel so far as
the State quota seats in private institutions are concerned. However, no such reservation was
provided for the management quota seats.

2.6 A bunch of writ petitions came to be filed before the High Court for the academic year 2019-20
challenging the notification for (i) not providing reservation for sports persons, children/grand
children of terrorist affected persons and children/grand children of Sikh riot affected persons
insofar as the management quota seats in private institutes are concerned; and (ii) for providing 1%
reservation for sports persons insofar as the government Medical/Dental Colleges as well as the
private institutes, instead of 3% reservation for sports persons. By the impugned judgment and
order, the High Court has allowed the said writ petitions and issued the following directions:

( a )   T h e   S t a t e   i s   d i r e c t e d   t o   i s s u e   a   f r e s h   n o t i f i c a t i o n   p r o v i d i n g   f o r   1 %
reservation/quota for children/grand children of terrorist affected persons/Sikh riot
affected persons in all private unaided non-minority Medical/Dental Institutions in
the State of Punjab. This reservation/quota shall apply to management quota seats as
well.

(b) The notification shall also provide for a sports quota of 3% in Government
Medical/Dental Colleges.

(c) While determining inter se merit of candidates possessing the same sports
gradation, only the NEET score shall be considered.

(d) Implementation of the 10% quota for economically weaker sections and the
calculation thereof by the State of Punjab is upheld.

2.7 Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned common judgment and order passed by
the High Court in issuing the aforesaid directions, more particularly directing the State to issue a
fresh notification providing for reservation/quota for sports persons, children/grand children of
terrorist affected persons/Sikh riot affected persons in all private unaided non-minority
Medical/Dental Institutions in the State and directing to provide for a sports quota of 3% (instead of
1% as fixed by the State Government) in Government Medical/Dental Colleges, the State has
preferred the present appeals.

3. We have heard Ms. Meenakshi Arora, learned Senior Advocate appearing for the State of Punjab
and Shri P.S. Patwalia, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the original writ petitioners.
3.1 Number of submissions have been made by Ms. Meenakshi Arora, learned Senior Advocate
appearing on behalf of the State on the High Court issuing a writ of mandamus directing the State to
provide for reservation/quota for sports persons, children/grand children of terrorist affected
persons/Sikh riot affected persons in all private unaided non- minority Medical/Dental institutions
in the State. 3.2 It is vehemently submitted that no writ of mandamus can be issued by the High
Court directing the State to provide for reservation for the particular class or category and it should
be left to the wisdom of the State Government. It is also the case on behalf of the State that Article

3

The State Of Punjab vs Anshika Goyal on 25 January, 2022

15(5) of the Constitution of India is an enabling provision and it is ultimately for the State to provide
for reservation for a particular class/category and no State can be compelled and/or no writ of
mandamus can be issued directing the State to provide for reservation for a particular class or
category. In support of her submission, learned senior counsel has heavily relied upon the following
decisions of this Court:

(i) Gulshan Prakash (Dr.) and others v. State of Haryana and others, reported in
(2010) 1 SCC 477 (para 27);

(ii) Chairman and Managing Director, Central Bank of India and others v. Central
Bank of India SC/ST Employees Welfare Association and others, reported in (2015)
12 SCC 308 (para

26);

(iii) Suresh Chand Gautam v. State of Uttar Pradesh and others, reported in (2016) 11
SCC 113 (para 49); and

(iv) Mukesh Kumar and another v. State of Uttarakhand and others, reported in
(2020) 3 SCC 1 (paras 18 & 19) 3.3 Ms. Meenakshi Arora, learned senior counsel
appearing on behalf of the State of Punjab has further submitted that even a writ of
m a n d a m u s   i s s u e d   b y   t h e   H i g h   C o u r t   d i r e c t i n g   t h e   S t a t e   t o   p r o v i d e   3 %
reservation/quota for sports persons is also unsustainable. It is submitted that a
conscious policy decision was taken by the State Government to provide only 1%
reservation/quota for sports persons. It is submitted that it is ultimately for the State
G o v e r n m e n t   c o n s i d e r i n g   t h e   f a c t s   s i t u a t i o n   i n   t h e   S t a t e   t o   p r o v i d e   t h e
reservation/quota and what percentage of reservation/quota should be there should
be left to the concerned State Government. In support of her above submission, she
has also relied upon the aforesaid decisions.

4. Shri P.S. Patwalia, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the original writ
petitioners has submitted that the notification under challenge before the High Court
was for academic year 2019-20 and pursuant to the interim order passed by this
Court, admissions have been given implementing the impugned judgment and order
passed by the High Court, except providing reservation to the extent of 3% for sports
persons.

4.1 It is further submitted that thereafter a fresh notification has been issued for the academic year
2021-22 in which the State has provided the reservation for sports persons, children/grand children
of terrorist affected persons and Sikh riot affected persons to an extent of 1% each with respect to
the private institutes also. It is therefore submitted that as such the issue in the present case has
become academic. Therefore, it is prayed to dispose of the appeals by keeping the question of law
open. 4.2 Now so far as the direction issued by the High Court directing the State to provide 3%
reservation/quota for sports persons in Government Medical/Dental Colleges is concerned, Mr.

4

The State Of Punjab vs Anshika Goyal on 25 January, 2022

Patwalia, learned Senior Counsel has tried to support the same by submitting that when Sports
Policy, 2018 provided for 3% reservation for sports persons in admissions in all government and
private higher educational institutions and universities including those of medical and technical
education, located in the State of Punjab, there was no reason for the State to deviate from the same
and provide for only 1% reservation/quota for sports persons. It is therefore submitted that the High
Court has rightly directed to provide 3% reservation /quota for sports persons considering the
Sports Policy, 2018.

5. We have heard the learned senior counsel for the respective parties at length.

By the impugned judgment and order, the High Court has directed to provide for reservation/quota
to sports persons, children/grand children of terrorist affected persons/Sikh riot affected persons
for admissions in the private institutes and more particularly the management quota in the private
institutes. The High Court has also further directed to provide for 3% reservation/quota for sports
persons in all Government Medical/Dental Colleges.

6. Now so far as the directions issued by the High Court directing to provide for 1%
reservation/quota for children/grand children of terrorist affected persons/Sikh riot affected
persons and sports persons in all private unaided non-minority Medical/Dental institutions in the
State is concerned, at the outset, it is required to be noted that the said issue has become academic,
firstly on the ground that the issue before the High Court and even before this Court was/is for the
academic year 2019-20. Pursuant to the interim order passed by this Court, admissions for the
academic year 2019-20 are already given as per the judgment of the High Court except providing 3%
reservation/quota for sports persons and applying 1% reservation. This Court, vide order dated
27.08.2019, passed the following interim order:

“Heard Mr. K.K. Venugopal, learned Attorney General appearing on behalf of the
petitioners as well as Mr. P.S. Patwalia, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of
respondent No.4. Issue fresh notice to the unrepresented/unserved respondents.
After hearing the matters at some length, we deem it appropriate to have final
hearing in the matter as main question arises with regard to validity of classification
made as to Government seats and institutions seats for the purpose of reservation in
question. Fact remains other reservations have been applied to all seats in private
institutions. However, after hearing the learned counsel for the parties and
considering the decisions in “T.M.A.Pai Foundation & Ors. Versus State of Karnataka
& Ors.”, (2002)8 SCC 481 and “Gulshan Prakash (DR.) & Ors. Versus State of
Haryana & Ors.”, (2010) 1 SCC 477, without expressing any opinion on merits, we are
of the view that there shall not be a blanket stay on the order passed by the High
Court. However, the High Court has enhanced the sports quota from 1% to 3%. That
cannot be said to be appropriate as the Government has notified only 1% sports quota
on horizontal business. The part of the impugned order with respect to enhancing
quota from 1% to 3% shall remain stayed till the final decision by this Court. With
respect to remaining part there shall be no stay. 3 Counseling to take place by 7th
September, 2019. Only 1% reservation be implemented with respect to sports quota.

5

The State Of Punjab vs Anshika Goyal on 25 January, 2022

Counseling be held as per order passed by the High Court with other aspects.” 6.1
Secondly, the State has now already provided the reservation/quota for sports
persons, children/grand children of terrorist affected persons/Sikh riot affected
persons even with respect to admissions in the private institutes for the academic
year 2021-22.

Therefore, the first issue, whether the High Court was right in issuing directions directing the State
to issue a fresh notification providing for 1% reservation/quota for children/grand children of
terrorist affected persons/Sikh riot affected persons in all private unaided non-minority
Medical/Dental institutions in the State of Punjab including the management quota seats has
become academic and therefore we dispose of the present appeals keeping the question of law open.
As the admissions are given for the academic year 2019-20 pursuant to the interim order passed by
this Court, we direct that the said admission shall not be disturbed/affected. However, it is observed
that we have not entered into and/or considered any other dispute including whether the
admissions are made on the basis of merit or not. If anybody has any individual grievance, in that
case, it will be open for the aggrieved person to take recourse to law.

7. Now so far as the directions issued by the High Court directing the State to provide for 3%
reservation/quota for sports persons, instead of 1% provided by the State is concerned, it appears
from the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court that it has issued the said
direction considering the Sports Policy, 2018. It is true that as per clause 8.11(v), 3% reservation for
sports persons has been provided. However, it is to be noted that clause 10 permits/allows any other
department to have specific policy providing for reservation for sports persons other than 3%. As
observed hereinabove, thereafter the State Government has issued an order dated 25.07.2019
providing for 1% reservation/quota for sports persons. The said order has been issued and 1%
reservation/quota for sports persons is provided after taking into consideration the Sports Policy,
2018. Therefore, a conscious policy decision has been taken by the State Government to provide for
only 1% reservation/quota for sports persons. Therefore, the question posed for the consideration of
this Court is, whether the State Government’s action taking a policy decision to prescribe a
particular percentage of reservation/quota for a particular category of persons, can be interfered
with by issuance of a writ of mandamus, directing the State Government to provide for a particular
percentage of reservation for a particular category of persons other than what has been provided in
the policy decision taken by the State Government.

8. While answering the aforesaid issue, few decisions of this Court referred to hereinabove are
required to be discussed.

a) In the case of Gulshan Prakash (supra), it was observed by this Court that there
cannot be any mandamus by the Court to provide for a reservation for a particular
community. In the case before this Court, the State of Haryana did not provide any
reservation for SC/ST/backward community at the postgraduate level. A conscious
decision was taken by the State of Haryana not to provide for reservation at the
postgraduate level. The same was challenged and to that this Court has observed that
there cannot be any mandamus by the Court as claimed. In the aforesaid decision, it

6

The State Of Punjab vs Anshika Goyal on 25 January, 2022

was further observed and held that Article 15(4) of the Constitution is an enabling
provision and the State Government is the best Judge to grant reservation for
SC/ST/backward categories at postgraduate level. Any policy and the decision of the
State not to make any provision for reservation at postgraduate level suffers from no
infirmity. It was further observed that every State can take its own decision with
regard to reservation depending on various factors. At this stage, it is to be noted that
it was also submitted before this Court that since the Government has decided to
grant reservation for SC/ST/backward class communities in admission at MBBS
level, i.e., undergraduate level and therefore the State has to provide for reservation
at postgraduate level also. To that, this Court observed that since the Government
had decided to grant reservation for SC/ST/backward categories in admission at
MBBS level, i.e., undergraduate level, it does not mean that it is bound to grant
reservation at the postgraduate level also.

b) In the case of Central Bank of India SC/ST Employees Welfare Association and
others (supra), while considering the issue of providing reservation in favour of
SC/ST category persons in the promotion and when Articles 15 & 16 of the
Constitution of India were pressed into service, this Court observed and held that
though Articles 15 & 16 empower the State to take an affirmative action in favour of
the SC/ST category persons by making reservations for them in the employment of
the Union or the State, they are only enabling provisions which permit the State to
make provision for reservation of these category of persons. It was further observed
that insofar as making of provisions for reservation in matters of promotion to any
class/classes of post is concerned, such a provision can be made in favour of SC/ST
category employees if in the opinion of the State they are not adequately represented
in services under the State. It is observed that therefore power lies with the State to
make a provision but, at the same time, Courts cannot issue any mandamus to the
State to necessarily make such a provision. In paragraph 26, it was observed and held
as under:

“26. In the first instance, we make it clear that there is no dispute about the
constitutional position envisaged in Articles 15 and 16, insofar as these provisions
empower the State to take affirmative action in favour of SC/ST category persons by
making reservations for them in the employment in the Union or the State (or for
that matter, public sector/authorities which are treated as State under Article 12 of
the Constitution). The laudable objective underlying these provisions is also to be
kept in mind while undertaking any exercise pertaining to the issues touching upon
the reservation of such SC/ST employees. Further, such a reservation can not only be
made at the entry level but is permissible in the matters of promotions as well. At the
same time, it is also to be borne in mind that clauses (4) and (4-A) of Article 16 of the
Constitution are only the enabling provisions which permit the State to make
provision for reservation of these category of persons. Insofar as making of
provisions for reservation in matters of promotion to any class or classes of post is
concerned, such a provision can be made in favour of SC/ST category employees if, in

7

The State Of Punjab vs Anshika Goyal on 25 January, 2022

the opinion of the State, they are not adequately represented in services under the
State. Thus, no doubt, power lies with the State to make a provision, but, at the same
time, courts cannot issue any mandamus to the State to necessarily make such a
provision. It is for the State to act, in a given situation, and to take such an
affirmative action. Of course, whenever there exists such a provision for reservation
in the matters of recruitment or the promotion, it would bestow an enforceable right
in favour of persons belonging to SC/ST category and on failure on the part of any
authority to reserve the posts, while making selections/promotions, the beneficiaries
of these provisions can approach the Court to get their rights enforced. What is to be
highlighted is that existence of provision for reservation in the matter of selection or
promotion, as the case may be, is the sine qua non for seeking mandamus as it is only
when such a provision is made by the State, a right shall accrue in favour of SC/ST
candidates and not otherwise.”

c) In the case of Suresh Chand Gautam (supra), writ petitions were preferred before
this Court under Article 32 of the Constitution of India for issuance of a direction in
the nature of a mandamus commanding the State/States to enforce appropriately the
constitutional mandate as contained under the provisions of Article 16(4-A), 16(4-B)
and 335 of the Constitution , or in the alternative, directing the respondents to
constitute a committee or appoint a commission chaired either by a retired Judge of
the High Court or Supreme Court in making survey and collecting necessary
qualitative data of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the services of
the State for granting reservation in promotion in the light of direction given by this
Court in M. Nagaraj v. Union of India, (2006) 8 SCC 212. Refusing to grant such
reliefs in exercise of powers under Article 32 of the Constitution of India and after
referring to the decision of this Court in the case of Census Commr.

Vs. R. Krishnamurthy, (2015) 2 SCC 796, this Court has observed that no writ of mandamus of such
a nature can be issued. While refusing to issue a writ of mandamus of such a nature, in paragraph
49, it was observed and held as under:

“49. Recently in Census Commr. v. R. Krishnamurthy [Census Commr. v. R.
Krishnamurthy, (2015) 2 SCC 796 : (2015) 1 SCC (L&S) 589] a three-Judge Bench
while dealing with the correctness of the judgment of the High Court wherein the
High Court had directed that the Census Department of the Government of India
shall take such measures towards conducting the caste-wise census in the country at
the earliest and in a time-bound manner, so as to achieve the goal of social justice in
its true sense, which is the need of the hour, the court analysing the context opined
thus: (SCC p. 806, para 25) “25. Interference with the policy decision and issue of a
mandamus to frame a policy in a particular manner are absolutely different. The Act
has conferred power on the Central Government to issue notification regarding the
manner in which the census has to be carried out and the Central Government has
issued notifications, and the competent authority has issued directions. It is not
within the domain of the court to legislate. The courts do interpret the law and, in

8

The State Of Punjab vs Anshika Goyal on 25 January, 2022

such interpretation, certain creative process is involved. The courts have the
jurisdiction to declare the law as unconstitutional. That too, where it is called for. The
court may also fill up the gaps in certain spheres applying the doctrine of
constitutional silence or abeyance. But the courts are not to plunge into
policy-making by adding something to the policy by way of issuing a writ of
mandamus.” We have referred to the said authority in Census Commr. case [Census
Commr. v. R. Krishnamurthy, (2015) 2 SCC 796 : (2015) 1 SCC (L&S) 589] as the
Court has clearly held that it neither legislates nor does it issue a mandamus to
legislate. The relief in the present case, when appositely appreciated, tantamounts to
a prayer for issue of a mandamus to take a step towards framing of a rule or a
regulation for the purpose of reservation for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes in matter of promotions. In our considered opinion, a writ of mandamus of
such a nature cannot be issued.”

d) In the recent decision in the case of Mukesh Kumar and another (supra), again it is
reiterated by this Court that no mandamus can be issued by the Court directing the
State Government to provide for reservation. It was further observed that even no
writ of mandamus can be issued directing the State to collect quantifiable data to
justify their action not to provide for reservation. It was observed that even if the
under-representation of Scheduled Casts and Scheduled Tribes in public services is
brought to the notice of the Court, no mandamus can be issued by the Court to the
State Government to provide for reservation. While holding so, in paragraph 18, it
was observed and held as under:

“18. The direction that was issued to the State Government to collect quantifiable
data pertaining to the adequacy or inadequacy of representation of persons belonging
to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in government services is the
subject-matter of challenge in some appeals before us. In view of the law laid down
by this Court, there is no doubt that the State Government is not bound to make
reservations. There is no fundamental right which inheres in an individual to claim
reservation in promotions. No mandamus can be issued by the Court directing the
State Government to provide reservations. It is abundantly clear from the judgments
of this Court in Indra Sawhney [Indra Sawhney v. Union of India, 1992 Supp (3) SCC
217 : 1992 SCC (L&S) Supp 1] , Ajit Singh (2) [Ajit Singh (2) v. State of Punjab, (1999)
7 SCC 209 : 1999 SCC (L&S) 1239] , M. Nagaraj [M. Nagaraj v. Union of India, (2006)
8 SCC 212 : (2007) 1 SCC (L&S) 1013] and Jarnail Singh [Jarnail Singh v. Lachhmi
Narain Gupta, (2018) 10 SCC 396 : (2019) 1 SCC (L&S) 86] that Articles 16(4) and
16(4-A) are enabling provisions and the collection of quantifiable data showing
inadequacy of representation of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in public
service is a sine qua non for providing reservations in promotions. The data to be
collected by the State Government is only to justify reservation to be made in the
matter of appointment or promotion to public posts, according to Articles 16(4) and
16(4-A) of the Constitution. As such, collection of data regarding the inadequate
representation of members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, as noted

9

The State Of Punjab vs Anshika Goyal on 25 January, 2022

above, is a prerequisite for providing reservations, and is not required when the State
Government decided not to provide reservations. Not being bound to provide
reservations in promotions, the State is not required to justify its decision on the
basis of quantifiable data, showing that there is adequate representation of members
of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in State services. Even if the
under-representation of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in public services is
brought to the notice of this Court, no mandamus can be issued by this Court to the
State Government to provide reservation in light of the law laid down by this Court in
C.A. Rajendran [C.A. Rajendran v. Union of India, (1968) 1 SCR 721 : AIR 1968 SC
507] and Suresh Chand Gautam [Suresh Chand Gautam v. State of U.P., (2016) 11
SCC 113 : (2016) 2 SCC (L&S) 291] . Therefore, the direction given by the High Court
that the State Government should first collect data regarding the adequacy or
inadequacy of representation of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in
government services on the basis of which the State Government should take a
decision whether or not to provide reservation in promotion is contrary to the law
laid down by this Court and is accordingly set aside. Yet another direction given by
the High Court in its judgment dated 15-7-2019 [Vinod Kumar v. State of
Uttarakhand, WP (S/B) No. 291 of 2019, decided on 15-7-2019 (Utt)] , directing that
all future vacancies that are to be filled up by promotion in the posts of Assistant
Engineer, should only be from the members of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes, is wholly unjustifiable and is hence set aside.”

9. Applying the law laid down by this Court in the aforesaid decisions to the facts of the case on
hand, we are of the opinion that the High Court has committed a grave error in issuing a writ of
mandamus and directing the State Government to provide for 3% reservation/quota for sports
persons, instead of 1% as provided by the State Government. A conscious policy decision was taken
by the State Government to provide for 1% reservation/quota for sports persons. A specific order
dated 25.07.2019 was also issued by the State Government. Therefore, the High Court has exceeded
its jurisdiction while issuing a writ of mandamus directing the State to provide a particular
percentage of reservation for sports persons, namely, in the present case, 3% reservation instead of
1% provided by the State Government, while exercising powers under Article 226 of the Constitution
of India. Therefore, the impugned common judgment and order passed by the High Court insofar as
directing the State to provide for 3% reservation for sports persons and/or provide for a sports
quota of 3% in the Government Medical/Dental Colleges is unsustainable and the same deserves to
be quashed and set aside.

10. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the first direction issued by the High Court
directing the State to issue a fresh notification providing for 1% reservation/quota for
children/grand children of terrorist affected persons/Sikh riot affected persons in all private
unaided non-minority Medical/Dental institutions in the State of Punjab is concerned, the present
appeals are disposed of as the said issue has become academic for the reasons stated hereinabove,
However, the question of law, whether such a direction/writ of mandamus could have been issued is
kept open.

10

The State Of Punjab vs Anshika Goyal on 25 January, 2022

10.1 So far as the second direction issued by the High Court directing to provide for a sports quota of
3% in Government Medical/Dental Colleges in the State of Punjab is concerned, the same is hereby
quashed and set aside by observing that no writ of mandamus could have been issued by the High
Court.

10.2 All impleadment/intervention applications stand disposed of in terms of the aforesaid
judgment and order. However, if any individual person has a grievance, he/she may take recourse to
law for his/her grievance.

11. The present appeals are allowed in the aforesaid terms. However, in the facts and circumstances
of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.

………………………………….J.
[M.R. SHAH]
NEW DELHI;                               ………………………………….J.
JANUARY 25, 2022                         [B.V. NAGARATHNA]

11