The State Of Punjab vs Mehar Din on 2 March, 2022

The State Of Punjab vs Mehar Din on 2 March, 2022

Author: Ajay Rastogi

Bench: Abhay S. Oka, Ajay Rastogi

NON-REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 5861 OF 2009

STATE OF PUNJAB & OTHERS                                   ….APPELLANT(S)

VERSUS

MEHAR DIN                                                  ….RESPONDENT(S)

JUDGMENT

Rastogi, J.

1. The instant appeal arises from the judgment and order passed by the Division Bench of the High
Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh dated 13th August, 2008 setting aside the order dated
24th August, 2006 passed by the Financial Commissioner Revenue, Patiala with a further direction
to the competent authority to confirm the auction sale and complete all other formalities within
three months.

2. The facts in brief culled out from the record and relevant for the purpose are that the sub-urban
properties are to be disposed of in terms of the procedure for sale by public auction, as provided
17:48:51 IST Reason:

under Chapter III of the Punjab Package Deal Properties (Disposal) Rules, 1976
(hereinafter referred to as “the Rules 1976”), framed by the State Government in
exercise of its power conferred under Section 18 of the Punjab Package Deal
Properties(Disposal) Act, 1976. Part III of Rules 1976 provides for transfer of urban
properties.

3. The appellants being the custodian of the subject property initiated the process of putting the
property to public auction through the notice published in Punjabi Tribune of 17th May, 1993, the
extract of auction notice is reproduced as under:-

1

The State Of Punjab vs Mehar Din on 2 March, 2022

“Punjabi Tribune, Monday, 17 May 1993 AUCTION NOTICE General public is
informed that the following Sub Urban Land of Tehsil Malerkotla will be auctioned at
the time and place given below. 1/5th of the bid amount shall be given at the spot in
cash. The remaining conditions of the auction will be fold on the spot.

Town               :       Malerkotla
Place of Auction   :       At the spot
Dated              :       04.06.93
Time               :       10:00 A.M
Khasra No.         :       Area
185//22/2          :       7-0
191                :       7-10
12/2min            :       3-12
169//23/3/1        :       4-17
Kitte              4       22-17
Total Kitte        4       22-17
Sd/-
Tehsildar Revenue-cum-M.O. Malerkotla”

4. It has not been pleaded that the auction notice was given its wide publicity and
affixed at the conspicuous place in the locality where the property is situated.

5. The Tehsildar Sales, Malerkotla conducted public auction on 4th June, 1993 and
this fact is not disputed that only three bidders had participated in the bidding
process and bid of the respondent, Mehar Din was the highest bid of Rs.3,90,000/-,
which was provisionally accepted by the Tehsildar. Pursuant thereto, 1/5th of the bid
amount, i.e., Rs.78,000/- was deposited by the respondent at the spot subject to its
confirmation by the Sales Commissioner in terms of the procedure for sale by public
auction provided under Rule 8(1)(h) of Chapter III of the Rules 1976.

6. On perusal of records, the competent authority (Sales Commissioner) was of the
view that the public property has not been put to proper publicity and the present bid
is inadequate and failed to record his satisfaction for confirmation of the bid and
accordingly the bid was cancelled by an order dated 2nd July, 1993 with a further
direction for re-auction and to be auctioned in his presence with wide publication to
fetch the maximum price.

7. The order dated 2nd July, 1993 became the subject matter of challenge at the
instance of the respondent in appeal before the Chief Sales Commissioner, Sangrur,
who after perusal of the record, returned a finding that on the date of auction, i.e. 4th
June, 1993 conducted by the Tehsildar Sales, only three persons had participated in
the bidding process and arrived to a conclusion that the Tehsildar Sales had not
conducted the bidding process properly and adequate publicity was not made and
under its order dated 24th October 1994, confirmed the order of the Sales
Commissioner cancelling the bid.

2

The State Of Punjab vs Mehar Din on 2 March, 2022

8. The order of the Chief Sales Commissioner, Sangrur dated 24th October, 1994
came to be challenged by the respondent under Section 10 of the Act 1976. The
Divisional Commissioner, after recording a finding that no opportunity was afforded
to the bidder before passing of the order of cancellation of the bid dated 4th June,
1993 and after 1/5th of the bid towards earnest money was deposited and being the
highest bidder, no reasons were assigned for cancellation and accordingly by its order
dated 17th September, 2003, set aside the order of cancellation of the competent
authority dated 2nd July, 1993 and so also of the appellate authority dated 24th
October, 1994.

9. The order dated 17th September, 2003 became the subject matter of challenge
under Section 15(1) of the Act, 1976 before the Financial Commissioner Revenue,
Punjab, Chandigarh at the instance of the appellants and after re-appraisal of the
record, the Financial Commissioner, Revenue, by its order dated 24th August 2006,
observed as under:-

“4. Mehar Din has the following things against him as per the arguments of the State
in the courts below. First-Although this auction has fetched more money than the
previous auction held in 1983 but could have still fetched a better price. This is duty
of the Sale Agency to try to get the maximum price people and even in this, Mehar
Din's name is mentioned twice. That leaves effectively a total of three persons.
Collusion between the Sales Agency and the possible vendors is likely. Thirdly, this
being sub-urban land as the State (Tehsildar Sales) mentions, the land couId have
fetched Rs.8- 10 lakhs. Even basically, the Sales Commissioner is not bound to accept
the price settled in the auction because he is to always strive for a better price.

5. Therefore, 1 accept the appeal and set aside the orders dated 17.09.2003 of the
Commissioner, Patiala Division. The land is to be re-auctioned after proper munadi.”

10. The order passed by the Financial Commissioner dated 24th August, 2006
became the subject matter of challenge at the instance of the respondent by filing writ
petition before the High Court under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution.

11. The High Court proceeded on the premise that the reasons adopted by the
Financial Commissioner were based on conjectures and surmises and once the
auction purchaser’s bid was higher than the reserved price which was notified at site
and more than the price of the last auction and in the absence of any irregularity or
illegality being committed in the auction proceedings, there is no reason for vitiating
the auction process and accordingly, while setting the aside the order of the Financial
Commissioner dated 24th August, 2006 directed the competent authority to confirm
the sale and complete other formalities under the order dated 13th August, 2008. The
operative part of the order of the High Court dated 13th August, 2008 is reproduced
hereunder:-

3

The State Of Punjab vs Mehar Din on 2 March, 2022

“A perusal of the aforesaid observations and reasons adopted by the Financial
Commissioner clearly shows that the said revisional authority has acted only on
conjectures, surmises and suppositions. It is not in dispute that the price as· offered
by the petitioner-auction purchaser was much more than the price of last auction and
there is no material produced by the State to show that there was any irregularity or
illegality in the auction proceedings that might have taken place due to which it stood
vitiated. Still further, nothing could be shown that the value of the land was Rs.8 to
10 lacs as noticed by the Financial Commissioner in the impugned order.
Furthermore, no material has been shown which may impel to infer that there was
any connivance between the three persons who had given bid and that the price as
offered by the petitioner was not the real price of the land in question. The impugned
order dated 24.08.2006 is thus, legally unsustainable and is accordingly set aside.
The writ petition is allowed and it is directed that the competent authority shall
confirm the sale and complete all formalities within a period of three months from
the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.”

12. We have heard learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance perused
the material placed on record.

13. The Scheme of Chapter III of Rules, 1976 is related to transfer of urban properties
laying down the procedure to be followed for sale by public auction. The extract of
Rule 8 of the Rules, 1976 relevant for the purpose is reproduced hereinbelow:-

“8. (1) Procedure for sale by public auction. - (a) The urban property to be sold by
public auction shall be sold by Tehsildar (Sales) or Naib-Tehsildar (Sales).

(b) The Tehsildar (Sales) or Naib-Tehsildar (Sales) shall order a proclamation of the
intended sale to be made in the language of the principal civil court of original
jurisdiction within whose jurisdiction the property is situate.

(c) Notice of the intended sale shall be given at least fifteen days before the proposed
sale and every such notice shall indicate the date, time and place of the proposed sale,
the description of the urban property to be sold, its location and boundaries, where
possible the terms and conditions of the sale and any other particulars which the
Tehsildar (Sales) or Naib-Tehsildar (Sales) considers material. One copy of the notice
shall be affixed at a conspicuous place in the locality where the property is situate.
The notice of the intended sale shall also be given by beat of drum in the locality,
where such property is situate.

(d) Where the Tehsildar (Sales) or Naib-Tehsildar (Sales) thinks it desirable that the
notice of the intended sale of an urban property should also be published in the daily
newspapers, he may get such notice published accordingly before putting it to
auction.

4

The State Of Punjab vs Mehar Din on 2 March, 2022

(e) The Tehsildar (Sales) or Naib-Tehsildar (Sales) may by an order in writing and
after recording reasons for so doing withhold sale of any urban property notified for
sale.

(f) An urban property put to auction shall be sold subject to a reserve price fixed in
respect thereof, but such reserve price shall not be disclosed.

(g) The Tehsildar (Sales) or Naib-Tehsildar (Sales) may, for reasons to be recorded,
in writing, adjourn the sale to a specific date and hour and an announcement to that
effect shall be made at the time of the adjournment of the sale.

Provided that where a sale is adjourned for a period exceeding fifteen days, a fresh notice shall be
given in the manner indicated in clause (c).

(h) A person declared to be the highest bidder at the public auction shall be required to pay in cash,
at the fall of the hammer, the whole amount of the bid if it does not exceed Rs. 500 in case the
amount of bid money exceeds the said amount of Rs. 500, he shall be required to pay an amount
equal to 20 per cent of the bid as earnest money and to pay the balance within fifteen days of the
date of receipt of intimation of acceptance of the bid. If this amount is not paid, the bid shall be
deemed to have been cancelled and the urban property put to re-auction. The acceptance of the
highest bid in respect of which a deposit has been made shall be provisional, subject to the
confirmation of sale by the Sales Commissioner, provided that no bid shall be finally accepted until
after the expiry of ten days from the date of auction.”

14. As per Rule 8(1)(c), auction notice has to be given wide publicity and one copy of the notice is to
be affixed at the conspicuous place in the locality where the property is situated and as per Rule
8(1)(h), if the bid money exceeds Rs.500/-, the bidder shall be required to pay an amount equal to
1/5th of the bid amount as earnest money and acceptance of the highest bid in respect of which the
deposit has been made shall be provisional, subject to confirmation by the Sales Commissioner.

15. It is not disputed that the auction sale conducted by the Tehsildar Sales on 4th June, 1993 was
provisionally accepted in favour of the respondent being the highest bidder. Pursuant thereto, 1/5th
of the bid amount as earnest money was deposited, but that acceptance being provisional, was
subject to confirmation by the Sales Commissioner. When the proceedings of auction were placed
for confirmation before the competent authority (Sales Commissioner), the competent authority
after perusing the record of auction observed that the provisional bid is quite on the lower side and
looking to the location of the property in question, it needs a good publicity to fetch the better sale
price of the subject land and while cancelling the auction sale, directed to initiate the process of
re-auction and further observed that he should be informed in advance and intended to remain
present at the time of auction by order dated 2nd July, 1993. That apart, it is not disputed that total
applicants were fourteen but only three bidders had participated in the bidding process.

16. Proceeding on the said premise, the appellate authority, after due appraisal of record, confirmed
the action of the Sales Commissioner in cancelling the auction and was finally confirmed by the

5

The State Of Punjab vs Mehar Din on 2 March, 2022

Financial Commissioner(the revisional authority), under its order dated 24th August, 2006, of
which reference has been made.

17. From the Scheme of Chapter III of Rules 1976, it is apparent and explicit that even if the public
auction has been completed to the highest bidder, no right is accrued till the confirmation letter is
issued to him as the acceptance of the highest bid is provisional, subject to its confirmation by the
competent authority. Undisputedly, the competent authority (Sales Commissioner) has failed to
confirm the bidding process and after recording its satisfaction cancelled the auction bid under its
order dated 2nd July, 1993.

18. This Court has examined right of the highest bidder at public auctions in umpteen number of
cases and it was repeatedly pointed out that the State or authority which can be held to be State
within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution, is not bound to accept the highest tender of bid.
The acceptance of the highest bid or highest bidder is always subject to conditions of holding public
auction and the right of the highest bidder is always provisional to be examined in the context in
different conditions in which the auction has been held. In the present case, no right had accrued to
the respondent even on the basis of statutory provisions as being contemplated under Rule 8(1)(h)
of Chapter III of the Scheme of Rules, 1976 and in terms of the conditions of auction notice notified
for public auction.

19. The scope of judicial review in the matters of tenders/public auction has been explored in depth
by this Court in a catena of cases. Plausible decisions need not be overturned and, at the same time,
latitude ought to be granted to the State in exercise of its executive power. However, allegations of
illegality, irrationality and procedural impropriety would be enough grounds for Courts to assume
jurisdiction and remedy such ills.

20. In Tata Cellular v. Union of India1 it was held that judicial review of government contracts is
permissible in order to prevent arbitrariness or favouritism. It was fearlessly opined in this case as
under:-

“94. The principles deducible from the above are:

(1) The modern trend points to judicial restraint in administrative action.

(2) The court does not sit as a court of appeal but merely reviews the manner in
which the decision was made.

(3) The court does not have the expertise to correct the administrative decision. If a
review of the administrative decision is permitted it will be substituting its own
decision, without the necessary expertise which itself may be fallible.

(4) The terms of the invitation to tender cannot be open to judicial scrutiny because
the invitation to tender is in the realm of contract.

6

The State Of Punjab vs Mehar Din on 2 March, 2022

Normally speaking, the decision to accept the tender or award the contract is reached by process of
negotiations through several tiers. More often than not, such decisions are made qualitatively by
experts. (5) The Government must have freedom of contract. In other words, a fair play in the joints
is a necessary concomitant for an administrative body functioning in an administrative sphere or
quasi-administrative sphere. However, the decision must not only be tested by the application of
Wednesbury principle of reasonableness (including its other facts pointed out above) but must be
free from arbitrariness not affected by bias or actuated by mala fides.

(6) Quashing decisions may impose heavy administrative burden on the administration and lead to
increased and unbudgeted expenditure.” (emphasis in original)

21. The exposition of law on the subject has been consistently followed by this Court even in the later
decisions holding that superior Courts should not interfere in the matters of tenders, unless
substantial public interest was involved or the transaction (1994) 6 SCC 651 was malafide. It was
consistently stressed by this Court that the need for overwhelming public interest should always be
kept in mind to justify judicial intervention in contracts involving the State and its instrumentalities
and while exercising power of judicial review in relation to contracts, the Courts should consider
primarily the question whether there has been any infirmity in the decision-making process.

22. This view has been further considered by this Court in Jagdish Mandal v. State of Orissa and
Others2, wherein it was observed as under:-

“22. Judicial review of administrative action is intended to prevent arbitrariness,
irrationality, unreasonableness, bias and mala fides. Its purpose is to check whether
choice or decision is made “lawfully” and not to check whether choice or decision is
“sound”. When the power of judicial review is invoked in matters relating to tenders
or award of contracts, certain special features should be borne in mind. A contract is
a commercial transaction. Evaluating tenders and awarding contracts are essentially
commercial functions. Principles of equity and natural justice stay at a distance. If the
decision relating to award of contract is bona fide and is in public interest, courts will
not, in exercise of power of judicial review, interfere even if a procedural aberration
or error in assessment or prejudice to a tenderer, is made out. The power of judicial
review will not be permitted to be invoked to protect private interest at the cost of
public interest, or to decide contractual disputes. The tenderer or contractor with a
grievance can always seek damages in a civil court. Attempts by unsuccessful
tenderers with imaginary grievances, wounded pride and business rivalry, to make
mountains out of molehills of some technical/procedural violation or some prejudice
to self, and persuade courts to interfere by exercising power of judicial review, should
be resisted. Such interferences, either interim or final, may hold up public works for
years, or delay relief and (2007) 14 SCC 517 succour to thousands and millions and
may increase the project cost manifold…..”

23. This Court in a recent judgment in Silppi Constructions Contractors v. Union of India and
another3 held as under:

7

The State Of Punjab vs Mehar Din on 2 March, 2022

“20. The essence of the law laid down in the judgments referred to above is the
exercise of restraint and caution; the need for overwhelming public interest to justify
judicial intervention in matters of contract involving the State instrumentalities; the
courts should give way to the opinion of the experts unless the decision is totally
arbitrary or unreasonable; the court does not sit like a court of appeal over the
appropriate authority; the court must realise that the authority floating the tender is
the best judge of its requirements and, therefore, the court's interference should be
minimal. The authority which floats the contract or tender, and has authored the
tender documents is the best judge as to how the documents have to be interpreted. If
two interpretations are possible then the interpretation of the author must be
accepted. The courts will only interfere to prevent arbitrariness, irrationality, bias,
mala fides or perversity. With this approach in mind we shall deal with the present
case.”

24. The law on the subject is settled that the Courts being the custodian of fundamental rights are
under an obligation to interfere where there is arbitrariness, irrationality, unreasonableness,
malafides and bias, if any, but at the same time, the Courts should exercise the power of judicial
review with a lot of restraint, particularly in contractual and commercial matters.

(2020) 16 SCC 489

25. Undisputedly, the provisional bid, in the instant case, was not confirmed by the competent
authority (Sales Commissioner) and not being accepted after recording its due satisfaction by an
order dated 2nd July, 1993 and the decision of the authority in passing the order of cancellation of
the auction bid was scrutinized/examined by the appellate/revisional authority and the discretion
exercised by the competent authority in taking decision of cancellation was upheld at later stages.

26. This being a settled law that the highest bidder has no vested right to have the auction concluded
in his favour and in the given circumstances under the limited scope of judicial review under Article
226 of the Constitution, the High Court was not supposed to interfere in the opinion of the executive
who were dealing on the subject, unless the decision is totally arbitrary or unreasonable, and it was
not open for the High Court to sit like a Court of Appeal over the decision of the competent authority
and particularly in the matters where the authority competent of floating the tender is the best judge
of its requirements, therefore, the interference otherwise has to be very minimal.

27. To the contrary, the limited scope of judicial review for which interference could have been
permissible to prevent arbitrariness, irrationality, bias, malafides or perversity, if any, in the
approach of the authority while dealing with the auction proceedings, was never the case of the
respondent at any stage. The High Court has recorded a finding to the contrary that the appellants
have failed to show any irregularity or illegality in the auction proceedings and in the absence
whereof, the auction proceedings could not be held to be vitiated. The premise on which the High
Court has proceeded in recording a finding, particularly, in the matters of auction of public
properties is unsustainable in law and that apart, it is also not in conformity with the Scheme of
auction of public properties as defined under Chapter III of Rules 1976.

8

The State Of Punjab vs Mehar Din on 2 March, 2022

28. In our considered view, the finding recorded by the High Court in the impugned judgment is
unsustainable and deserves to be set aside.

29. Before we conclude, it has been informed to this Court that the respondent had deposited
Rs.78,000/- being 1/5th of the bid amount as earnest money on 5th June, 1993. Let the amount of
Rs.78,000/- deposited by the respondent be refunded with interest at the rate of 12% per annum
from the date of its deposit until its actual payment. The order be complied with within two months
from today.

30. The appeal succeeds and accordingly allowed. The impugned judgment of the High Court dated
13th August, 2008 is hereby set aside.

31. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.

…………………………….J. (AJAY RASTOGI) ……………………………J. (ABHAY S. OKA) NEW DELHI
MARCH 02, 2022

9