The State Of Rajasthan vs Phool Singh on 2 September, 2022

The State Of Rajasthan vs Phool Singh on 2 September, 2022

Author: Sudhanshu Dhulia

Bench: Sudhanshu Dhulia, S. Ravindra Bhat

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5930 OF 2022
(ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NO.11195 OF 2021)

THE STATE OF RAJASTHAN & ORS.                             ... APPELLANTS

Versus

PHOOL SINGH                                             ... RESPONDENT

J U D G M E N T

Sudhanshu Dhulia, J.

1. Leave granted. The State of Rajasthan is in appeal before this Court against the order dated
09.09.2020, passed by a Division Bench of Rajasthan High Court (Jaipur Bench). By the impugned
order the Division Bench has upheld the order of the learned Single Judge which had allowed the
writ petition of the present respondent, quashing his dismissal from service. Police Service as a
constable, in the year 1987. The 1 | Page same year, while he was posted at the Police Station Mania,
District Dholpur (Rajasthan), he allegedly committed a criminal offence, apart from an act of gross
indiscipline. On the fateful day of 15.10.1987, he was wandering around the town in the evening, in
company of one Lokman. Respondent was off duty but in police uniform, when he allegedly caught
one Mahesh Kumar and demanded Rs.100/- from him. On his refusal, Mahesh Kumar was asked to
show the papers of his motorcycle and when he failed to show these papers, Phool Singh took hold
of this motorcycle, and then tried to run away with it. Meanwhile, due to the alarm raised by Mahesh
Kumar a crowd also gathers in support of Mahesh Kumar. At this point, Phool Singh is alleged to
have waved a gun (“Pachpera”), towards the crowd but was nevertheless chased by the crowd, till
Phool Singh succeeds in getting inside his house, which was nearby. Once inside his house, he fires
from his gun 2 | Page which injures the inmates of the house, i.e., his family members, besides
damaging the property. All this results in lodging of an FIR (No. 146/1987) against the respondent,
at Police Station Mania, under Sections 392, 307 IPC and Section 34 of Police Act read with Section
3/25 of Arms Act. After investigation in the case a chargesheet was filed against Phool Singh and
Lokman. Ultimately charges were framed under Section 392 IPC and Section 3/25 of the Arms Act
by the Trial Court. The Trial Court then convicts Phool Singh, under Section 392 IPC and Section
3/25 Arms Act and sentences him for one-year rigorous imprisonment and fine for each of the above

1

The State Of Rajasthan vs Phool Singh on 2 September, 2022

two offences, with default stipulations, vide order dated 31.03.1994. The co- accused Lokman is
acquitted. This order was challenged by Phool Singh in appeal and the learned Sessions Judge,
Dholpur, allows the appeal, and sets aside the order of the Trial Court, giving “benefit of doubt” to
the accused.

3 | Page

3. Meanwhile, a departmental proceeding had also been initiated against the delinquent constable
on three charges, which are as follows:-

“CHARGE NO. l :- In the year 1987 when on 15.10.87 you, Shri Phool Singh Constable
No.386 was deputed with Police Station Mania at that time while off duty as Guard
time at around 3:00 PM dressed in police uniform you had consumed alcohol and
under the influence of alcohol being highly intoxicated continued to roam around in
Kasba Mania and snatched away licensed Pachpcra (rifle) of Shivram Kachhi.

CHARGE NO.2:- On 15.10.87, you in a drunken state dressed in uniform alongwith
Lokman Gurjar went to Bedia Kasba Mohalla where being off duty and without any
authority you demanded for documents pertaining to Rajdoot Motorcycle from
Mahesh Kumar S/o Shiv Hare Brahmin R/o Patpara Dholpur and also indecently
abused and demanded for a bribe of Rs.100/- and

4 | Page forcibly looted and took away Motorcycle bearing registration No.RJD 7722 from Mahesh
Kumar and due to which a lot of people gathered and they chased behind you.

CHARGE NO.3:- On being chased by public you ran and reached your quarter in the compound of
Police Station Mania and in a drunk state fired in your self- defence inside your house from the
Pachpera snatched away by you from Shiv Ram but the gunshot hit the balcony in the chowk of the
quarter and as a result broken pieces of balcony fell on your family members and due to which your
family members got injured and the said incident led to the registration of FIR No.146 dated
15.10.87 against you u/s 392, 307/34 of Police Act & 3/25 of Arms Act thereafter investigation was
conducted.” In the departmental enquiry fourteen prosecution witnesses were examined. Some of
these witnesses supported the case of the prosecution, others did not. Additionally, material exhibits
were 5 | Page also examined such as, the first information report, the memorandum of seizure of the
motorcycle and more importantly the Breath Alcohol Analysis Test of respondent which was positive
for alcohol consumption. The delinquent constable had also examined nine defence witnesses.

All the three charges were ultimately proved against the respondent in the disciplinary proceedings
and he was dismissed from service, vide order dated 18.12.1989. This order of the disciplinary
authority was taken in appeal by respondent which was also dismissed by the Appellate Authority on
23.08.1990. Then a review was also filed, which was also dismissed on 03.06.1994. By the time the
Reviewing Authority had dismissed the review of the respondent (i.e., on 03.06.1994), the
respondent who was also facing a criminal trial was convicted by the Trial court, under Section 392
IPC and under Section 3/25 of the Arms Act, on 31.03.1994, as already referred above.

2

6 | Page Later, as we know, his conviction was set aside by the Sessions Court.

The State Of Rajasthan vs Phool Singh on 2 September, 2022

4. Respondent Phool Singh after his acquittal moves an application before the authorities for his
reinstatement. Since the authorities did not respond favourably, he filed a writ petition in the year
1998 before a learned Single Judge of Rajasthan High Court. The challenge of his dismissal from
service though was made only after his acquittal in the criminal case, yet the challenge was on
various other grounds as well, such as the order of termination not being passed by the appointing
authority, non-supply of inquiry report, not being allowed to cross examine the witness, etc. All
these grounds did not find favour with the learned Single Judge, except for the ground raised by the
respondent that now since he has faced a criminal trial on the same set of charges, where he was
ultimately acquitted by the Sessions Court, his dismissal order is liable to be quashed and he 7 |
Page should be reinstated in service. The learned Single Judge allowed his writ petition and his
dismissal order was quashed and orders for his reinstatement were made with 50% back wages.
State of Rajasthan filed an appeal against this order before Division Bench of the High Court which
was dismissed on 09.09.2020. The State is now before this Court against the order of reinstatement
passed by the Rajasthan High Court.

5. We must reiterate that the High Court of Rajasthan, both in the writ petition and special appeal
had allowed the case of respondent, Phool Singh only on the ground, that now since he has been
acquitted by a criminal court, on the same set of facts and charges on which he had faced a
departmental proceeding, the orders passed in departmental proceedings are liable to be quashed
and he must be reinstated in service. As we have already referred above, none of the other
arguments raised on behalf of the private respondent challenging 8 | Page procedural anomalies in
the departmental proceedings, violation of principles of natural justice and fair play or lack of
jurisdiction of the authority, had found favour with either the learned Single Judge or the Division
Bench.

6. The case of the State, who is the appellant before this Court is that the respondent was a member
of a disciplined force. There were extremely serious charges against the respondent in the
departmental proceedings. He was charged of threatening and extorting money from a member of
public, roaming in a public place under influence of liquor, and then using a fire arm and causing
injuries, which were all very serious charges. Respondent was given full opportunity to defend his
case in the departmental proceedings. He was given the opportunity to cross- examine the
prosecution witnesses and in fact, he also presented nine defence witnesses who were examined in
the departmental proceedings. The disciplinary authority concluded that the delinquent 9 | Page
constable (respondent) had committed an act of gross indiscipline and negligence, as well as
dereliction of duties and of misbehavior and misconduct, and all this had tarnished the image of
Rajasthan Police in public. Under the circumstances, the delinquent officer cannot be retained in
Police service and was thus dismissed from service with immediate effect. The State would also
argue that the acquittal by the criminal court is of no consequence, as far as departmental
proceedings are concerned.

7. The question before this Court is therefore only to see whether the respondent can be reinstated
in service for the reason that now on the same set of charges he has been acquitted by a criminal

3

court?

The State Of Rajasthan vs Phool Singh on 2 September, 2022

8. There should be no ambiguity in law on this subject.

A departmental proceeding is different from a criminal proceeding. The fundamental difference
between the two is that whereas in a departmental proceeding a delinquent employee can be held 10
| P a g e guilty on the basis of “preponderance of probabilities”, in a criminal court the prosecution
has to prove its case “beyond reasonable doubt”. In short, the difference between the two
proceedings would lie in the nature of evidence and the degree of its scrutiny. The two forums
therefore run at different levels. For this reason, this Court has consistently held that merely
because a person has been acquitted in a criminal trial, he cannot be ipso facto reinstated in service.

9. Be that as it may, a delinquent employee after his dismissal from service, nevertheless, seeks
reinstatement when he is acquitted by a criminal court on the same set of charges and facts. A very
heavy reliance is then placed on a decision of this Court given in Capt. M. Paul Anthony v. Bharat
Gold Mines Ltd. & Anr.1 Reliance was placed on this decision by the present respondent as well,
before the learned Single Judge, as well as before the Division Bench of Rajasthan High Court. Both
1 (1999) 3 SCC 679 11 | P a g e the courts have relied on this judgment while giving their decision in
favour of the respondent. In Capt. M. Paul Anthony, this Court had indeed held that as the
petitioner before them had been acquitted on the same set of charges by a criminal court, he should
be reinstated in service, though he was dismissed from service after facing a departmental
proceeding. But then the case of Capt. M. Paul Anthony must be appreciated in the background of its
unique facts.

10. Capt. M. Paul Anthony was working in the year 1985 as a ‘Security Officer’ with ‘Bharat Gold
Mines Ltd.’, which was engaged in the mining of gold in the Kolar Gold mines in Karnataka. On
02.06.1985 a raid was conducted by the Superintendent of Police at the residence of Capt. M. Paul
Anthony (whom we should refer here also as the ‘petitioner’), from where a sponge gold ball
weighing 4.5 grams and 1276 grams of ‘gold bearing sand’ were recovered. He was immediately
suspended from his services 12 | P a g e and the same day an F.I.R. was registered. The next day
petitioner received a charge sheet and hence departmental proceedings were also initiated against
him. The petitioner then moved an application before his disciplinary authorities praying that the
departmental proceedings be stayed till the conclusion of the criminal proceedings, but his request
was turned down. Meanwhile he returned to his home State of Kerala and requested for an
adjournment of the disciplinary proceedings. This request was also turned down. The departmental
proceedings went ex-parte against the petitioner where he was found guilty of misconduct. On
07.06.1986 petitioner was dismissed from service. During his entire period of suspension, he was
not given any subsistence allowance.

On 03.02.1987 Capt. M. Paul Anthony was acquitted in the criminal trial, on the grounds that the
prosecution had failed to establish its case, 13 | P a g e particularly the police raid on which the
entire case was based. The petitioner, immediately after his acquittal, placed a copy of the judgment
of the criminal court before his departmental authorities and prayed for his reinstatement. This was
denied and consequently the petitioner filed a departmental appeal which was also dismissed. He

4

The State Of Rajasthan vs Phool Singh on 2 September, 2022

then approached the High Court of Karnataka, where his writ petition was allowed by the Court and
his reinstatement was ordered on the ground that on the same set of charges, the petitioner has been
acquitted by a criminal court and hence he must be reinstated in service. The State filed a special
appeal before the Division Bench which was allowed and the order of the learned Single Judge was
set aside. The petitioner (Capt. M. Paul Anthony) then challenged the order of the Division Bench of
the Karnataka High Court before this Court.

14 | P a g e There were two factors which weighed with the Supreme Court, while deciding that case.
The first was the admitted fact that the petitioner was not given any subsistence allowance during
his period of suspension and therefore, he was not in a position to face the departmental
proceedings in Karnataka while he was residing in Kerala. The second aspect was that the petitioner
was being charged on the same set of facts in the two proceedings and therefore, he had made
request to the departmental authorities to stay the departmental proceedings till the conclusion of
the criminal case, a request which was denied. This aspect seems to be the most important factor
weighing in the mind of this Court, as this Court was of the opinion that the charges, (both in the
criminal court and with the department), involved a complicated question of fact and law, relating to
the “raid” made by the police, and therefore the departmental proceedings should have been stayed
15 | P a g e and it should have awaited the result of the criminal proceedings. It was in the raid made
by the Police that the ‘Gold sponge ball’ and ‘Gold bearing sand’ were allegedly recovered from his
residence. This factum of “raid and recovery” which was the fulcrum of the case, stood disproved.
Under these circumstances, it was held that the petitioner was liable to be reinstated. Capt. M. Paul
Anthony thus must be appreciated for its unique facts and to our mind it does not lay down a law of
universal application.

11. We say this because as against Capt. M. Paul Anthony, we have a large number of cases where
this Court has consistently held that the two proceedings, i.e., criminal and departmental, are
entirely different and merely because one has been acquitted in a criminal trial that itself will not
result in the reinstatement in service when one has been found guilty in a departmental proceeding.
We may refer to a few of these decisions.

16 | P a g e In the case of Union of India v. Sitaram Mishra2, a constable in Central Reserve Police
Force (CRPF) was charged for being negligent and careless and therefore, was removed from
service. The facts of the case were that the constable while removing the magazine of his 9mm
carbine gun, accidently fired eight rounds which resulted in the death of one constable who was at
the relevant time in the same barrack. The constable was held guilty of misconduct in the
disciplinary proceedings and was dismissed from service. Meanwhile the constable was also tried for
the offence under Section 304 of IPC in a criminal trial where he was acquitted. He thereafter filed a
writ petition before the High Court challenging his dismissal from service. The writ petition was
dismissed but later on an appeal before a Division Bench, the order of the learned Single Judge was
set aside and it was ordered that since the constable by that time had 2 (2019) 20 SCC 588 17 | P a g
e been acquitted in the criminal court, he is liable to be reinstated in service and since by that time
he had retired from service, he was to be treated in service with directions that he be given back
wages and pension. This Court while deciding the appeal filed by the Union of India came to the
conclusion that the grounds which weighed with the High Court were specious, and merely because

5

The State Of Rajasthan vs Phool Singh on 2 September, 2022

the employee was acquitted by the criminal court it does not mean, ipso-facto that he is entitled to
be reinstated in service, since he was dismissed from service after facing a disciplinary proceeding.
The reason being that the disciplinary proceedings are governed by a different standard of proof,
which are different from what is applied in a criminal proceeding. Whereas, in a criminal trial the
burden lies on the prosecution to establish the charge beyond reasonable doubt and in a
departmental proceeding, the charges have to be proved on the basis of preponderance of
probabilities.

18 | P a g e In the above case a distinction has also been drawn by this Court between a “criminal
offence” and “misconduct”. One has to be proved in a criminal court, the other in a departmental
proceeding, and though both may arise from the same set of facts, yet there is a clear distinction
between the two and merely because one has been acquitted in a criminal trial, it would not amount
to a reversal of the findings of “misconduct”, which were arrived in a departmental proceeding. This
Court also observed that the High Court fell into an error in doing exactly this, which was done by
drawing an ‘erroneous inference’ from the decision of this Court given in Capt. M. Paul Anthony. We
must therefore, reproduce here the two paragraphs from the judgment of this Court in Sitaram
Mishra (supra) :-

“14. The fact that the first respondent was acquitted in the course of the criminal trial
cannot operate ipso facto as a ground for vitiating the finding of misconduct

19 | P a g e which has been arrived at during the course of the disciplinary proceedings. The High
Court, in our view, has drawn an erroneous inference from the decision of this Court in M. Paul
Anthony v. Bharat Gold Mines Ltd. [M. Paul Anthony v. Bharat Gold Mines Ltd., (1999) 3 SCC 679 :
1999 SCC (L&S) 810]. The High Court adverted to the following principle of law laid down in the
above judgment: (SCC p. 687, para 13) “13….While in the departmental proceedings the standard of
proof is one of preponderance of the probabilities, in a criminal case, the charge has to be proved by
the prosecution beyond reasonable doubt. The little exception may be where the departmental
proceedings and the criminal case are based on the same set of facts and the evidence in both the
proceedings is common without there being a variance.”

15. It is undoubtedly correct that the charge in the criminal trial arose from the death of a
co-employee in the course of the incident resulting from the firing of a bullet which took 20 | P a g e
place from the weapon which was assigned to the first respondent as a member of the Force. But the
charge of misconduct is on the ground of the negligence of the first respondent in handling his
weapon and his failure to comply with the departmental instructions in regard to the manner in
which the weapon should be handled. Consequently, the acquittal in the criminal case was not a
ground for setting aside the penalty which was imposed in the course of the disciplinary enquiry.
Hence, having regard to the parameters that govern the exercise of judicial review in disciplinary
matters, we are of the view that the judgment [Sitaram Mishra v. Union of India, 2007 SCC OnLine
Cal 718 :

(2008) 1 Cal LJ 863] of the Division Bench of the High Court is unsustainable.” A
three Judge Bench of this Court in Ajit Kumar Nag v. General Manager (PJ), Indian

6

The State Of Rajasthan vs Phool Singh on 2 September, 2022

Oil Corpn. Ltd.3 held the position of law, was explained as follows :-

“11….. In our judgment, the law is fairly well settled. Acquittal by a criminal court
would not debar an employer from exercising power in accordance with Rules and
Regulations in force. The two proceedings criminal and departmental - are entirely 3
(2005) 7 SCC 764

21 | P a g e different. They operate in different fields and have different objectives. Whereas the
object of criminal trial is to inflict appropriate punishment on offender, the purpose of enquiry
proceedings is to deal with the delinquent departmentally and to impose penalty in accordance with
service Rules. In a criminal trial, incriminating statement made by the accused in certain
circumstances or before certain officers is totally inadmissible in evidence. Such strict rules of
evidence and procedure would not apply to departmental proceedings. The degree of proof which is
necessary to order a conviction is different from the degree of proof necessary to record the
commission of delinquency. The rule relating to appreciation of evidence in the two proceedings is
also not similar. In criminal law, burden of proof is on the prosecution and unless the prosecution is
able to prove the guilt of the accused 'beyond reasonable doubt’, he cannot be convicted by a court of
law. In departmental enquiry, on the other hand, penalty can be imposed on the delinquent officer
on a finding recorded on the basis of 'preponderance of probability'…..” 22 | P a g e

12. Thus, in the present case, the learned Single Judge as well as the Division Bench of Rajasthan
High Court were clearly wrong in interfering with the order of the Disciplinary Authority of the
Rajasthan Police and placing their reliance on Capt. M. Paul Anthony. It is the Disciplinary
Authority which is best equipped to reach a finding whether a “misconduct” has been committed.
The prime concern of a Judge should be whether such a finding has been arrived after following a
fair procedure, following the principles of natural justice and fairness. This aspect has been
underlined in a recent judgment of this Court (State of Rajasthan v. Heem Singh4). The relevant
para is reproduced as hereunder:-

“39. In exercising judicial review in disciplinary matters, there are two ends of the
spectrum. The first embodies a rule of restraint. The second defines when
interference is permissible. The rule of restraint constricts the ambit of judicial
review. This is for a valid reason.

4 (2020) SCC OnLine SC 886 23 | P a g e The determination of whether a misconduct
has been committed lies primarily within the domain of the disciplinary authority.
The judge does not assume the mantle of the disciplinary authority. Nor does the
judge wear the hat of an employer. Deference to a finding of fact by the disciplinary
authority is a recognition of the idea that it is the employer who is responsible for the
efficient conduct of their service. Disciplinary enquiries have to abide by the rules of
natural justice. But they are not governed by strict rules of evidence which apply to
judicial proceedings. The standard of proof is hence not the strict standard which
governs a criminal trial, of proof beyond reasonable doubt, but a civil standard
governed by a preponderance of probabilities.

7

The State Of Rajasthan vs Phool Singh on 2 September, 2022

Within the rule of preponderance, there are varying approaches based on context and subject. The
first end of the spectrum is founded on deference and autonomy – deference to the position of the
disciplinary authority as a fact finding authority and autonomy of the employer in maintaining
discipline and efficiency of the service. At the other end of the spectrum is the principle that the
court has the jurisdiction to interfere when the findings in the enquiry are based on no evidence or
when they 24 | P a g e suffer from perversity. A failure to consider vital evidence is an incident of
what the law regards as a perverse determination of fact. Proportionality is an entrenched feature of
our jurisprudence.

Service jurisprudence has recognized it for long years in allowing for the authority of the court to
interfere when the finding or the penalty are disproportionate to the weight of the evidence or
misconduct. Judicial craft lies in maintaining a steady sail between the banks of these two shores
which have been termed as the two ends of the spectrum. Judges do not rest with a mere recitation
of the hands-off mantra when they exercise judicial review. To determine whether the finding in a
disciplinary enquiry is based on some evidence an initial or threshold level of scrutiny is
undertaken. That is to satisfy the conscience of the court that there is some evidence to support the
charge of misconduct and to guard against perversity. But this does not allow the court to re-

appreciate evidentiary findings in a disciplinary enquiry or to substitute a view which appears to the
judge to be more appropriate. To do so would offend the first principle which has been outlined
above. The ultimate guide is the exercise of robust common sense 25 | P a g e without which the
judges’ craft is in vain.” It is true that this Court, apart from the case of Capt. M. Paul Anthony, has
in a few cases not interfered with the reinstatement of an employee who was dismissed as a result of
disciplinary proceedings, and was only reinstated in service because of his acquittal in criminal
proceedings, but again the reasons which weighed with the Court in such cases were that in almost
in all such cases, the acquittal was an honourable acquittal and not an acquittal on a technicality, or
on acquittal given because of “benefit of doubt”.

13. In the case at hand, respondent was convicted by the Trial Court and in appeal the Appellate
Court only acquitted him by giving him a “benefit of doubt”. The operative part of order dated
26.11.1994 of the Appellate Authority reads as under: -

“Hence, on the basis of aforesaid analysis the present appeal on behalf of the
appellant accused 26 | P a g e against the respondent/ prosecution is allowed and the
judgment and sentence dated 21.3.94 passed by the Subordinate Court of Munsif &
Judicial Magistrate Dholpur is hereby quashed and the above appellant/accused
Phool Singh is acquitted for the charge u/s 392 IPC & u/s 3/25 of Arms Act by giving
benefit of doubt.”

14. Therefore, in the present case the acquittal of the respondent is not an honourable
acquittal, but an acquittal given due to a “benefit of doubt”. Under these
circumstances and in view of the position of law as stated above, this appeal is
allowed and the order dated 29.01.2014 of the learned Single Judge and the order
dated 09.09.2020 of the Division Bench of Rajasthan High Court, Jaipur Bench are

8

The State Of Rajasthan vs Phool Singh on 2 September, 2022

hereby set aside.

……..............................J [S. RAVINDRA BHAT] ……............................J. [SUDHANSHU DHULIA]
New Delhi, September 02, 2022.

27 | P a g e

9