The State Of Sikkim vs Jasbir Singh on 1 February, 2022

The State Of Sikkim vs Jasbir Singh on 1 February, 2022

Author: D.Y. Chandrachud

Bench: D.Y. Chandrachud, Surya Kant, Vikram Nath

Reportable

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

Criminal Appeal No. 85 of 2022

The State of Sikkim                                        … Appellant

Versus

Jasbir Singh & Anr.                                       … Respondent

J U D G M E N T   D r   D h a n a n j a y a   Y   C h a n d r a c h u d ,
J   A
Facts........................................................................................................................ 2 B
Submissions............................................................................................................ 8 C
Analysis................................................................................................................. 14 D
Conclusion............................................................................................................. 42 A Facts 1 This
appeal arises from a judgment of a Single Judge of the High Court of Sikkim. While exercising the
revisional jurisdiction under Sections 397 and 401 read with Section 482 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure 1973 1, the High Court has upheld the order of the Sessions Judge, Special Division-II,
Sikkim, at Gangtok, directing the Chief Judicial Magistrate, East Sikkim to furnish a written notice
to the Commanding Officer of the unit of the respondent-accused and deliver him for trial by a
court-martial.

2 On 14 December 2014, at about 19:40 hours, Lance Naik Rajesh Kumar of 17 Mountain Division of
the Indian Army lodged a First Information Report 2 before the Station House Officer at the Sadar
Police Station in Gangtok stating inter alia that on the relevant date at around 6.00 p.m., when he
returned to his barracks, he struck up a conversation with two riflemen for a short while. After that,
as he was freshening up, between 6.30 p.m. and 6.45 p.m. he heard sounds of gunshots inside the
barracks. He immediately rushed to the barracks and witnessed the respondent- accused, Lance
Naik Jasbir Singh, opening fire on a rifleman, Balbir Singh, with an INSAS Rifle. The informant
pulled the respondent-accused out of the barracks along with the rifle and simultaneously raised an
alarm for help, on which Signalmen Ujjal Sinha and C.H. Anil arrived at the spot. The accused, in
the meanwhile, escaped from the clutches of the informant. The informant then immediately rang

1

The State Of Sikkim vs Jasbir Singh on 1 February, 2022

up the medical room and returned to check on the injured rifleman, by which time he 1 “CrPC”
suspected that the he was already dead. FIR No. 409 of 2014 was registered on 14 December 2014 at
the Sadar Police Station, Gangtok.

3 On 15 December 2014, the custody of the accused was handed over by the competent military
authority to the Investigating Officer 3 and an arrest/ court surrender memo was issued by the
Sub-Inspector of Police at the Sardar Police Station. While conducting the investigation, the IO
issued a requisition to the Commanding Officer of the 17 Mountain Division Pro Unit, informing
him that an FIR under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code 1860 4 had been registered against the
respondent-accused. The IO requested certain documents for the purpose of investigation, namely:

(i)       The order of appointment of the accused;
(ii)      Duty Deployment Chart of Sunday, 14 December 2014;
(iii)     Weapon Issue Register of Sunday, 14 December 2014; and

(iv)      Records of any previous offence.

4         In response to the above communication, Colonel RR Nair, the Commanding

Officer5 of the 17 Mountain Division Pro Unit furnished the following documents by his letter dated
27 December 2014:

(i) Copy of the posting order in respect of No. 778224F L/Nk(MP) Jasbir Singh;

(ii) CTC of Pilot duty detailment extract as on 14 December 2014;

( i i i )   C T C   o f   W e a p o n   I s s u e   R e g i s t e r ,   w h e r e   h e   i n f o r m e d   t h e   I O   t h a t   t h e
respondent-accused had withdrawn the weapon for piloting duty on 14 3 “IO” 4 “IPC”
5 “CO” December 2014. After completion of the duty however, while committing the
offence, the respondent had unauthorizedly accessed the weapon; and

(iv) Record of previous offences.

A copy of this communication was forwarded by the CO to the Headquarters of the 17 Mountain
Division Pro Unit.

5 On 12 January 2015, the IO filed an application before the Chief Judicial Magistrate (East &
North), for recording the statement of the informant (Rifleman Rajesh Kumar). On 13 February
2015, the IO submitted a charge-sheet after the completion of investigation against the
respondent-accused for offences punishable under Sections 302 and 308 of the IPC. An order of
committal was passed by the Chief Judicial Magistrate to the Principal Sessions Judge. On 28
February 2015, a case was registered as Sessions Trial Case No.03/2015. On 15 July 2015, the
Sessions Judge framed charges against the respondent under Sections 302 and 308 of the IPC and
under Section 25(1-B)(a) of the Arms Act 1959 6. On 18 November 2015, the Sessions Judge allowed

2

The State Of Sikkim vs Jasbir Singh on 1 February, 2022

an application filed under Section 216 of the CrPC for alteration of the charge under Section
25(1-B)(a) to Section 27(3) of the Arms Act.

6 During the course of the trial, on 18 June 2016, the Sessions Judge directed the issuance of fresh
summons to Colonel RR Nair returnable on 7 July 2016. On 07 July 2016, the Sessions Judge was
informed that a letter had been received from the Army authorities stating that Colonel RR Nair was
undergoing a training course 6 “Arms Act” and was on leave up to 24 July 2016. During the course
of the trial, the CO, Colonel RR Nair was examined as PW19 on 28 July 2016. After the recording of
evidence was complete, the Sessions Judge heard the counsel for the parties for final arguments.
During the course of the hearing, counsel for the accused inter alia contended that as the
respondent-accused and the deceased were both governed by the Army Act 19507 when the incident
took place, in view of Section 69 of the Army Act, the accused could be tried only by a General
Court-Martial and not by the Sessions Court. Having due regard to the provisions of Section 69 of
the Army Act, the Sessions Judge by his order dated 9 March 2017 upheld the objection of the
respondent-accused by concluding that given the nature of offence, the accused ought to have been
tried by court-martial alone and that the Sessions Court had no jurisdiction. With this conclusion,
the Chief Judicial Magistrate was directed to give a written notice to the CO of the respondent’s unit
or the competent military authority for his trial by a court-martial.

7 The order of the Sessions Court was challenged in revision. The Sikkim High Court in its judgment
dated 6 April 2019 adverted to the provisions of Section 69 and 70 of the Army Act. The High Court
held that the procedure prescribed under Sections 125 and 126 of the Army Act, Section 475 of the
CrPC, and Rules 3, 4 and 5 of the Criminal Courts and Court Martial (Adjustment of Jurisdiction)
Rules 1978 8 had not been observed. While issuing notice to the Army authorities, the High Court
held that both the respondent and the deceased were subject to the Army Act. The 7 “Army Act” 8
“1978 Rules” procedure mandated by the 1978 Rules had to be followed and the submission that the
Army authority had exercised their discretion to try the accused in the criminal court was held to
bear no weight on the ground that no documentary evidence existed to prove the exercise of the
discretion. Moreover, the mere handing over of the accused to the civil authority was held not to be
proof of the exercise of the option. While a minute sheet was produced before the High Court where
the General Officer Commanding9 had accepted the recommendation that the accused be tried by
the Sessions Court, the High Court rejected this on the ground that: (i) the document was not
furnished before the Sessions Judge and (ii) the document which was produced was a photocopy
and not a certified copy. The revision petition was dismissed.

8 Pursuant to the impugned judgment of the High Court, the GOC of 17 Mountain Division Pro Unit,
Maj. General. RC Tiwari, by an order dated 22 April 2019, exercised his powers under Section 125 of
the Army Act and decided that the proceedings against the respondent-accused be instituted before
the criminal court and that he be detained in civil custody. An application was filed before the Chief
Judicial Magistrate to convey the decision of the GOC. By an order dated 22 April 2019, the Chief
Judicial Magistrate rejected the application of the GOC in view of the order of the Sessions Judge
dated 9 March 2017, which required that the accused be delivered to the competent military
authority. Since this order had been upheld by the High Court, the Chief Judicial Magistrate
directed the Superintendent of Prisons, Central Jail, Rongyek to hand over the respondent to the

3

The State Of Sikkim vs Jasbir Singh on 1 February, 2022

competent military 9 “GOC” authority. The respondent was handed over to the Army and has been
in military custody since 23 April 2019. Meanwhile, the respondent retired from service on 31 March
2020. On the same day, the Army authorities passed an order for extension of the time of detention.

B      Submissions

9      The State of Sikkim is in appeal against the judgment of the High Court. The

State has been represented by Mr Vivek Kohli, learned Advocate General. The challenge made by the
State of Sikkim has been supported by the Union of India appearing as a respondent through Mr
Aman Lekhi, learned Additional Solicitor General. The arguments on behalf of the respondent were
made by Mr Pradeep Kumar Dey, learned Senior Counsel.

10 Mr Vivek Kohli, Advocate General appearing on behalf of the appellant-State made the following
submissions:

(i) The High Court and Sessions Court have both failed to appreciate that the criminal
courts and court-martial have concurrent jurisdiction to try a case, depending on the
“discretion” exercised under Section 125 of the Army Act.

The “discretion” to decide whether or not the accused is to be tried by court- martial, is solely with
the Commanding Officer;

(ii) Under Section 125, one of the following three situations may arise:

(a) The Commanding Officer may exercise his discretion and affirmatively choose to
try the accused through court martial;

(b) The Commanding Officer may exercise his discretion and may not choose a trial
through court martial; and

(c) There may be no overt exercise of discretion by the Commanding Officer, in which
event his conduct should determine whether there was an exercise of discretion;

(iii) When the Commanding Officer exercises discretion in terms of the first two
situations noted above, the procedure under Section 126 of the Army Act and Rules 3,
4 and 5 of the 1978 Rules becomes applicable;

(iv) However, when the Commanding Officer does not exercise his discretion as
detailed in the last situation, the absence of any objection by the Army authorities to
the trial by the criminal court can be regarded as a tacit approval of the Commanding
Officer for the accused to be tried by the criminal court;

4

The State Of Sikkim vs Jasbir Singh on 1 February, 2022

(v) As held by this Court in Joginder Singh v. State of Himachal Pradesh10, if the
designated officer does not exercise his discretion to institute proceedings before a
court-martial, then the Army Act would not come in the way of the criminal court
exercising its ordinary jurisdiction in the manner provided by law;

(vi) On the basis of the above premises, in the present case, the discretion has been
exercised by the Commanding Officer by recommending that the trial can be
conducted by the ‘civil court’ (ie, the criminal court) which, in the present case is, the
Sessions Judge, Special Division-II, Sikkim, Gangtok.

The following circumstances indicate the exercise of this discretion:

10 (1971) 3 SCC 86

(a) The handing over of the accused by the Commanding Officer to the IO on 15
December 2014, immediately after the incident took place on 14 December 2014;

(b) The letter dated 27 December 2014 by the Commanding Officer in response to the requisition
made by the IO (by his letter dated 26 December 2014) for furnishing of documents for conducting
the investigation;

(c) The recording of the statement under Section 164 of the CrPC on 12 January 2015 of the
informant - Lance Naik Rajesh Kumar;

(d) The examination on 28 July 2015 of the Commanding Officer (Colonel RR Nair) during the
course of the trial, together with the examination of other Army officials;

(e) The participation, right from the institution of the FIR till the investigation and throughout the
trial, by the Commanding Officer and the Army in the proceedings before the criminal court. Thus,
the trial has to be conducted by the criminal court and not the court-martial;

(f) On 16 January 2015, the Army authorities recommended that the case of the accused be tried by
the civil court (criminal court). On 8 March 2015, this recommendation culminated into the
Commanding Officer exercising “discretion” by deciding that the case of the accused should be tried
by the criminal court. On 22 April 2019, the Commanding Officer exercised his discretion under
Section 125 of the Army Act read with Rule 9 of the 1978 Rules by addressing a communication to
the Chief Judicial Magistrate, East Sikkim (Gangtok), intimating the decision that the trial of the
accused should be conducted by the criminal court; and

(vii) The order of the Sessions Judge dated 9 March 2017, turned back the clock at the stage of final
arguments. The High Court has failed to consider that under Section 122 of Army Act, the period of
limitation to commence a trial by court-martial is three years from the date of the offence. In the
present case, the offence took place on 14 December 2014 and immediately thereafter proceedings
were initiated before the criminal court.

5

The State Of Sikkim vs Jasbir Singh on 1 February, 2022

11 Mr Aman Lekhi, Additional Solicitor General, has supported the submissions of the State of
Sikkim and urged the following propositions:

(i) The controversy in the present case is covered by the decision of this Court in
Joginder Singh v. State of Himachal Pradesh11, where it was held that the Army
authority was aware of the offence committed and decided to handover the custody of
the accused to the police and not to hold a court martial;

(ii) There are three categories of offences, namely: -

(a) Offences which are created by the Army Act, such as those provided under
Sections 34, 35, 36 and 37, which are exclusively triable by a court-

martial;

(b) Offences which are committed under Section 70 of the Army Act which are to be tried by a
criminal court subject to exceptions; and 11 (1971) 3 SCC 86

(c) Offences involving the exercise of jurisdiction by the court-martial and by an ordinary criminal
court (Section 69), where a court martial can be convened if a decision in terms of Section 125 of the
Army Act is taken;

(iii) In the present case, the Army authorities had taken control of the accused and handed him over
to the IO for trial by criminal court. This clearly establishes that the Army did not want to try the
accused by court-martial. 12 Mr Pradeep Kumar Dey, Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the
respondent-accused has supported the decision of the High Court and made the following
submissions:

(i) In view of the provisions of Sections 69 and 70 of the Army Act, a trial is possible
only before the court-martial and not by an ordinary criminal court;

(ii) Sections 125 and 126 operate in different spheres. Section 125 relates to the
discretion of the Army authorities to the effect that when a criminal court and a
court- martial both have jurisdiction in respect of an offence, it shall be the discretion
of the Commanding Officer to decide before which court the proceedings shall be
instituted;

(iii) Section 126 deals with the power of the criminal court to require delivery of an
offender. When a criminal court having jurisdiction is of opinion that proceedings
shall be instituted before itself in respect of any alleged offence, it may, by written
notice, require the officer referred to in Section 125, at his option, to either deliver the
offender to the nearest magistrate to be proceeded against according to law, or to
postpone proceedings pending a reference to the Central Government. In every such
case the said officer shall either deliver the offender in compliance with the

6

The State Of Sikkim vs Jasbir Singh on 1 February, 2022

requisition, or shall forthwith refer the question as to the court before which the
proceedings are to be instituted for the determination by the Central Government,
whose order upon such reference shall be final;

(iv) Section 475 of the CrPC and Rules 3, 4 and 5 of the 1978 Rules indicate that in
this case, a trial is only permissible before the court-martial;

(v) It is a settled principle of law that where a statute provides that a particular thing
should be done in the manner prescribed by law and if it is not done in the same
manner, failure to comply with this mandatory requirement would lead to severe
consequences and any action taken would be a nullity. It will be a mockery of the
provisions of Section 461(l) of the CrPC and other provisions of the law and the trial
stands vitiated;

(vi) The trial before the ordinary criminal court will cause serious prejudice to the
accused and will result in a failure of justice. The entire trial before the ordinary
criminal court is null and void as it lacks jurisdiction;

(vii) The decision in Joginder Singh (supra) is contrary to the judgments of the
Constitution Bench in Som Datt Datta v. Union of India and others12 and Ram Sarup
v. Union of India and another13;

(viii) The crucial question is the stage at which the discretion has to be exercised
under Section 125. The decision has to be taken after the filing of the charge-

sheet and before taking cognizance. However, in the present case, the decision was taken by the
Army authority to opt for a trial before the ordinary criminal court before filing the charge-sheet,
which is clear from the cross- 12 AIR 1969 SC 414 13 AIR 1965 SC 247 examination of the
Commanding Officer. Since the decision was taken before the submission of the charge-sheet, it is
immaterial;

(ix) The Magistrate was required under Rules 3 and 4 of the 1978 Rules to issue a notice to the
Commanding Officer and to require him to take a decision under Section 125 of the Army Act. The
Magistrate, however, committed the case to the Sessions Court on the same day as the filing of the
charge sheet, as a consequence of which there was non-compliance of the provisions of Rules 3, 4
and 5 of the 1978 Rules. In view of the well settled position of law, the discretion under Section 125
has to be exercised by the Commanding Officer only after filing of the charge-sheet;

(x) The 1978 Rules have been framed in pursuance of the powers conferred under Section 475 CrPC
and the mandate of issuing a notice is provided under Section 126 of the Army Act; and

(xi) The respondent can still be tried by a court-martial under Section 123 of the Army Act, having
regard to the fact that his retirement was due on 31 March 2020.

7

13 The rival submissions shall now be considered.

The State Of Sikkim vs Jasbir Singh on 1 February, 2022

C      Analysis

14     Chapter VI of the Army Act deals with offences. The expression ‘civil offences’

is defined in Section 3(ii) to mean “an offence which is triable by a criminal court”. Section 6914
deals with civil offences. Section 7015 deals with civil offences which are not triable by a
court-martial.

15 Section 12516 deals with a situation where both a criminal court and a court- martial have
jurisdiction in respect of an offence. In such a case, it is the discretion of the Commanding Officer of
the unit where the accused person is serving to decide before which court the proceedings shall be
instituted, and if that officer decides that the proceedings should be instituted before a
court-martial, he may direct that the accused be retained in military custody. Section 125, in other
words, confers the discretion on the designated officer to decide whether the accused should be tried
by a court martial or by the regular criminal court. 16 Section 126, as the marginal note indicates,
deals with the powers of the criminal court “to require delivery of offender”. Section 126 provides
that when a 14 “69. Civil offences. Subject to the provisions of section 70, any person subject to this
Act who at any place in or beyond India, commits any civil offence, shall be deemed to be guilty of
an offence against this Act and, if charged therewith under this section, shall be liable to be tried by
a court-martial and, on conviction, be punishable as follows, that is to say,--

(a) if the offence is one which would be punishable under any law in force in India with death or
with transportation, he shall be liable to suffer any punishment, other than whipping, assigned for
the offence, by the aforesaid law and such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and

(b) in any other case, he shall be liable to suffer any punishment, other than whipping, assigned for
the offence by the law in force in India, or imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven
years, or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.” 15 “70. Civil offence not triable by
court-martial. A person subject to this Act who commits an offence of murder against a person not
subject to military, naval or air force law, or of culpable homicide not amounting to murder against
such a person or of rape in relation to such a person, shall not be deemed to be guilty of an offence
against this Act and shall not be tried by a court- martial, unless he commits any of the said
offences-

(a)       while on active service, or
(b)       at any place outside India, or
(c)       at a frontier post specified by the Central Government by notification in this behalf.”

16 “125. Choice between criminal court and court- martial. When a criminal court and a court-
martial have each jurisdiction in respect of an offence, it shall be in the discretion of the officer
commanding the army, army corps, division or independent brigade in which the accused person is

8

The State Of Sikkim vs Jasbir Singh on 1 February, 2022

serving or such other officer as may be prescribed to decide before which court the proceedings shall
be instituted, and, if that officer decides that they should be instituted before a court- martial, to
direct that the accused person shall be detained in military custody.” criminal court having
jurisdiction is of the opinion that the proceedings should be instituted before itself in respect of “any
alleged offence”, it may by written notice require the officer referred to in Section 125 to either
deliver over the offender to the nearest magistrate to be dealt with in accordance with law or in the
alternative to postpone the proceedings, pending a reference to the Central Government. Under
Section 126, the designated officer has two courses of action open: (i) deliver the offender in
compliance with the requisition of the criminal court; or (ii) refer the question to the Central
Government for determining the court before which the proceedings are to be instituted. The
determination by the Central Government is to be final.

17 Sections 125 and 126 operate in different domains. Section 125 envisages that there is a discretion
in the designated officer to determine as to whether the accused should be tried by a court-martial
or by the competent criminal court. Section 126 on the other hand recognises that the criminal court
may require the officer designated in Section 125 by a written notice, to deliver the offender to the
nearest magistrate to be proceeded with in accordance with law. Upon the issuance of such a written
notice, the designated officer has the discretion either to accept the decision of the criminal court by
delivering the offender or the officer may decide to refer the matter to the Central Government for
its decision. Section 126 explicitly recognises that in the event of a difference of view between the
officer designated under Section 125 and the criminal court under Section 126, the matter has to be
referred to the Central Government for resolution, finality being attached to the decision of the
Central Government. Section 126, in other words, has provided the modalities for resolving a
situation where a criminal court decides to proceed against the accused, while on the other hand the
designated officer under Section 125 decides to have the accused tried by a court-martial. It is to
resolve a situation of this nature that a reference is envisaged to the Central Government. 18 Section
47517 of the CrPC has empowered the Central Government to make rules consistent with the CrPC
and the Army Act, Navy Act 1957 and the Air Force Act 1950 and any other law relating to the Armed
Forces of the Union, as regards the cases in which persons subject to military, naval or air force law
or such other law, shall be tried by a court to which the CrPC applies or by a court-martial. The first
part of Section 475(1) recognizes the rule making power of the Central Government. The latter part
of Section 475(1) contemplates an eventuality in which a person is brought before a Magistrate and
is charged with offences for which that person is liable to be tried either by a court to which the CrPC
applies or by a court- 17 “475. Delivery to commanding officers of persons liable to be tried by
Court-martial- (1) The Central Government may make rules consistent with this Code and the Army
Act, 1950 (46 of 1950), the Navy Act, 1957 (62 of 1957), and the Air Force Act, 1950 (45 of 1950), and
any other law, relating to the Armed Forces of the Union, for the time being in force, as to cases in
which persons subject to military, navel or air force law, or such other law, shall be tried by a Court
to which this Code applies or by a Court-martial, and when any person is brought before a
Magistrate and charged with an offence for which he is liable to be tried either by a Court to which
this Code applies or by a Court-martial, such Magistrate shall have regard to such rules, and shall in
proper cases deliver him, together with a statement of the offence of which he is accused, to the
commanding officer of the unit to which he belongs, or to the commanding officer of the nearest
military, naval or air-force station, as the case may be, for purpose of being tried by a Court-martial.

9

Explanation.—In this section—

The State Of Sikkim vs Jasbir Singh on 1 February, 2022

(a) "unit" includes a regiment, corps, ship, detachment, group, battalion or company.

(b) "Court-martial" includes any tribunal with the powers similar to those of a Court-martial
constituted under the relevant law applicable to the Armed Forces of the Union.

(2) Every Magistrate shall, on receiving a written application for that purposes by the commanding
officer of any unit or body of soldiers, sailors or airmen stationed or employed at any such place, use
his utmost endeavours to apprehend and secure any person accused of such offence.

(3) A High Court may, if it thinks fit, direct that a prisoner detained in any jail situate within the
State be brought before a Court-martial for trial or to be examined touching any matter pending
before the Court-martial.” martial. In such a situation, the Magistrate is to have regard to the rules
and shall in proper cases deliver the person together with a statement of the offences of which he is
accused to the Commanding Officer of the unit of the nearest military, naval or air force station, for
the purpose of being tried by a court-martial. 19 In exercise of the powers which have been
conferred by Section 475 of the CrPC, the Central Government framed the Criminal Courts and
Court Martial (Adjustment of Jurisdiction) Rules 1952 which were notified and published in the
Gazette of India on 26 April 1952. These Rules were superseded by the Criminal Courts and
Court-Martial (Adjustment of Jurisdiction) Rules 1978. Rules 3, 4, and 5 of the 1978 Rules are
extracted below:

“3. Where a person subject to military, naval or air force law, or any other law
relating to the Armed Forces of the Union for the time being in force is brought
before a Magistrate and charged with an offence for which he is also liable to be tried
by a Court- martial, such Magistrate shall not proceed to try such person or to
commit the case to the Court of Session, unless—

(a) he is moved thereto by a competent military, naval or air force authority; or

(b) he is of opinion, for reasons to be recorded, that he should so proceed or to
commit without being moved thereto by such authority.

4. Before proceeding under clause (b) of rule 3, the Magistrate shall give a written notice to the
Commanding Officer or the competent military, naval or air force authority, as the case may be, of
the accused and until the expiry of a period of fifteen days from the date of service of the notice he
shall not-

(a) convict or acquit the accused under section 252, sub-

sections (1) and (2) of section 255 sub-section (1) of section 256 or section 257 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), or hear him in his defence under section 254 of the said Code;
or

10

The State Of Sikkim vs Jasbir Singh on 1 February, 2022

(b) frame in writing a charge against the accused under section 240 or sub-section (1) of section 246
of the said Code; or

(c) make an order committing the accused for trial to the Court of Session under section 209 of the
said Code; or

(d) make over the case for inquiry or trial under section 192 of the said Code.

5. Where a Magistrate has been moved by the competent military, naval or air force authority, as the
case may be, under clause (a) of rule 3, and the commanding officer of the accused or the competent
military, naval or air force authority, as the case may be, subsequently gives notice to such
Magistrate that, in the opinion of such officer or authority, the accused should be tried by a Court-
martial, such Magistrate if he has not taken any action or made any order referred to in clauses (a),
(b), (c) or (d) of rule 4, before receiving the notice shall stay the proceedings and, if the accused is in
his power or under his control, shall deliver him together with the statement referred to in
sub-section (1) of section 475 of the said Code to the officer specified in the said sub-section.” 20
Under Rule 3, where a person who is subject to military, naval or air force law, (or any other law
relating to the Armed Forces of the Union) is brought before a Magistrate and is charged with an
offence liable to tried by a court-martial, the Magistrate cannot proceed to try such a person or
commit the case to the Court of Session, except in one of the two eventualities specified in clauses
(a) and (b). Clause (a) envisages a situation where the Magistrate is moved by a competent military,
naval, or air force authority. Clause (b) envisages a situation where the Magistrate is of the opinion
that the person should be tried by him or that the case should be committed to the Court of Session.

21 Rule 4(c) provides that before proceeding under clause (b) of Rule 3, the Magistrate has to give a
written notice to the Commanding Officer or the competent authority of the accused and until the
expiry of fifteen days, the Magistrate cannot make an order committing the accused for trial to the
Court of Session under Section 209 of the CrPC. Rule 5 deals with a situation where the Magistrate
has been moved by the competent military, naval or air force authority under clause (a) of Rule 3
and subsequently, the Commanding Officer or competent authority gives notice to the Magistrate
that in the opinion of the officer, the accused should be tried by a court-martial.

22 The purpose underlying Rule 3 and Rule 4 is that unless the Magistrate has been moved by a
competent military, naval or air force authority, the Magistrate must furnish a written notice to the
Commanding Officer or the competent authority, if he is of the opinion that either the trial should
proceed before the Magistrate or an order of committal of the case to the Court of Sessions should
be passed against the accused held liable to be tried by a court-martial. The object and purpose of
giving the notice is to facilitate an exercise of discretion by the designated officer to determine
whether the accused should be tried by a court-martial or in the alternative, should be proceeded
with before the ordinary criminal court. The above provisions have been interpreted in several
decisions of this Court. 23 In Ram Sarup v. Union of India and another18, the petitioner, who was a
sepoy subject to the Army Act, was charged under Section 69 of the Army Act read 18 (1964) 4 SCR
931 with Section 302 of the IPC. The petitioner was tried by the General Court-Martial for having
shot dead two sepoys, and was found guilty and sentenced to death. The Central Government

11

The State Of Sikkim vs Jasbir Singh on 1 February, 2022

confirmed the findings and the sentence awarded by the General Court-Martial. The petitioner inter
alia challenged the provisions of Section 125 of the Army Act on the ground that they were in
violation of Article 14 of the Constitution. While dealing with the constitutional challenge, Justice
Raghubar Dayal, speaking for the Constitution Bench observed as follows:

“17. Section 69 provides for the punishment which can be imposed on a person tried
for committing any civil offence at any place in or beyond India, if charged under
Section 69 and convicted by a Court Martial. Section 70 provides for certain persons
who cannot be tried by Court Martial, except in certain circumstances. Such persons
are those who commit an offence of murder, culpable homicide not amounting to
murder or of rape, against a person not subject to Military, Naval or Air-Force law.
They can be tried by Court Martial of any of those three offences if the offence is
committed while on active service or at any place outside India or at a frontier post
specified by the Central Government by notification in that behalf. This much
therefore is clear that persons committing other offences over which both the Court
Martial and ordinary criminal courts have jurisdiction can and must be tried by
Courts-Martial if the offences are committed while the accused be on active service or
at any place out-side India or at a frontier post. This indication of the circumstances
in which it would be better exercise of discretion to have a trial by Court Martial, is an
index as to what considerations should guide the decision of the officer concerned
about the trial being by a Court Martial or by an ordinary Court. Such considerations
can be based on grounds of [maintenance] of discipline in the army, the persons
against whom the offences are committed and the nature of the offences. It may be
considered better for the purpose of discipline that offences which are not of a serious
type be ordinarily tried by a Court Martial, which is empowered under Section 69 to
award a punishment provided by the ordinary law and also such less punishment as
be mentioned in the Act. Chapter VII mentions the various punishments which can
be awarded by Court Martial and Section 72 provides that subject to the provisions of
the Act a Court Martial may, on convicting a person of any of the offences specified in
Sections 31 to 68 inclusive, award either the particular punishment with which the
offence is stated in the said sections to be punishable or in lieu thereof any one of the
punishments lower in the scale set out in Section 71, regard being had to the nature
and degree of the offence.” 24 In the above extract, the Court dealt with the
considerations which would ultimately weigh in determining as to whether a trial by
a court-martial should be convened. In that backdrop, the Court noted :

“21. In short, it is clear that there could be a variety of circumstances which may
influence the decision as to whether the offender be tried by a Court Martial or by an
ordinary criminal court, and therefore it becomes inevitable that the discretion to
make the choice as to which Court should try the accused be left to responsible
military officers under whom the accused be serving. Those officers are to be guided
by considerations of the exigencies of the service, maintenance of discipline in the
army, speedier trial, the nature of the offence and the person against whom the
offence is committed.” (emphasis supplied) 25 Hence in the view of the Constitution

12

The State Of Sikkim vs Jasbir Singh on 1 February, 2022

Bench, there are a wide variety of circumstances which may be relevant in deciding
whether an accused should be tried by a court-martial or by an ordinary criminal
court. Due to this, the choice of making this decision is entrusted to the military
officer under whom the accused was serving. The Court also noted that under Section
549 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1898 (equivalent to Section 475 of the CrPC),
the final choice about the forum of the trial of a person accused of a ‘civil offence’
rests with the Central Government, whenever there is a difference of opinion between
a criminal court and the military authority.

26 In Som Datt Datta v. Union of India19, the Constitution Bench considered a
challenge under Article 32 to the proceedings before a General Court-Martial,
pursuant to which the petitioner had been found guilty of charges under Section 304
and Section 149 of the IPC and sentenced to rigorous imprisonment of six years and
cashiering. The first question which was considered by the Constitution Bench was
whether the Court-Martial had jurisdiction to try and convict the petitioner for the
offences. Justice V Ramaswami, speaking for the Constitution Bench, elaborated that
under Chapter VI of the Army Act, Sections 34 to 68 define the offences against the
Act which are triable by a court-martial. After alluding to Sections 69 and 70, the
Court observed:

“4. […] Shortly stated, under this Chapter there are three categories of offences,
namely, (1) offences committed by a person subject to the Act triable by a Court
Martial in respect whereof specific punishments have been assigned; (2) civil offences
committed by the said person at any place in or beyond India, but deemed to be
offences committed under the Act and, if charged under Section 69 of the Act, triable
by a Court Martial; and (3) offences of murder and culpable homicide not amounting
to murder or rape committed by a person subject to the Act against a person not
subject to the military law. Subject to a few exceptions, they are not triable by Court
Martial, but are triable only by ordinary criminal courts. The legal position therefore
is that when an offence is for the first time created by the Army Act, such as those
created by Sections 34, 35, 36, 37 etc., it would be exclusively triable by a Court
Martial; but where a civil offence is also an offence under the Act or deemed to be an
offence under the Act, both an ordinary Criminal Court as well as a Court Martial
would have jurisdiction to try the person 19 (1969) 2 SCR 177 committing the offence.
Such a situation is visualized and provision is made for resolving the conflict under
Sections 125 and 126 of the Army Act.” 27 The Court noted that where a civil offence
is also an offence under the Army Act or is deemed to be an offence under the Act,
both the ordinary criminal court as well as the court-martial have jurisdiction to try
the accused committing the offence.

In that case, the petitioner argued that the Commanding Officer had not furnished a notice under
Rule 5 to the Magistrate that the petitioner should be tried by a court- martial and hence the
criminal court alone had jurisdiction. This submission was held to be misconceived for the following
reasons:

13

The State Of Sikkim vs Jasbir Singh on 1 February, 2022

“7. It was argued on behalf of the petitioner that there was no notice given by the
Commanding Officer to the Magistrate under Rule 5 that the petitioner should be
tried by a Court Martial and hence the criminal court alone had jurisdiction under
Rule 3 to conduct proceedings against the petitioner for the offences charged. In our
opinion, the argument on behalf of the petitioner is misconceived. The Rules framed
by the Central Government under Section 549 of the Criminal Procedure Code apply
to a case where the proceedings against the petitioner have already been instituted in
an ordinary Criminal Court having jurisdiction to try the matter and not at a stage
where such proceedings have not been instituted. It is clear from the affidavits filed
in the present case that the petitioner was not brought before the Magistrate and
charged with the offences for which he was liable to be tried by the Court Martial
within the meaning of Rule 3 and so the situation contemplated by Rule 5 has not
arisen and the requirements of that Rule are therefore not attracted. It was pointed
out by Mr Dutta that after the first information report was lodged at Pallavaran police
station a copy thereof should have been sent to the Magistrate. But that does not
mean that the petitioner “was brought before the Magistrate and charged with the
offences” within the meaning of Rule 3. It is manifest that Rule 3 only applies to a
case where the police had completed investigation and the accused is brought before
the Magistrate after submission of a charge-sheet. The provisions of this Rule cannot
be invoked in a case where the police had merely started investigation against a
person subject to military, naval or air force law. With regard to the holding of the
inquest of the dead-body of Spr. Bishwanath Singh it was pointed out by the
Attorney-General that Regulation 527 of the Defence Services Regulations has itself
provided that in cases of unnatural death that is death due to suicide, violence or
under suspicious circumstances information should be given under Section 174 of the
Criminal Procedure Code to the civil authorities, and the conduct of Maj. Agarwal in
sending information to the civil police was merely in accordance with the provisions
of this particular regulation. For these reasons we hold that counsel for the petitioner
is unable to make good his argument on this aspect of the case.” (emphasis supplied)
28 From the above extract, it is evident that the Constitution Bench held that the
Rules applied in a situation where proceedings had already been instituted in an
ordinary criminal court. In that case, the petitioner was not brought before the
Magistrate and charged with an offence for which he was liable to be tried by the
court-martial. Rule 3 only applied, as the Court noted, where the police had
completed the investigation and the accused was brought before the Magistrate after
the submission of the charge-sheet. The decision in Som Datt Datta (supra), in other
words, dealt with a situation where the offender had been tried by a court-

martial. The argument that the Rules applied but had not been followed by the competent officer
was rejected.

29 In Joginder Singh v. State of Himachal Pradesh20, a two-judge Bench of this Court dealt with a
case where the appellant, who was governed by the Army Act, challenged the legality of his trial and
conviction for committing the offence under Section 376 of the IPC by the Assistant Sessions Judge,

14

The State Of Sikkim vs Jasbir Singh on 1 February, 2022

Nahan. Unlike the situation 20 (1971) 3 SCC 86 before the Constitution Bench in Som Datt Datta
(supra) (where the accused had been tried by a court-martial), in Joginder Singh (supra) the
accused had been tried and convicted by the Sessions Court. In that case, the appellant who was
subject to the Army Act was alleged to have committed rape in relation to a person who was not
subject to military, naval or air force law and hence under Section 70, the accused could normally be
tried by an ordinary criminal court. However, since the appellant was in active service at the time of
the alleged offence, the court- martial also had the jurisdiction to try him and the case involved a
situation where both the court-martial and the ordinary criminal court had concurrent jurisdiction.
After considering the earlier judgments of this Court in Major EG Barsay v. State of Bombay21, Ram
Sarup (supra) and Som Datt Datta (supra), the Court observed:

“22. It is further clear that in respect of an offence which could be tried both by a
criminal court as well as a Court-martial Sections 125, 126 and the Rules, have made
suitable provisions to avoid a conflict of jurisdiction between the ordinary criminal
courts and the Court-martial. But it is to be noted that in the first instance, discretion
is left to the officer mentioned in Section 125 to decide before which court the
proceedings should be instituted. Hence the officer commanding the army, army
corps, division or independent brigade in which the accused person is serving or such
other officer as may be prescribed will have to exercise his discretion and decide
under Section 125 in which court the proceedings shall be instituted. It is only when
he so exercises his discretion and decides that the proceedings should be instituted
before a Court-martial, that the provisions of Section 126 (1) come into operation. If
the designated officer does not exercise his discretion and decides that the
proceedings should be instituted before a Court-martial, the Army Act would not
obviously be in the way of a criminal court exercising its ordinary jurisdiction in the
manner provided by law.” (emphasis supplied)

21 (1962) 2 SCR 195 30 In the above observation, the Court clarified that Sections 125 and 126 have
made provisions to avoid a conflict of jurisdiction between ordinary criminal courts and a
court-martial in respect of an offence which could be tried by both the criminal court and by a
court-martial. The Court observed that Section 125 leaves the discretion, in the first instance, with
the competent officer and it is only when he so exercises the discretion and decides that the
proceedings should be instituted before a court-martial that Section 126 would come into operation.
If the designated officer does not exercise this discretion to institute proceedings before a court-
martial, the Army Act would not interdict the exercise of jurisdiction by the ordinary criminal court.
After adverting to the provisions of the Rules, the Court noted:

“29. Rule 4 is related to clause (a) of Rule 3 and will be attracted only when the
Magistrate proceeds to conduct the trial without having been moved by the
competent military authority. It is no doubt true that in this case the Assistant
Sessions Judge has not given a written notice to the Commanding Officer as
envisaged under Rule 4. But, in our view, that was unnecessary. When the competent
military authorities, knowing full well the nature of the offence alleged against the
appellant, had released him from military custody and handed him over to the civil

15

The State Of Sikkim vs Jasbir Singh on 1 February, 2022

authorities, the Magistrate was justified in proceeding on the basis that the military
authorities had decided that the appellant need not be tried by the Court-martial and
that he could be tried by the ordinary criminal court.”

31 In Joginder Singh (supra) therefore the Court noted that the absence of a written notice to the
competent officer under Rule 4 was unnecessary where the competent military authorities, knowing
about the nature of the offence alleged against the appellant, released him from military custody and
handed him over to the civil authorities. In such a situation, it was held that the Magistrate was
justified in proceeding on the basis that the military authorities had decided that the appellant need
not be tried by a court-martial and that he should be tried by the ordinary criminal court.

32 The next decision to which a reference has to be made is that of a three-judge Bench decision in
Delhi Special Police Establishment, New Delhi v. Lt. Col. SK Loraiya22. The respondent in that case
was a Lieutenant Colonel in the service of the Army and was charged by the Special Judge, Gauhati
for offences punishable under Section 120B of the IPC read with Section 5(1)(c) and (d) and Section
5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act 1988. A revision against the framing of charges was allowed
by the High Court. The order of the High Court quashing the charges was assailed before this Court.
In that context, the Court held:

“9. As regards the trial of offences committed by army men, the Army Act draws a
threefold scheme. Certain offences enumerated in the Army Act are exclusively
triable by a Court- Martial; certain other offences are exclusively triable by the
ordinary Criminal Courts; and certain other offences are triable both by the ordinary
criminal court and the Court- Martial. In respect of the last category both the courts
have concurrent jurisdiction. Section 549(1) CrPC is designed to avoid the conflict of
jurisdiction in respect of the last category of offences. The clause “for which he is
liable to be tried either by the court to which this Code applies or by a Court-Martial”
in our view, qualifies the preceding clause “when any person is charged with an
offence” in Section 549(1). Accordingly the phrase “is liable to be tried either by a
court to which this Code applies or a Court-Martial” imports that the offence for
which the accused is to be tried should be an offence of which cognizance can be
taken by an ordinary criminal court as well as a Court-Martial. In our opinion, the
phrase is intended to refer to the initial jurisdiction of the two 22 (1972) 2 SCC 692
courts to take cognizance of the case and not to their jurisdiction to decide it on
merits. It is admitted that both the ordinary criminal court and the Court-Martial
have concurrent jurisdiction with respect to the offences for which the respondent
has been charged by the Special Judge. So, Section 549 and the rules made
thereunder are attracted to the case at hand.” (emphasis supplied)

33 The Court noted that it was an admitted fact that the procedure specified in Rule 3 was not
followed by the Special Judge, Gauhati before framing the charges. The Court held that Section
549(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1898 (equivalent to Section 475 of the CrPC) had to be
construed in the light of Section 125 of the Army Act and both the provisions had in mind the object
of avoiding a collision between the ordinary criminal court and the court-martial. In this backdrop,

16

The State Of Sikkim vs Jasbir Singh on 1 February, 2022

the order of the High Court quashing the framing of charges was sustained. 34 An order of a
two-judge Bench of this Court in SK Jha v. State of Kerala23 arose from a case where three naval
officers were arrested for offences punishable under Sections 143, 147, 148, 452, 307, 326 and 427
read with Section 149 of the IPC. An application was filed by the Commanding Officer of the Naval
Unit for handing over the accused for trial under the Navy Act 1957. The application was rejected by
the Magistrate on the ground that the stage for consideration would only be on the completion of the
police investigation. The order of the Magistrate was challenged before the High Court in revision
and the challenge was rejected. The two-judge Bench held that the decision in Som Datt Datta
(supra) governed the case and the option as to whether the accused should be tried before the
criminal 23 (2011) 15 SCC 492 court or by a court-martial could be exercised only after the police
had completed the investigation and submitted the charge-sheet. In that case, the police had merely
commenced the investigation and hence the rejection of the request of the Commanding Officer by
the Magistrate was upheld.

35 In Extra-Judicial Execution Victim Families Association and Another v. Union of India24, a
submission was urged on behalf of the Union of India that an offence committed by a member of the
Armed Forces must be tried under the provisions of the Army Act through a court-martial and not
under the CrPC. Justice Madan B Lokur, speaking for the two-judge Bench, inter alia adverted to the
decisions of the Constitution Benches in Ram Sarup (supra) and Som Datt Datta (supra). The Court
also referred to the following extract from the decision in Balbir Singh and Another v. State of
Punjab25:

“240. In para 17 of the Report in Balbir Singh case [Balbir Singh v. State of Punjab,
(1995) 1 SCC 90 : 1995 SCC (Cri) 202] , this was held as follows : (SCC pp. 99-100)
“17. A conjoint reading of the above provisions shows that when a criminal court and
court martial each have jurisdiction in respect of the trial of the offence, it shall be in
the discretion of the officer commanding the group, wing or station in which the
accused is serving or such other officer as may be prescribed, in the first instance, to
decide before which court the proceedings shall be instituted and if that officer
decides that they should be instituted before a “court martial”, to direct that the
accused persons shall be detained in air force custody. Thus, the option to try a
person subject to the Air Force Act who commits an offence while on “active service”
is in the first instance with the Air Force Authorities. The criminal court, when such
an accused is brought before it shall not proceed to try such a person or to inquire
with 24 (2016) 14 SCC 536 25 (1995) 1 SCC 90 a view to his commitment for trial and
shall give a notice to the Commanding Officer of the accused, to decide whether they
would like to try the accused by a court martial or allow the criminal court to proceed
with the trial. In case, the Air Force Authorities decide either not to try such a person
by a court martial or fail to exercise the option when intimated by the criminal court
within the period prescribed by Rule 4 of the 1952 Rules (supra), the accused can be
tried by the ordinary criminal court in accordance with the Code of Criminal
Procedure. On the other hand if the Authorities under the Act opt to try the accused
by the “court martial”, the criminal court shall direct delivery of the custody of the
accused to the Authorities under the Act and to forward to the Authorities a

17

The State Of Sikkim vs Jasbir Singh on 1 February, 2022

statement of the offence of which he is accused. It is explicit that the option to try the
accused subject to the Act by a court martial is with the Air Force Authorities and the
accused person has no option or right to claim trial by a particular forum. … …
However, in the event the criminal court is of the opinion, for reasons to be recorded,
that instead of giving option to the Authorities under the Act, the said court should
proceed with the trial of the accused, without being moved by the competent
authority under the Act and the Authorities under the Act decide to the contrary, the
conflict of jurisdiction shall be resolved by the Central Government under Section
125(2) of the Act and the decision as to the forum of trial by the Central Government
in that eventuality shall be final.”” (emphasis supplied)

36 The Court also adverted to the following extract from the decision in the Additional Director
General, Army Headquarters v. Central Bureau of Investigation26:

“244. This Court in Army Headquarters case [Army Headquarters v. CBI, (2012) 6 SCC 228 : (2012)
3 SCC (Cri) 88] then recorded its conclusions in para 95 of the Report and they read as follows :
(SCC p. 264) “95. To sum up:

26 (2012) 6 SCC 228 95.1. The conjoint reading of the relevant statutory provisions
and Rules make it clear that the term “institution” contained in Section 7 of the 1990
Act means taking cognizance of the offence and not mere presentation of the
charge-sheet by the investigating agency.

95.2. The competent army authority has to exercise his discretion to opt as to
whether the trial could be by a court martial or criminal court after filing of the
charge-sheet and not after the cognizance of the offence is taken by the court. 95.3.
Facts of this case require sanction of the Central Government to proceed with the
criminal prosecution/trial. 95.4. In case option is made to try the accused by a court
martial, sanction of the Central Government is not required.”

37 In this backdrop, the Court held that if an offence is committed even by Army personnel, there
was no concept of absolutely immunity from trial by the criminal court constituted under the CrPC.
Rejecting the submission of the Union of India, the Court observed:

“246. The result of the interplay between Section 4 and Section 5 CrPC and Sections
125 and 126 of the Army Act makes it quite clear that the decision to try a person who
has committed an offence punishable under the Army Act and who is subject to the
provisions of the Army Act does not always or necessarily lie only with the Army —
the criminal court under CrPC could also try the alleged offender in certain
circumstances in accordance with the procedure laid down by CrPC.”

38 In the present case, the essence of the submission which has been urged on behalf of the
respondent is:

18

The State Of Sikkim vs Jasbir Singh on 1 February, 2022

(i) The stage of the exercise of discretion by the Army authority to either opt for a
court-martial or for trial before the criminal court is after the charge-sheet is filed
and before cognizance has taken;

(ii) The Magistrate precluded the exercise of the discretion by the Army authorities by
passing an order of committal to the Court of Sessions immediately after the
charge-sheet was filed;

(iii) There was a failure on part of the Magistrate to follow the mandatory provisions
of the 1978 Rules by issuing a notice under Rule 4 to the competent officer; and

(iv) All that has transpired prior to the submission of the charge-sheet in terms of the
handing over of the accused by the Army authorities to the police stands obliterated
and in the absence of a notice under Rule 4, the trial would stand vitiated.

39 Now in evaluating this submission, a survey of the precedent indicates that Ram Sarup (supra)
was a case of a court-martial where there was a challenge to the validity of Section 125 of the Army
Act. The challenge was rejected on the ground that a variety of circumstances bearing upon the
exigencies of the service would determine the exercise of discretion by the competent authority to
opt for a court-martial.

40 The decision of the Constitution Bench in Som Datt Datta (supra) involved a challenge to the
court-martial proceedings on the ground that no notice had been issued by the competent officer to
the Magistrate notifying the latter that the accused was to be tried by a court-martial. The argument
was rejected on the ground that Rule 3 only applied to a situation where a person who is charged
with an offence is brought before a Magistrate, which was not the case before the Constitution
Bench. In that case, the accused had been tried by the court-martial and there was no involvement
of the Magistrate. Thus, the challenge that there had been a violation of the procedure mandated
under the Criminal Courts and Court Martial (Adjustment of Jurisdiction) Rules 1952 was rejected.

41 Broadly speaking there are three categories of offences. First, the provisions of Chapter VI of the
Army Act indicate that where an offence is created by the Act itself it would be exclusively triable by
a court-martial. Second, where a ‘civil offence’ is also an offence under the Army Act or is deemed to
be an offence under the Act, both the ordinary criminal court as well as court-martial would have
jurisdiction to try the person committing the offence. The third category (referred to in Section 70)
consists of the offences of murder, culpable homicide not amounting to murder or rape committed
by a person subject to the Army Act against a person who is not subject to military, naval or air force
law. Subject to the three exceptions which are set out in Section 70, such offences are not triable by a
court-martial but by an ordinary criminal court.

42 The offence in the present case does not fall in the category of those offences which are triable
exclusively by a court-martial (Section 34 to 68) or those offences which cannot be tried by a
court-martial (under Section 70). The offence with which the respondent-accused is charged falls in
the category where there is a concurrent jurisdiction between the court-martial and the ordinary

19

The State Of Sikkim vs Jasbir Singh on 1 February, 2022

criminal court. Hence, it needs to be underscored that there is no inherent lack of jurisdiction in the
ordinary criminal court to conduct a trial in accordance with the procedure envisaged in the CrPC.

43 Section 69 provides when a person who is subject to the Act shall be deemed to be guilty of an
offence against the Act. Section 69 of the Army Act has been made subject to the provisions of
Section 70. When a provision of a statute is made subject to another provision by the legislature, this
evinces an intent that where the latter provision is attracted, the former would give way. Where the
conditions requisite for the application of Section 70 exist, Section 69 would give way to Section 70.
Section 70 provides for the conditions in which a person who is subject to the Army Act shall not be
deemed to be guilty of an offence under the Act and shall not be tried by a court-martial. In other
words, Section 70 of the Army Act provides for where the court-martial would not exercise
jurisdiction (unless the case falls under the exceptions to Section 70). When the provisions of
Section 70 apply, a person who is subject to the Army Act is not deemed to be guilty of an offence
under the Act if the ingredients of that provision are fulfilled. The ingredients of Section 70 are:

(i) The offence must be committed by a person subject to the Army Act;

(ii) The offence must be committed against a person who is not subject to military,
naval or air force law; and

(iii) The offence must be of murder, culpable homicide not amounting to murder or
rape.

Where these conditions apply, the person is not deemed to be guilty of an offence under the Act and
is not to be tried by a court-martial unless the three exceptions which are carved out in clauses (a),
(b) and (c) of Section 70 are attracted. 44 In the present case, the conditions requisite for the
application under Section 70 do not stand attracted for the reason that the offence in the present
case was committed against a person who was subject to military law and in any event, the offence
was committed by the respondent while on active service in Sikkim. Since Section 70 has no
application, the respondent who is alleged to have committed a ‘civil offence’ in India would be
subject to the provisions of the Army Act as provided by Section 69. The crucial words of Section 69
however are that an accused “shall be deemed to be guilty of an offence against this Act” and “if
charged therewith under this section, shall be liable to be tried by a court-martial”. The liability to be
tried by a court-martial arises if the person is charged with an offence under “this section”, that is
Section 69. The language of Section 69 is a clear indicator that it does not ipso jure oust the
jurisdiction of the ordinary criminal court. Where there exists concurrent jurisdiction in the
court-martial and in the ordinary criminal court, primarily the discretion of conducting the
court-martial in preference to a trial by the ordinary criminal court is entrusted to the designated
officer under Section 125. The designated officer has been conferred with the discretion “to decide
before which court the proceedings shall be instituted”. Moreover, Section 125 has a conjunctive
requirement which is amplified by the expression “and, if that officer decides that they should be
instituted before a court-martial”. Thus, the conjunctive requirement under Section 125 is that the
competent officer has the discretion to decide before which court the proceedings shall be instituted
and if the officer exercises that discretion to institute proceedings before a court-martial, then the

20

The State Of Sikkim vs Jasbir Singh on 1 February, 2022

officer will direct that the accused be detained in military custody. Section 125, in other words, not
only recognizes that an element of discretion has been vested in the designated officer, but it also
postulates that the designated officer should have decided that the proceedings be instituted by the
court-martial in which event the court-martial would take place.

45 Significantly, in the present case there was no decision by the designated officer to institute
proceedings before a court-martial in terms of Section 125. The argument on the absence of
compliance with Rule 3 and Rule 4 of the 1978 Rules is misconceived. The 1978 Rules, which have
been made pursuant to Section 126 of the Army Act and Section 475 of the CrPC, were intended to
obviate a conflict of jurisdiction where both the Army authorities under a court-martial as well as
the ordinary criminal court assert jurisdiction to try a person for the same offence. Section 126(2)
provides the modality for the resolution of a conflict by the Central Government. The rules which
have been framed under Section 475 of the CrPC provide for the issuance of a notice by the
Magistrate to the competent officer in order to enable the competent officer to take a considered
decision on whether the interest of the service would warrant a trial by a court-martial. But the
present case does not involve a conflict in the exercise of jurisdiction in the first place. The entire
sequence of events both before and after the completion of investigation provides a clear indicator
that the Commanding Officer took a conscious decision that the investigation and trial should be
conducted in accordance with the provisions of the CrPC. In the earlier part of this judgment, we
have narrated these circumstances namely:

(i) the handing over of the accused by the Army to the custody of the police;

(ii) the co-operation of the Commanding Officer, Colonel RR Nair, in meeting the
requisitions of the Investigating Officer;

(iii) the recording of the statement of the informant under Section 164 of the CrPC;

(iv) the recording of the evidence of the Commanding Officer during the course of the
criminal trial, thereby indicating a clear intent that the trial would proceed in terms
of the jurisdiction of the ordinary criminal court.

46 The respondent-accused has relied on the decision of this Court in Loraiya (supra), to urge that
the provisions of Section 475 of the CrPC are mandatory, that is, the Magistrate must issue notice to
the Commanding Officer to enable him to exercise the option of a trial by court-martial or by a
criminal court. The submission is that since the procedure under this provision and Rule 4 of the
1978 Rules was not followed, the trial stands vitiated. We do not find this submission to be
persuasive. The decision in Loraiya (supra) is distinguishable. Loraiya (supra) involved the framing
of charges under the Prevention of Corruption Act 1988 and the IPC against a person subject to the
Army Act. The judgment of this Court does not contain any indication of a deferral to the
jurisdiction of the ordinary criminal court by the Army authorities, as in the present case.

47 The High Court has found fault with the prosecution in not producing certified copies of the
decision of the Army authorities to defer to the jurisdiction of the criminal court. But even keeping

21

The State Of Sikkim vs Jasbir Singh on 1 February, 2022

that decision aside, it is abundantly clear that far from there being any decision by the competent
officer regarding the institution of proceedings before the court-martial, there was in the present
case an unequivocal and clear acceptance of the jurisdiction of the ordinary criminal court coupled
with explicit cooperation with the Court of Sessions.

48 The respondent has also submitted that the proceedings before the Sessions Judge would be in
violation of the Section 461(l) of the CrPC. The submission is thoroughly misconceived as Section
461(l) indicates that if a Magistrate has not been empowered by law to try an offender, then the
proceedings would be void. For the reasons, we have indicated above, it is clear that the Sessions
Judge had the jurisdiction to try the offender and thus, the provisions of Section 461(l) of the CrPC
have no application.

49 During the course of the proceedings, Mr Pradeep Kumar Dey urged before this Court that in
case the trial is conducted by the ordinary criminal court and not a court-martial under the Army
Act, the respondent would not be able to avail the benefit of being awarded a lower punishment
under the Army Act. 50 Section 69 of the Army Act is reproduced below:

“Subject to the provisions of section 70, any person subject to this Act who at any
place in or beyond India, commits any civil offence, shall be deemed to be guilty of an
offence against this Act and, if charged therewith under this section, shall be liable to
be tried by a court-martial and, on conviction, be punishable as follows, that is to
say,--

(a) if the offence is one which would be punishable under any law in force in India
with death or with transportation, he shall be liable to suffer any punishment, other
than whipping, assigned for the offence, by the aforesaid law and such less
punishment as is in this Act mentioned;

and

(b) in any other case, he shall be liable to suffer any punishment, other than whipping, assigned for
the offence by the law in force in India, or imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven
years, or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.” (emphasis supplied) Sub-section (a) of
Section 69 states if a person is convicted of a ‘civil offence’ which is punishable with death or
transportation under the law in force, then he shall be liable to suffer any punishment, other than
whipping, assigned for the offence by the aforesaid law and such less punishment as is in this Act
mentioned. In contrast with sub-Section (a), sub-Section (b) provides that in all other offences, the
person convicted shall be liable to suffer the punishment assigned under the laws in force or
imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, or such less punishment as provided in
the Act. The words of the statute clearly indicate that the legislature provided different punishments
for serious offences which under law are punishable with death or life imprisonment, and for all
other offences. In case of the former, sub- Section (a) of Section 69 provides that the court-martial
may convict him and punish him with death or life imprisonment. In addition to this, the
court-martial may also give a lesser punishment under the Army Act (such as cashiering, dismissal

22

from service, etc., provided under Section 71 27). The use of the word “and” in sub-Section

The State Of Sikkim vs Jasbir Singh on 1 February, 2022

(a) clarifies the intent of the legislature, which is to ensure that the Army authorities have sufficient
discretion to grant a punishment for serious offences, over and beyond what is permissible under
Penal Code. This however, does not imply that a person who is otherwise liable for death or life
imprisonment can be granted a lesser punishment under the Army Act. In contrast, sub-Section (b)
of Section 69 uses the term “or” to indicate that for offences that under the Penal Code or any other
law are of less severity, the Army authorities may order a lesser punishment. If the argument of the
respondent is accepted, it would imply that a person who is convicted and punished by a
Court-martial under the Army Act will be in an advantageous position than a person who, though
subject to the Army Act, has been convicted by an ordinary criminal court. If that was the intent of
the legislature - that is to protect persons subject to the Army Act by awarding them lesser
punishment even for serious offences - then the Act would not have provided for concurrent
jurisdiction of 27 “71. Punishments awardable by court-martial. Punishments may be inflicted in
respect of offences committed by persons subject to this Act and convicted by courts-martial,
according to the scale following, that is to say,--

(a) death;

(b) transportation for life or for any period not less than seven years;

(c) imprisonment either rigorous or simple, for any period not exceeding fourteen years;

(d) cashiering, in the case of officers;

(e) dismissal from the service;

(f) reduction to the ranks or to a lower rank or grade or place in the list of their rank, in the case of
warrant officers; and reduction to (he ranks or to a lower rank or grade, in the case of
non-commissioned officers:

Provided that a warrant officer reduced to the ranks shall not be required to serve in
the ranks as a sepoy;

(g) forfeiture of seniority of rank, in the case of officers, junior commissioned officers,
warrant officers and non-

commissioned officers; and forfeiture of all or any part of their service for the purpose of promotion,
in the case of any of them whose promotion depends upon length of sendee;

(h) forfeiture of service for the purpose of increased pay, pension or any other prescribed purpose;

(i) severe reprimand or reprimand, in the case of officers, junior commissioned officers, warrant
officers and non- commissioned officers;

23

The State Of Sikkim vs Jasbir Singh on 1 February, 2022

(j) forfeiture of pay and allowances for a period not exceeding three months for an offence
committed on active service;

(k) forfeiture in the case of a person sentenced to cashiering or dismissal from the service of all
arrears of pay and allowances and other public money due to him at the time of such cashiering or
dismissal:

(l) stoppage of pay and allowances until any proved loss or damage occasioned by (he
offence of which he is convicted is made good.” court-martial and ordinary criminal
courts at all. Although the Army Act is special law in this case as compared to the IPC,
if the statute in its text does not make any qualifications or exceptions to the general
law, it would be impermissible for the court to read such qualifications in the Act.
Thus, we are unable to accept this submission of the respondent.

D      Conclusion

51     For the above reasons, we find that the High Court was in error in affirming, in

the exercise of its revisional jurisdiction, the decision of the Sessions Judge that the
court-martial alone would have jurisdiction. Both on law and in fact, the position is to
the contrary. The Sessions Judge was competent and there was no error in the
assumption or the exercise of the jurisdiction. The consequence of the decision of the
High Court is to foist an obligation on the Army Authorities to hold a court-martial
despite a clear and unequivocal submission to the jurisdiction of the Court of
Sessions. We accordingly allow the appeal and set aside impugned judgment of the
Single Judge of the High Court of Sikkim dated 6 April 2019 in Criminal Revision
Petition No 2 of 2017. The respondent-accused shall be transferred from military
custody to civil custody to face trial.

52 The trial would proceed from the stage that was reached when the Sessions Judge decided that
there was an absence of jurisdiction. The trial shall be proceeded with and be concluded in
accordance with law. The appeal is allowed in the above terms.

53 Pending applications, if any, shall stand dismissed.

… … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … J .   [ D r   D h a n a n j a y a   Y   C h a n d r a c h u d ]
………………………………………………J. [Surya Kant] New Delhi;

February 01, 2022

24