Union Of India vs Manpreet Singh Poonam on 8 March, 2022

Union Of India vs Manpreet Singh Poonam on 8 March, 2022

Author: M.M. Sundresh

Bench: M.M. Sundresh, Sanjay Kishan Kaul

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 517-518 OF 2017

UNION OF INDIA & ANR.                                            …APPELLANT(S)

VERSUS

MANPREET SINGH POONAM ETC.                                      …RESPONDENT(S)

JUDGMENT

M.M. SUNDRESH, J.

1. These appeals are filed by the respondents before the High Court and the Central Administrative
Tribunal, raising a challenge on two grounds, namely: -

i. A voluntary retiree cannot seek promotion as a matter of right sans rules governing.

ii. a mere delay in consideration of the promotion would not create a vested right
over a post that quantifies the maximum accommodation in terms of numbers,
involving a process of suitability.

BRIEF FACTS:

2. Both the respondents before us worked with the appellant holding the post of Junior
Administrative Grade-II (hereinafter referred to as “JAG-II”) officers. Respondent in Civil Appeal
No.517 of 2017 retired in the said capacity voluntarily in the year 2010. Respondent in Civil Appeal
No.518 of 2017was promoted on ad hoc basis to Junior Administrative Grade-I (hereinafter referred
to as “JAG-I”) vide order dated 27.12.2011 and regularized vide notification dated 17.04.2012 with
effect from 01.07.2011, after undergoing a selection process against the vacancies in tune with Rule
4 of the National Capital Territory of Delhi, Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Lakshadweep, Daman
and Diu and Dadra and Nagar Haveli (Civil Service) Rules, 2003 (hereinafter referred to as ‘2003

1

Union Of India vs Manpreet Singh Poonam on 8 March, 2022

Rules’) which prescribes 10% as the maximum in the cadre of JAG-I of the total sanctioned strength
of the posts in the service. The 2003 Rules were amended vide Notification dated 01.10.2009, and
the sanctioned strength was increased to 472.

3. The respondents filed separate applications before the Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT).
Despite holding that the post of JAG-I is neither wholly promotional nor an upgradation, the
applications were dismissed on the premise that a conjoint reading of Rule 4 and 7 of the 2003
Rules would disentitle the relief being granted.

4. The respondents filed writ petitions assailing the aforesaid decision of the CAT, which were
allowed inter alia holding that Respondent in Civil Appeal No.517 of 2017 is entitled to relief in
terms of the Circular No.AB.14017/47/2011-EST (DR) dated 01.08.2012 issued by the Department
of Personnel and Training (DoPT), which facilitates a retired officer who is otherwise eligible as on
the due date to be considered for the benefit of “pay-upgradation”. In the case of Respondent in Civil
Appeal No.518 of 2017, the High Court reasoned that after keeping the officer without consideration
for promotion for a long time, with the decision to grant promotion with effect from 01.07.2011,
there is no justification for denying it from 01.10.2009. Thus, both the writ petitions found favour
with the High Court. Assailing the aforesaid orders, the appellants filed the present appeals.

ARGUMENTS:

5. Heard Ms. Rekha Pandey, learned counsel for the Appellants, Ms. Avnish Ahlawat, learned
counsel for the Respondent in Civil Appeal No.517 of 2017 and party in person in Civil Appeal No.
518 of 2018.

6. The learned counsel appearing for the appellants submitted that the High Court committed a
fundamental error in granting the relief in favour of Respondent in Civil Appeal No.517 of 2017, Shri
M.S. Poonam, who admittedly voluntarily retired in the year 2010 while the promotion was granted
after the completion of the selection process on 04.04.2012 against the vacancies which arose in the
year of 2011, in the light of promotion of ‘JAG-I’ officers to IAS. The High Court has misconstrued
Circular No. AB.14017/47/2011-EST (DR) dated 01.08.20212 issued by the Department of
Personnel and Training (DoPT), which can be applied only for upgradation simpliciter. There is no
need to challenge the finding of the CAT when the applications filed were dismissed.

7. As there is no vested or accrued right over a promotional post, in the absence of any vacancies
actually in existence for the year 2009, the migration of the other officers of the Indian
Administrative Service (IAS) cadre took place only in the year 2011. Thus, the embargo brought
forth by Rule 4 and 7 of the 2003 Rules would not facilitate such a relief. Under the Indian
Administrative Service (Appointment by promotion) Regulations 1954, and IAS (Regulations of
Seniority Rules, 1987, Officers inducted into IAS from ‘JAG-I’ get seniority from the date on which
vacancy arises, even though induction takes place subject to DPC. In the present case, there was a
delay in holding of Departmental Promotion Committee (hereinafter referred to as ‘DPC’) for
induction of JAG-I officers into IAS, as such actual vacancy in JAG-I occurred in 2011, even though
notional vacancy may have arisen in 2009 itself. Since the promotion from JAG-II to JAG-I is

2

Union Of India vs Manpreet Singh Poonam on 8 March, 2022

governed by the 2003 Rules, which prescribe promotion when actual vacancy arises and DPC takes
place, as such, a right would accrue to an officer only after his entry and therefore, mere inclusion in
the select list based on induction of JAG-I officers into IAS, is of no consequence. Under the 2003
Rules, a vacancy would mean an actual one and inclusion in the select list to a different cadre
governed by different rules would not create a deemed one. In any case, on facts, the respondent in
Civil Appeal No.518 of 2017 was appointed to JAG-I service on an ad hoc basis only on 27.12.2011
and, therefore, without being inducted in the said cadre, he cannot seek for promotion with
retrospective effect.

8. It was further submitted that regularization took place on 17.04.2012 with effect from 01.07.2011,
after his clearance by the DPC, which is a benefit conferred upon him. Since there would be an
excess of 10% in the post of JAG-I, the aforesaid rules also clearly indicate that JAG-I is a
promotional post from the feeder category of JAG-II as demonstrated through Schedule I and
Schedule III in tune with the emphasis of Rule 4.1, 7.3, 7.4 and 7.5 of the 2003 Rules.

9. The counsel for Respondent in Civil Appeal No.517 of 2017 submitted that what has been done is
only an upgradation and, therefore, the consequential benefit will have to be given to the respondent
as well. Respondent in Civil Appeal No.518 of 2017, Shri Suresh Gupta, submitted that one has to
see the proviso to Rule 4 of 2003 Rules, and for the delay committed by the Appellants, he cannot be
made to suffer. It was further submitted that the Respondents were at Serial No.1 and 2, in the select
list for the year 2009, and as such, his appointment ought to be with effect from 2009 and not
01.07.2011.

ANALYSIS AND CONCLUSION:

10.On considering the submissions made, it would only be appropriate to place on record the
relevant rules governing the issues raised along with the schedules:

Rule 4.1 of the 2003 Rules:

“4. Grades, strength and their review.-

(1) The duty posts included in the various grades, their number and the scales of pay
attached to them on the date of commencement of these rules shall be as specified in
Schedule I: Provided that ten per cent and twenty per cent of the sanctioned strength
of the posts in the Service shall be non-functional grades of Junior Administrative
Grade-I and Selection Grade respectively, and these shall be operated within the
respective number of posts specified in Parts B and C of Schedule I: Provided further
that the number of posts in Junior Administrative Grade I shall not exceed the total
number of sanctioned posts in the Junior Administrative Grade in the scale of pay of
Rs.12,000-16,500.” Rule 7.3, 7.4 and 7.5 of the 2003 Rules:

“7. Future maintenance of the Service: -

3

Union Of India vs Manpreet Singh Poonam on 8 March, 2022

xxx xxx xxx (3) All the vacancies in the grades of Junior Administrative Grade-I,
Junior Administrative Grade-II and Selection Grade shall be filled by promotion
from amongst the officers in the immediate respective lower grade with the minimum
qualifying service as specified in Schedule III.

(cid:12)                     xxx                   xxx                   xxx

(4)   (a)   xxx             xxx                   xxx

(b)   xxx             xxx                   xxx

(c)The promotion to the Junior Administrative Grade-I and Selection Grade shall be
made in the order of seniority subject to rejection of unfit.

( 5 )   T h e   s e l e c t i o n   i n   e a c h   c a s e   u n d e r   s u b - r u l e   ( 4 )   s h a l l   b e   m a d e   o n   t h e
recommendations of the Departmental Promotion Committee.” Schedule I of the
2003 Rules:

“SCHEDULE I [See rule 4(1)] Name, number and scale of pay of duty posts in the
grades of the National Capital Territory of Delhi, Andaman and Nicobar Islands
Lakshadweep, Daman and Diu and Dadra and Nagar Haveli Civil Service.

Part A                                Grades and sanctioned
strength of the Service
(a)                     Grades of the      Scales of pay
Service
1                       Junior             Rs.14,300-400-
Administrative     18,300
Grade I (Group A)
2                       Junior             Rs. 12,000-375-
Administrative     16,500
Grade II (Group A)

(cid:12)       Schedule III of the 2003 Rules:

“SCHEDULE III

[See rule 7 (3)]

Sl. No Grade            Method of promotion      Eligibility          for
Promotion
(1)         (2)                (3)                         (4)
1.      Junior         By promotion in the       A regularly appointed
Administrative order of seniority        Junior Administrative

4

Union Of India vs Manpreet Singh Poonam on 8 March, 2022

Grade I        subject to rejection of   Grade-II officer with a
unfit      on       the   minimum of eighteen
recommendations of        years approved service
the      Departmental     shall be eligible to be
Promotion                 considered           for
Committee.                promotion to the Junior
Administrative Grade I

11.There is no dispute, at least to the effect, that the aforesaid rules and the schedules
govern the service condition, including the officer's promotion from JAG-II to JAG-I.
Rule 4 fixes the cap of the sanctioned strength to the post to the maximum of 10%.
The schedules to the aforesaid rules clearly indicate the different pay scales for JAG-I
and JAG-II.

12.Rule 7 of the 2003 Rules specifies that the vacancies arising in JAG-I shall only be
filled by promotion from amongst the officers in the immediate respective lower
grade with the minimum qualifying service as specified in Schedule III.

Schedule III clearly states that JAG-I is the promotional post with JAG-II as the feeder cadre post,
subject to the other prescribed qualifications.

13.As there is no ambiguity in the aforesaid rules, we are not able to approve the views of the CAT
and the High Court that JAG-I is a mere upgradation of JAG- II. Differential pay scale along with a
process of selection qua suitability fixing eligibility criteria are the factors to determine whether a
particular post is the same as the other or a promotional one. We feel that such an exercise is not
required since the rules themselves are specific. When the rules are specific and clear, there is no
need for interpretation which may lead to a case of judicial legislation. We are also in agreement
with the submission of the learned counsel for the appellant that the reasoning of the CAT, though
not challenged is unsustainable, since there is no occasion to challenge it with the dismissal of the
applications filed.

14.The High Court also fell in error in taking note of the delay in considering the case of the
respondents to the promotional post of JAG-I. No officer has a vested right to a promotional post,
which is restricted to that of consideration according to law. The law on this aspect is settled by this
Court in the case of Ajay Kumar Shukla and Ors. v. Arvind Rai and Ors., 2021 SCC OnLine SC 1195:

“37. This Court, time and again, has laid emphasis on right to be considered for
promotion to be a fundamental right, as was held by K. Ramaswamy, J., in the case of
Director, Lift Irrigation Corporation Ltd. v. Pravat Kiran Mohanty [(1991) 2 SCC 295]
in paragraph 4 of the report which is reproduced below:

“4… There is no fundamental right to promotion, but an employee has only right to
be considered for promotion, when it arises, in accordance with relevant rules. From

5

Union Of India vs Manpreet Singh Poonam on 8 March, 2022

this perspective in our view the conclusion of the High Court that the gradation list
prepared by the corporation is in violation of the right of respondent/writ petitioner
to equality enshrined under Article 14 read with Article 16 of the Constitution, and
the respondent/writ petitioner was unjustly denied of the same is obviously
unjustified.”

38. A Constitution Bench in case of Ajit Singh v. State of Punjab [(1999) 7 SCC 209],
laying emphasis on Article 14 and Article 16(1) of the Constitution of India held that if
a person who satisfies the eligibility and the criteria for promotion but still is not
considered for promotion, then there will be clear violation of his/her's fundamental
right. Jagannadha Rao, J. speaking for himself and Anand, CJI., Venkataswami,
Pattanaik, Kurdukar, JJ., observed the same as follows in paragraphs 21 and 22 and
27:

“21 : Articles 14 and 16(1) : is right to be considered for promotion a fundamental
right 22 : Article 14 and Article 16(1) are closely connected.

They deal with individual rights of the person. Article 14 demands that the “State shall not deny to
any person equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws”. Article 16(1) issues a positive
command that “there shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to
employment or appointment to any office under the State”. It has been held repeatedly by this Court
that clause (1) of Article 16 is a facet of Article 14 and that it takes its roots from Article 14. The said
clause particularises the generality in Article 14 and identifies, in a constitutional sense “equality of
opportunity in matters of employment and appointment to any office under the State. The word
“employment” being wider, there is no dispute that it takes within its fold, the aspect of promotions
to posts above the stage of initial level of recruitment. Article 16(1) provides to every employee
otherwise eligible for promotion or who comes within the zone of consideration, a fundamental right
to be “considered” for promotion. Equal opportunity here means the right to be “considered” for
promotion. If a person satisfies the eligibility and zone criteria but is not considered for promotion,
then there will be a clear infraction of his fundamental right to be “considered” for promotion, which
is his personal right.

“Promotion based on equal opportunity and seniority attached to such promotion are facets of
fundamental right under Article 16(1) xxx xxx xxx

27. In our opinion, the above view expressed in Ashok Kumar Gupta and followed in Jagdish Lal and
other cases, if it is intended to lay down that the right guarantee to employees for being “considered”
for promotion according to relevant rules of recruitment by promotion (i.e. whether on the basis of
seniority or merit) is only a statutory right and not a fundamental right, we cannot accept the
proposition. We have already stated earlier that the right to equal opportunity in the matter of
promotion in the sense of a right to be “considered” for promotion is indeed a fundamental right
guaranteed under Article 16(1) and this has never been doubted in any other case before Ashok
Kumar Gupta right from 1950.”

6

Union Of India vs Manpreet Singh Poonam on 8 March, 2022

15.On facts, we find that promotions could be given for the reason that the migration of the then
incumbent in the post of JAG-I, despite being in the select list to the cadre of IAS, did not take place
and thus, they were working in the said post till the date of notification paving way. The aforesaid
factual position not disputed, the rigor of Rule 4 would certainly come into play. We do not find the
proviso to Rule 4 helping the case of the respondents. The post of JAG-I is certainly a promotional
post from the feeder cadre of the JAG-II.

16.It is trite law that once an officer retires voluntarily, there is cessation of jural relationship
resorting to a “golden handshake” between the employer and employee. Such a former employee
cannot seek to agitate his past, as well as future rights, if any, sans the prescription of rules. This
would include the enhanced pay scale. The Respondent in Civil Appeal No.517 of 2017 was rightly
not considered in the DPC in 2012 since he was no longer in service at the relevant point of time.
The High Court has committed an error in relying upon a circular, which has got no application at
all, particularly in the light of our finding that we are dealing with a case of promotion simpliciter as
against up- gradation of any nature.

17.On facts, there is no dispute that Respondent in Civil Appeal No.518 of 2017 was given promotion
after the successful consideration by the DPC. On such clearance the appellant has rightly fixed the
promotion with the year of actual vacancy, as per rules. Thus, the Respondent neither on facts nor
on law can claim retrospective promotion, and that too from the year 2009 being the year in which
he was placed in the select list against a notional vacancy, especially when the then existing vacancy
accrued only in the year 2011, when the JAG-I officers were actually inducted into IAS, against
which he was promoted. As such, the promotion cannot be granted retrospectively and extended to
give benefit and seniority from the date of notional vacancy, causing violence to Rule 4 and 7 of the
2003 Rules.

18. A mere existence of vacancy per se will not create a right in favour of an employee for
retrospective promotion when the vacancies in the promotional post is specifically prescribed under
the rules, which also mandate the clearance through a selection process. It is also to be borne in
mind that when we deal with a case of promotion, there can never be a parity between two separate
sets of rules. In other words, a right to promotion and subsequent benefits and seniority would arise
only with respect to the rules governing the said promotion, and not a different set of rules which
might apply to a promoted post facilitating further promotion which is governed by a different set of
rules. In the present case, the authority acting within the rules has rightly granted promotion after
clearance of DPC on 17.04.2012 with effect from 01.07.2011, when the actual vacancies arose, which
in any case is a benefit granted to the Respondent in Civil Appeal No.518 of 2017. In our view, this
exercise of power by the authority of granting retrospective promotion with effect from the date on
which actual vacancies arose is based on objective considerations and a valid classification.

19.This Court in the case of Union of India v. KK Vadhera and Ors., 1989 Supp (2) SCC 625 has
clearly laid down that the promotion to a post should only be granted from the date of promotion
and not from the date on which vacancy has arisen, and has observed that:

7

Union Of India vs Manpreet Singh Poonam on 8 March, 2022

“5….We do not know of any law or any rule under which a promotion is to be effective
from the date of creation of the promotional post After a post falls vacant for any
reason whatsoever, a promotion to that post should be from the date the promotion is
granted and not from the date on which such post falls vacant. In the same way when
additional posts are created, promotions to those posts can be granted only after the
Assessment Board has met and made its recommendations for promotions being
granted. If on the contrary, promotions are directed to become effective from the date
of the creation of additional posts, then it would have the effect of giving promotions
even before the Assessment Board has met and assessed the suitability of the
candidates for promotion. In the circumstances, it is difficult to sustain the judgment
of the Tribunal.”

20.Similarly, this Court in the case of Ganga Vishan Gujrati and Ors. v. State of Rajasthan, (2019) 16
SCC 28 has held that:

45. A consistent line of precedent of this Court follows the principle that retrospective
seniority cannot be granted to an employee from a date when the employee was not
borne on a cadre. Seniority amongst members of the same grade has to be counted
from the date of initial entry into the grade. This principle emerges from the decision
of the Constitution Bench of this Court in Direct Recruit Class II Engg.

Officers' Assn. v. State of Maharashtra, (1990) 2 SCC 715 . The principle was reiterated by this Court
in State of Bihar v. Akhouri Sachindra Nath, 1991 Supp (1) SCC 334 and State of Uttaranchal v.
Dinesh Kumar Sharma, (2007) 1 SCC 683. In Pawan Pratap Singh v. Reevan Singh, (2011) 3 SCC
267, this Court revisited the precedents on the subject and observed: (SCC pp. 281-82, para 45) “45.
… (i) The effective date of selection has to be understood in the context of the Service Rules under
which the appointment is made. It may mean the date on which the process of selection starts with
the issuance of advertisement or the factum of preparation of the select list, as the case may be.

(ii) Inter se seniority in a particular service has to be determined as per the Service Rules. The date
of entry in a particular service or the date of substantive appointment is the safest criterion for fixing
seniority inter se between one officer or the other or between one group of officers and the other
recruited from different sources. Any departure therefrom in the statutory rules, executive
instructions or otherwise must be consistent with the requirements of Articles 14 and 16 of the
Constitution.

(iii) Ordinarily, notional seniority may not be granted from the backdate and if it is done, it must be
based on objective considerations and on a valid classification and must be traceable to the statutory
rules.

(iv) The seniority cannot be reckoned from the date of occurrence of the vacancy and cannot be
given retrospectively unless it is so expressly provided by the relevant Service Rules. It is so because
seniority cannot be given on retrospective basis when an employee has not even been borne in the
cadre and by doing so it may adversely affect the employees who have been appointed validly in the

8

Union Of India vs Manpreet Singh Poonam on 8 March, 2022

meantime.” This view has been re-affirmed by a Bench of three Judges of this Court in P. Sudhakar
Rao v. U. Govinda Rao, (2013) 8 SCC 693.”

21.For the aforesaid reasoning, we are unable to give our imprimatur to the reasoning of the High
Court. Accordingly, the appeals stand allowed and consequently, the order passed by the High Court
stand set aside. No costs.

……………………………J. (SANJAY KISHAN KAUL) ……………………………J. (M.M. SUNDRESH) New
Delhi, March 08, 2022

9