Veena Singh(Dead) Through Lr vs The District Registrar/ Additional ... on 10 May, 2022

Veena Singh(Dead) Through Lr vs The District Registrar/
Additional ... on 10 May, 2022

Author: D.Y. Chandrachud

Bench: Bela M Trivedi, A S Bopanna, Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

Civil Appeal No. 2929 of 2022

Veena Singh (Dead) Through LR                            ...Appellant

Versus

The District Registrar/Additional Collector (F/R)        ...Respondents

And Another JUDGMENT Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, J This judgment has been divided into
sections to facilitate analysis. They are:

A Introduction...................................................................................................... 3 B
Submissions of Counsel ................................................................................ 13 C
Analysis ......................................................................................................... 18 C.1
Statutory Framework of the Registration Act .......................................... 18 C.2
Validity of the recourse by the Second Respondent ............................... 27 C.3
Meaning of ―execution(cid:129)............................................................................ 33 D
Conclusion..................................................................................................... 61 PART A
A Introduction 1 This appeal has arisen from a judgment dated 31 May 2018 of a
Single Judge of the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad. By the impugned
judgment, the High Court dismissed a petition under Article 226 filed by the
appellant, seeking a writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing an order dated 31
March 2012 of the District Registrar/Additional Collector (Finance and Revenue),
Bareilly1, who is the first respondent in the present appeal. During the pendency of
this appeal, the appellant has passed away and has been substituted by her legal heir,
by an order of this Court dated 9 December 2021.

1

Veena Singh(Dead) Through Lr vs The District Registrar/ Additional ... on 10 May, 2022

2 At the heart of this dispute is a certain piece of land admeasuring 3,793 square
yards, situated at 110-B, Civil Lines, Bareilly, Uttar Pradesh, which was owned by one
C P Singh. During his life time, he had alienated approximately 415 square yards of
the land to four distinct persons. After his death, the appellant, who is his spouse,
together with her two daughters, namely Nita Singh and Neelam Singh, and son,
Pradeep Singh, became joint owners of the property. A power of attorney was
executed on 17 April 2010 in favour of the appellant by her daughters and son, which
is stated to have been cancelled on 27 September 2011.

3 The appellant is alleged to have entered into two agreements with a developer –
Gujral Associates, who is the second respondent in the present appeal:

(i) the first was allegedly a development agreement in respect of an area admeasuring
1000 square meters in the front portion of the land. It is important to ―District
Registrar(cid:129) PART A note that the nature of this agreement is disputed by the second
respondent (who alleges that it was instead an agreement to sell), but that dispute is
not before this Court in the present appeal; and (ii) the second was an agreement to
sell for an area admeasuring 839.4 square meters in the rear portion of the land for a
sale consideration of Rs 1.6 crores, which was executed on 22 October 2010. On the
other hand, the second respondent contends that this agreement to sell was for an
area admeasuring 1839.4 square meters. It is also important to note that the stamp
duty in the amount of Rs 39,61,000 (according to counsel for the second respondent)
was paid on the agreement on the basis of the circle rate of the land, i.e., Rs
6,11,53,000.

4 Between October 2010 and 3 January 2011, the second respondent allegedly paid the appellant a
sum of Rs 93 lakhs in twelve instalments. A cheque for the remaining sum of Rs 67 lakhs was
handed over to the appellant by the second respondent on 20 June 2011. The appellant has stated
that she did not encash this cheque upon realising that a fraud had been committed upon her. On
the same date, a sale deed was purported to have been executed by the appellant in favour of the
second respondent based upon the agreement to sell and upon the payment of the remaining sale
consideration. The execution and registration of this sale deed forms the bedrock of the dispute in
the present appeal.

5 On 5 December 2011, the second respondent filed an application seeking permission to execute the
sale deed. Thereafter, on 15 December 2011, they presented the sale deed for registration before the
Sub-Registrar-I, Bareilly. In PART A response to a notice from the Sub-Registrar, the appellant
appeared before the Sub- Registrar on 17 February 2012 and submitted an objection in writing, with
a request not to execute the incomplete and forged sale deed in favour of the second respondent.
The appellant stated that she was 78 years of age, ―a chronic patient of depression, heart ailment
and hypertension(cid:129) under medical treatment and that her son was an alcoholic who was incapable of
taking any decision on his own. The appellant stated that the second respondent had been harassing
her into forcibly signing the sale deed in respect of her property. The appellant further stated that
the second respondent furnished her with misleading and false information in order to ger her to

2

Veena Singh(Dead) Through Lr vs The District Registrar/ Additional ... on 10 May, 2022

sign the papers, all the while even forcing her to hide the transaction from the members of her own
family. Specifically in relation to the two transactions in regards the front and rear portion of the
land, the appellant alleged as follows:

―(A) Details of 100 sq. meter agreement with m/S Gujral Associates having a market
value of not less than Rs.5 Crore showing a meagre sale consideration of
Rs.1,30,00,000/- on 22.10.2010 forming part of 110-B Civil Lines, Bareilly,
stipulating to have paid a sum of Rs.18,00,000/- to me including a sum of
Rs.90,00,000/- in cash and a sum of Rs.3,00,000/- through cheque No.111681 dated
03.06.2009 Bank of Baroda, which in fact was never paid to me and the cheque
referred to above stands credited in someone else account and not in my account.
According to me and the Law the agreement becomes NULL and VOID as the
intention of the party is to do a fraud by illegal measures.

(B) Details of 1839.48 Sq. meter agreement with M/s Gujral Associates having a
market value of not less than Rs.7 Crore showing a meagre sale consideration of
Rs.1,60,00,000/- on 22.10.2010 forming part of 11-B Civil Lines, Bareilly, stipulating
to have paid a sum of Rs.83,00,000/- including a sum of Rs.8,00,000/- shown to
have been paid in cash, which in fact has never been paid to me (Mrs. Veena Singh).
According to me and the Law the PART A agreement becomes NULL and VOID as
the intention of the party is to do a fraud by illegal measures.(cid:129) The appellant further
stated:

―That the time within which sale deed was allegedly agreed to be executed was period
of eight months which too has expired on 22.06.2011 and to avoid legal consequences
they obtained signature on INCOMPLETE SALE DEED dt. 20.06.2011 from me
under misleading and false information when they were pressurizing me to quickly
sign the papers before the registry office closes and didn't give a chance to read the
papers before signing, my granddaughter entered the room and enquired about the
doing. She asked if the papers had been read by one to which I replied NO. So she
asked a photo copy of the documents so that our Lawyer could go through them. It
was at that moment that this fact came to light that whatever was undergoing was
wrong and misleading, M/ s Gujral Associates people and his lawyer Mr. Anil Ku.
Agarwal was shocked when my granddaughter asked for a photo copy as she was
scared to see me surrounded by 5 people in my Room and then when we realized that
they manipulated the land area and they were taking my manipulated the land area
and they were taking my HOUSE also illegally, so I am against this SALE deed as they
have done a fraud.(cid:129) The appellant further claimed that:

(i) The boundaries which were set out in the deed for 1839.48 square meters were
erroneous and did not clearly reflect what was to be sold. Further, the second
respondent had manipulated the actual land area by also including within it the
appellant‘s house, where she was residing for over five decades, though it was not her
intention to alienate it;

3

Veena Singh(Dead) Through Lr vs The District Registrar/ Additional ... on 10 May, 2022

PART A

(ii) The sale deed itself was incomplete, but the second respondent forcibly made her sign it on the
pretext of a rush to file the sale deed within time for registration; and

(iii) The second respondent himself was aware that there was no partition between the co-sharers of
the land, yet went ahead with the sale deed. Hence, based on her above contentions, the appellant
requested the Sub-Registrar to take action for the forgery which had been committed by the second
respondent and prevent the second respondent from getting the incomplete sale deed registered for
an area admeasuring 1839.48 square meters.

6 By an order dated 17 February 2012, the Sub-Registrar declined to register the sale deed after
recording the following statement of the appellant:

―I was alone, my signature was forcibly taken on this sale deed, I do not remain well,
and I take Alprex also, I am diabetic also, I r4emain under Hypertension also. Many
persons who were 4-5 in number by reaching there, got my signature forcibly. Other
paper was read to me, and signature was taken on other paper. I live alone. They
trouble me from day to today. The land not so in quantity which they have written. As
per them, they try to occupy that house also which is mine. I do not want to execute
this sale deed. I be let live comfortably.(cid:129) Relying upon her statement, the
Sub-Registrar held as follows:

―On the basis of the aforesaid statement as Smt. Beena is not ready to register the
aforesaid sale deed which she tells to be executed fraudulently and cheatingly.
Therefore, the registration of the sale deed is denied under Section 35(3)A of the
Indian Registration Act and under Rule 249 of the Registration Manual, Part -2.(cid:129)
PART A

7 The Sub-Registrar having refused to order the registration of the sale deed, the second respondent
instituted an appeal2 under Section 72 of the Registration Act 19083 on 2 March 2012. The
appellant objected to the maintainability of the appeal under Section 72, besides supporting the
order of the Sub-Registrar on the ground that the sale deed in dispute had not been executed by her.

8 By an order dated 31 March 2012, the District Registrar, while entertaining the appeal, proceeded
to follow the procedure prescribed by Section 74 of the Registration Act to determine whether the
sale deed had been executed by the appellant. The District Registrar subsequently held that the
appellant had admitted her signature on the document and that the second respondent was entitled
to get the sale deed registered. In arriving at the conclusion, the District Registrar relied on the
statements made on solemn affirmation by the scribe of the sale deed and by the witnesses to the
sale deed, to the effect that the document had been executed by the appellant in their presence
without any pressure. The District Registrar also noted that prior to the sale deed, an agreement to
sell had been registered on 22 October 2010 in terms of which the appellant received an amount of
Rs 93 lakhs by cash and cheque, as token money towards the sale consideration of Rs 1.6 crores. The

4

Veena Singh(Dead) Through Lr vs The District Registrar/ Additional ... on 10 May, 2022

receipt of the consideration by cheque in pursuance of the agreement to sell was stated to not be in
dispute. Further, the District Registrar noted that during the period of about one year and two
months, between the registration of the agreement Appeal No 01 of 2012 ―Registration Act(cid:129) PART
A to sell and the presentation of the sale deed on 15 December 2011, the appellant had not lodged
any complaint alleging fraud. The District Registrar also observed that the signatures and thumb
impressions/fingerprints of the appellant on the agreement to sell and sale deed had been examined
by a handwriting expert, and were found to be identical. Based on these findings, the District
Registrar set aside the Sub-Registrar‘s decision and ordered the registration of the sale deed
presented on 15 December 2011. Consequently, the sale deed was registered on 16 April 2012.

9 Crucially, the appellant has adverted to certain developments which took place after the order of
the District Registrar. According to the appellant, the Assistant Inspector General, Registration,
Bareilly ordered a spot inspection by the Sub-Registrar of the land covered by the sale deed. In his
report dated 30 April 2012, the Sub-Registrar concluded that the actual area covered by the deed
was 1341.73 square meters, out of which 740.73 square meters was the area of the appellant‘s house.
Further, the Sub-Registrar noted that while the northern and western boundaries were present as
according to the sale deed, the southern and eastern boundaries at the spot did not match with the
boundaries mentioned in the sale deed. Later, pursuant to the recommendation of the
Sub-Registrar, a further spot verification was also carried out by the Naib Tahsildar. In a report
dated 26 May 2012, the Naib Tahsildar stated that the boundaries mentioned in the sale deed were
completely incorrect. Further, it was stated that the actual area on the spot was 849.12 square
meters, as opposed to the area of 1839.48 square meters shown in PART A the sale deed. The report
noted that if the area of 1839.48 square meters was taken as the area of the sale deed, it would partly
cover the residential house of the appellant, garden area situated in front of the house and three
properties which had been previously sold by the deceased husband of the appellant. Therefore, the
Naib Tahsildar concluded that the registered sale deed was completely incorrect. 10 At this stage, it
would also be material to note that a first information report4 was filed by the appellant on 4 May
2012 at PS Kotwali, Sub-District Sadar, Bareilly against the proprietors of the second respondent for
offences punishable under Sections 420, 467, 468, 471 and 506 of the Indian Penal Code 1860.
Subsequently, a final report was filed in the FIR by the Investigating Officer. A protest petition filed
by the appellant against the final report has since been dismissed by the Magistrate by an order
dated 20 September 20135, against which the appellant‘s revision remains pending.

11 Along with these developments, the appellant challenged the order dated 31 March 2012 of the
District Registrar before the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad in proceedings under Article 226
of the Constitution. In adjudicating the appellant‘s writ petition by the impugned judgment dated 31
May 2018, a Single Judge of the High Court framed the following questions for consideration:

―38. The question to be considered by this Court in facts and circumstances of this
case and in the light of arguments made by the counsel for the parties can be
summarized thus:

Whether the Writ Petition was maintainable in the form and FIR No 192 of 2012;
Case Crime No 1118 of 2012 Misc Case No 225 of 2013 PART A manner it had been

5

Veena Singh(Dead) Through Lr vs The District Registrar/ Additional ... on 10 May, 2022

filed? What is the scope of power exercised by the Deputy Registrar under section
35(3)(a) of the Act? Whether the denial of execution of Sale Deed by the petitioner
was correctly interpreted by the Deputy Registrar to exercise power under Section
35(3)(a) and refuse registration? Whether the District Registrar could have
considered, the appeal filed by Respondent No. 2 as a representation and exercise
power as an original Authority and not as an Appellate Authority? Whether Sale Deed
which was Registered on 16.04.2012 before this Court passed its interim order can be
set aside by this Court by holding that it was wrongly registered?(cid:129) The Single Judge
then observed:

(i) In terms of this Court‘s judgment in Satya Pal Anand v. State of M.P.6, the
Sub-Registrar under Sections 34 and 35 of the Registration Act has no quasi-

judicial power to conduct an enquiry regarding the validity of the title or legality of the transaction
in a sale deed, but only has to ascertain whether the provisions of the Registration Act have been
complied with. Questions regarding the validity of the title or legality of the transaction can only be
decided by a competent civil court; and

(ii) The Sub-Registrar, in the present case, had denied the registration of the sale deed under Section
35(3)(a) of the Registration Act since the appellant had, while admitting that she had placed her
thumb impressions/fingerprints and signatures on the sale deed, objected to the registration on the
ground that her signatures had been taken in a fraudulent manner by representing to her that she
was selling only 839 square meters of land whereas the area shown (2016) 10 SCC 767 (―Satya Pal
Anand(cid:129)) PART A in the sale deed was 1839 square meters. However, it was held that the Sub-
Registrar under Section 35 did not have the power to conduct an inquiry regarding the execution of
the sale deed, and could have only recorded the denial of execution by the appellant. On the other
hand, it was noted that a wider power is entrusted to the Registrar under Section 74(a) of the
Registration Act to determine whether the document has been executed. On these premises, the
Single Judge held:

―55…The registration does not depend upon the consent of the executant, but on the
Registrar finding that the executant had actually signed the document concerned, but
now was requesting that it may not be registered for reasons other than its execution.
The registrar is required under Section 74 to conduct an inquiry. If the Registrar
finds that the document was duly prepared by the Scribe/Deed Writer and the
attesting witnesses to such document also deposed that the document was signed and
the thumb and finger print impressions were made thereon by the vendor in their
presence, and on inquiry from the vendor it comes out that indeed such facts were
correct, the Registrar can direct registration of a document in spite of denial of
execution before him by the person aggrieved if such registration of such a document
is compulsory under the Act.(cid:129)

12 The Single Judge also observed that the writ petition had been instituted after the registration of
the FIR by the appellant, prior to which the order of the District Registrar dated 31 March 2012 had

6

Veena Singh(Dead) Through Lr vs The District Registrar/ Additional ... on 10 May, 2022

already been complied with by the registration of the sale deed on 16 April 2012. The Single Judge
noted that initially, the appellant had pleaded before the High Court that her signatures and thumb
impressions/fingerprints had not been placed on the sale deed, but had been forged by the second
respondent. However, the Single Judge noted that this was an PART B improvement from the
appellant‘s story as detailed in the FIR dated 4 May 2012, where it was stated that the appellant
willingly put her signatures and thumb impressions/fingerprints on the sale deed and only later did
her granddaughter realise the incorrect figure of the area in the sale deed. In any case, the High
Court observed that whether the signatures and thumb impressions/fingerprints of the appellant
had been forged by the second respondent raised a disputed question of fact which could only be
resolved on the basis of evidence before a competent civil court. Holding that the High Court in the
exercise of its writ jurisdiction could not render a finding either way, the writ petition was dismissed
by the Single Judge while leaving it open to the appellant to move the civil court for a declaration
that the sale deed had been obtained by fraud and was a nullity.

B       Submissions of Counsel

13      We have heard Mr Pradeep Kant, learned Senior Counsel appearing on

behalf of the appellant and Mr V K Shukla, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the
second respondent.

14 Mr Pradeep Kant, learned Senior Counsel submitted that:

(i) An appeal under Section 72 of the Registration Act lies to the Registrar against an
order of the Sub-Registrar refusing to admit a document to registration except where
the refusal is made on the ground of denial of execution. In the present case, the
execution of the sale deed had been PART B denied by the appellant and the
Sub-Registrar refused registration on that ground under Section 35(3)(a). Hence, no
appeal would be maintainable under Section 72;

(ii) In any event, in an appeal under Section 72, it is not open to the Registrar to
pursue an enquiry under Section 74. The procedure under Section 74 has to be
followed only when an application is filed under Section 73. Under Section 74, a
person who had applied under Section 73 challenging the non-

registration of a document, of which execution is denied by any person by whom it purports to have
been executed, may apply to the Registrar to establish his right to have the document registered. In
the present case, the second respondent having filed an appeal under Section 72, the provisions of
Sections 73 and 74 could not have been attracted;

(iii) The appellant does not deny having signed the sale deed and having placed her thumb
impressions/fingerprints on the documents. However, the execution of a document cannot be
conflated with its mere signing. The appellant admitted her signatures but objected to registration

7

Veena Singh(Dead) Through Lr vs The District Registrar/ Additional ... on 10 May, 2022

on the ground of fraud and undue influence. Hence, the question of proving her signature on the
sale deed was never an issue. Pertinently, neither the Registrar nor the High Court has recorded a
finding that the appellant understood the contents of the sale deed or she was made to understand
the obligations which were being assumed by her with respect to the subject matter of the sale,
including the boundaries and area of the land, at the time when she placed her signatures and
thumb impressions/fingerprints on the documents. Therefore, PART B the mere fact that the
witnesses proved the signatures of the appellant on the sale deed cannot lead to the conclusion that
the appellant had duly ‗executed‘ the sale deed or that there could not have been any denial of
execution;

(iv) The specific objection of the appellant is that the sale deed is fraudulent and contrary to the
agreed terms since:

(a) The area reflected in the sale deed is almost double the area agreed upon between
the parties; and

(b) The area reflected in the sale deed includes a public way on the northern side as
well as a part of the appellant‘s residential house; and

(v) In sum and substance, the submission for the appellant is that:

(a) The appeal itself was not maintainable before the Registrar under Section 72 of
the Registration Act;

(b) The appellant does not deny her signatures or thumb impressions/fingerprints on the sale deed.
Hence, the Registrar‘s reliance on the statements of the two witnesses and handwriting experts to
prove the appellant‘s signature on the sale deed, while concluding that it was thus duly ‗executed‘
by appellant, is misplaced;

(c) There has been no finding in regards to the due execution of the sale deed by the appellant,
which is the matter in dispute; and

(d) There could have been no ‗execution‘ by the appellant when there is a serious dispute between
the parties over the area reflected in the sale deed and what had been agreed earlier.

PART B 15 On the other hand, Mr V K Shukla, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the
second respondent submitted that:

(i) The appellant has admitted to the execution of the sale deed both in her objections
before the Sub-Registrar and in the FIR which was lodged on 4 May 2012, where the
appellant admits that the sale deed was signed by her.

If an instrument is signed by both the parties, it is presumptive of the fact that both of them have
executed it, though the presumption is rebuttable. In the present case, the sale deed having been

8

Veena Singh(Dead) Through Lr vs The District Registrar/ Additional ... on 10 May, 2022

signed by the parties and attested by the two witnesses, it has to be regarded as having been validly
‗executed‘;

(ii) Under the Registration Act, the Registrar is vested with a duality of powers:

(a) An appellate power under Section 72; and

(b) A power under Section 73 read with Section 74 to determine upon enquiry
whether a document has been executed and can be registered;

Since the Registrar has an independent power under Section 73 and Section 74, the mere
mentioning of a wrong provision (Section 72) by the second respondent and the Registrar will not
invalidate the proceedings;

(iii) A document, once it is registered, can be cancelled or set aside only by a civil court of competent
jurisdiction. Upon the registration of the sale deed on 16 April 2012, the registration authorities are
rendered infructuous and would have no power to cancel registration even on the ground of fraud or
other irregularities;

(iv) The following conduct of the appellant has disentitled her to relief:

PART B

(a) The appellant placed her signature and thumb impressions/fingerprints on each
page of the sale deed as well as the photocopies totaling over 340 pages;

(b) The appellant received all the payments towards the sale consideration of Rs 1.6
crores, except the last cheque of Rs 67 lakhs which she has deliberately not encashed
in order to resist registration;

(c) The appellant has instituted a civil suit7 claiming to be an owner of the entire
3,172 square meters of land, despite her husband having sold portions nearing 300
square meters to third parties during his lifetime;

(d) The appellant has executed gift deeds dated 4 October 2011 and 22 October 2011
in favour of her granddaughter, in respect of land which has been registered in the
name of the second respondent under the sale deed; and

(e) The sale deed was preceded by an agreement to sell, which is also a registered
document executed by the appellant. The registered agreement to sell dated 22
October 2010 was also used by the handwriting/fingerprint expert for the purpose of
comparing the appellant‘s signatures on the sale deed, which was found to be
identical.

9

Veena Singh(Dead) Through Lr vs The District Registrar/ Additional ... on 10 May, 2022

16 The rival submissions would now fall for analysis.

Suit No 727 of 2012

(cid:12)                                                                                  PART C

C       Analysis

17      There are two broad issues which arise in the present civil appeal:

(i) Whether the recourse by the second respondent to Section 72 of the Registration Act, against the
order of the Sub-Registrar refusing registration on the basis of the appellant‘s denial of execution,
would deprive them of any remedy whatsoever; and

(ii) Whether the appellant‘s admission of her signatures and thumb impressions/fingerprints on the
sale deed also amounts to an admission of its ―execution(cid:129).

However, before proceeding with a discussion of these issues, it is important to understand the
statutory framework of the Registration Act.

C.1     Statutory Framework of the Registration Act

18      Section 17 of the Registration Act stipulates which documents are

compulsorily registrable. Among them, in clause (b), are non-testamentary instruments which
purport or operate to create, declare, assign, limit or extinguish a right, title or interest to or in
immoveable property of a value higher than Rs 100. Section 23, which deals with the time for
presenting documents, stipulates that subject to Sections 24, 25 and 26, no documents other than a
will shall be accepted PART C for registration unless presented to the proper officer within four
months from the date of its execution.

19 Section 32 then entails that every document, to be registered, shall be presented at the
registration office by: (a) person executing or claiming under the document; or (b) a representative
or assign of such a person; or (c) the agent of such a person, or their representative or assign, duly
authorized by a power of attorney executed and authenticated in the manner provided. 20 Section
348 stipulates that, subject to the provisions referred to in it, no document shall be registered unless
the person executing such a document or their representative, assign or agent authorized, appear

10

Veena Singh(Dead) Through Lr vs The District Registrar/ Additional ... on 10 May, 2022

before the registering officer within the time allowed for presentation. The provision also outlines
the duties of ―34. Enquiry before registration by registering officer.—(1) Subject to the provisions
contained in this Part and in Sections 41, 43, 45, 69, 75, 77, 88 and 89, no document shall be
registered under this Act, unless the persons executing such document, or their representatives,
assigns or agents authorized as aforesaid, appear before the registering officer within the time
allowed for presentation under Sections 23, 24, 25 and 26:

Provided that, if owing to urgent necessity or unavoidable accident all such persons
do not so appear, the Registrar, in cases where the delay in appearing does not exceed
four months, may direct that on payment of a fine not exceeding ten times the
amount of the proper registration fee, in addition to the fine, if any, payable under
Section 25, the document may be registered.

(2) Appearances under sub-section (1) may be simultaneous or at different times.

(3) The registering officer shall thereupon—

(a) enquire whether or not such document was executed by the persons by whom it
purports to have been executed;

(b) satisfy himself as to the identity of the persons appearing before him and alleging
that they have executed the document; and

(c) in the case of any person appearing as a representative, assign or agent, satisfy
himself of the right of such person so to appear.

(4) Any application for a direction under the proviso to sub-section (1) may be lodged
with a Sub-Registrar, who shall forthwith forward it to the Registrar to whom he is
subordinate.

(5) Nothing in this section applies to copies of decrees or orders.(cid:129) PART C enquiry
placed upon the registering officer once a document is presented before them within
the time limit prescribed.

21 Section 35 entails that the registering officer shall register the document if:

(i) All the persons executing the document appearing personally, are personally
known to the registering officer, or if the registering officer is otherwise satisfied that
they are the person they represent themselves to be and all of them admit the
execution of the document;

(ii) A person appearing by a representative, assign or agent admits the execution to
the registering officer; and

11

Veena Singh(Dead) Through Lr vs The District Registrar/ Additional ... on 10 May, 2022

(iii) Where the person executing the document is dead, their representative or assign
appears before the registering officer and admits its execution.

On the other hand, sub-Section (3)(a) of Section 35 stipulates, inter alia, that if a person by whom
the document purports to be executed denies its execution, the registering officer will refuse to
register the document. Section 35 is extracted below:

―35. Procedure on admission and denial of execution respectively.—(1) (a) If all the
persons executing the document appear personally before the registering officer and
are personally known to him, or if he be otherwise satisfied that they are the persons
they represent themselves to be, and if they all admit the execution of the document,
or

(b) if in the case of any person appearing by a representative, assign or agent, such
representative, assign or agent admits the execution, or

(c) if the person executing the document is dead, and his representative or assign
appears before the registering officer and admits the execution, PART C the
registering officer shall register the document as directed in Sections 58 to 61,
inclusive.

(2) The registering officer may, in order to satisfy himself that the persons appearing
before him are the persons they represent themselves to be, or for any other purpose
contemplated by this Act, examine any one present in his office.

(3)(a) If any person by whom the document purports to be executed denies its
execution, or

(b) if any such person appears to the registering officer to be a minor, an idiot or a
lunatic, or

(c) if any person by whom the document purports to be executed is dead, and his
representative or assign denies its execution, the registering officer shall refuse to
register the document as to the person so denying, appearing or dead:

Provided that, where such officer is a Registrar, he shall follow the procedure
prescribed in Part XII:

Provided further that the State Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, declare that any Sub- Registrar named in the notification shall, in respect of
documents the execution of which is denied, be deemed to be a Registrar for the
purposes of this sub-section and of Part XII.(cid:129)

12

Veena Singh(Dead) Through Lr vs The District Registrar/ Additional ... on 10 May, 2022

22 The above provisions indicate that the registration of a document by the Sub- Registrar must be
preceded by:

(i) Presentation of the document by a proper person within the time allowed for
presentation; and

(ii) Admission of the execution of the document.

23 Section 58 provides for the particulars to be endorsed on the documents admitted to registration.
Section 58(2) provides that ―[i]f any person admitting the PART C execution of a document refuses
to endorse the same, the registering officer shall nevertheless register it, but shall at the same time
endorse a note of such refusal(cid:129). Section 59 stipulates that the endorsements are to be dated and
signed by the registering officer. Section 60 provides that once the requirements of Sections 34, 35,
58 and 59 have been complied with, the registering officer shall endorse the document with a
certificate of registration.

24 Section 719 requires the Sub-Registrar who refuses to register a document, except on the ground
that the property to which it relates is not situated within his sub-district, to make an order of
refusal and record his reasons, and endorse the refusal of registration on the document. Further, the
Sub-Registrar is required to furnish a copy of the reasons recorded, to any person executing or
claiming under the document.

25 Section 72 provides for an appeal to the Registrar from an order of the Sub- Registrar refusing
registration on a ground other than the denial of execution. Section 72 is in the following terms:

―72. Appeal to Registrar from orders of Sub-Registrar refusing registration on
ground other than denial of execution.—(1) Except where the refusal is made on the
ground of denial of execution, an appeal shall lie against and order of a Sub-Registrar
refusing to admit a document to registration (whether the registration of such
document is ―71. Reasons for refusal to register to be recorded.—(1) Every
Sub-Registrar refusing to register a document except on the ground that the property
to which it relates is not situate within his sub-district, shall make an order of refusal
and record his reasons for such order in his Book No. 2, and endorse the words
―registration refused(cid:129) on the document; and, on application made by any person
executing or claiming under the document, shall, without payment and unnecessary
delay, give him a copy of the reasons so recorded.

(2) No registering officer shall accept for registration a document so endorsed unless
and until, under the provisions hereinafter contained, the document is directed to be
registered.(cid:129) PART C compulsory or optional) to the Registrar to whom such Sub-

Registrar is subordinate, if presented to such Registrar within thirty days from the date of the order;
and the Registrar may reverse or alter such order.

13

Veena Singh(Dead) Through Lr vs The District Registrar/ Additional ... on 10 May, 2022

(2) If the order of the Registrar directs the document to be registered and the document is duly
presented for registration within thirty days after the making of such order, the Sub- Registrar shall
obey the same, and thereupon shall, so far as may be practicable, follow the procedure prescribed in
Sections 58, 59 and 60; and such registration shall take effect as if the document had been
registered when it was first duly presented for registration.(cid:129) In terms of sub-Section (1) of Section
72, an appeal lies to the Registrar against an order of the Sub-Registrar refusing to admit a
document to registration, except where the refusal is made on the ground of a denial of execution.
26 Section 73 provides for an application to the Registrar where the Sub- Registrar has refused to
register a document on the ground of a denial of execution. Section 73 provides thus:

―73. Application to Registrar where Sub-Registrar refuses to register on ground of
denial of execution.—(1) When a Sub-Registrar has refused to register a document on
the ground that any person by whom it purports to be executed, or his representative
or assign, denies its execution, any person claiming under such document, or his
representative, assign or agent authorized as aforesaid, may, within thirty days after
the making of the order of refusal, apply to the Registrar to whom such Sub-Registrar
is subordinate in order to establish his right to have the document registered.

(2) Such application shall be in writing and shall be accompanied by a copy of the
reasons recorded under Section 71, and the statements in the application shall be
verified by the applicant in manner required by law for the verification of plaints.(cid:129)
PART C In terms of Section 73, where a Sub-Registrar refuses registration on the
ground that the person by whom it purports to be executed (or their representative or
assign) denies execution, any person who claims under the document (or a
representative assign or authorized agent) may apply to the Registrar within thirty
days ―in order to establish [their] rights to have the document registered(cid:129). Such an
application has to be in writing, accompanied by the reasons recorded under Section

71. The statements in the application have to be verified in the manner required by
law for the verification of plaints.

27 On such an application being preferred, the Registrar has to follow the procedure which is spelt
out in Section 74. Section 74 stipulates as follows:

―74. Procedure of Registrar on such application.—In such case, and also where such
denial as aforesaid is made before a Registrar in respect of a document presented for
registration to him, the Registrar shall, as soon as conveniently may be, enquire—

(a) whether the document has been executed;

(b) whether the requirements of the law for the time being in force have been
complied with on the part of the applicant or person presenting the document for
registration, as the case may be, so as to entitle the document to registration. (cid:129) In
terms of the above provision, the Registrar in such a case, and also where a denial of

14

Veena Singh(Dead) Through Lr vs The District Registrar/ Additional ... on 10 May, 2022

execution is made before the Registrar, has to enquire:

(i) Whether the document has been executed; and PART C

(ii) Whether the requirements of law for the time being in force have been complied
with on the part of the applicant or person presenting the document for registration.

28 Section 7510 provides that if the Registrar finds that the document has been executed and the
requirements under the law have been complied with, the Registrar shall order the document be
registered. Thereafter, if the document is duly presented for registration within thirty days of the
order of the Registrar, the registering officer has to obey the order and, as far as may be practicable,
must follow the procedure in Sections 58, 59 and 60. The registration then takes effect as if the
document has been registered when it was first presented for registration. Pertinently, under
sub-Section (4) of Section 75, the Registrar may, for the purpose of an enquiry under Section 74,
summon and enforce the attendance of witnesses, and compel them to give evidence, as if the
Registrar were a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure 190811.

―75. Order by Registrar to register and procedure thereon.—(1) If the Registrar finds that the
document has been executed and that the said requirements have been complied with, he shall order
the document to be registered.

(2) If the document is duly presented for registration within thirty days after the making of such
order, the registering officer shall obey the same and thereupon shall, so far as may be practicable,
follow the procedure prescribed in Sections 58, 59 and 60.

(3) Such registration shall take effect as if the document had been registered when it was first duly
presented for registration.

(4) The Registrar may, for the purpose of any enquiry under Section 74, summon and enforce the
attendance of witnesses, and compel them to give evidence, as if he were a Civil Court, and he may
also direct by whom the whole or any part of the costs of any such enquiry shall be paid, and such
costs shall be recoverable as if they had been awarded in a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 (5 of 1908).(cid:129) ―CPC(cid:129) PART C 29 Section 7612 provides for that the order of refusal by the
Registrar under Sections 72 or 75 has to be reasoned, and the Registrar is required to furnish a copy
of the reasons recorded to any person executing or claiming under the document. It further provides
that no appeal shall lie against such an order of refusal. 30 In the event of a refusal by the Registrar,
a suit can be filed by a party in terms of the provisions of Section 7713 before a civil court, praying
for a decree directing the document to be registered. On the other hand, an order of the Registrar
directing the registration of a document is amenable to a challenge under Article 226 of the
Constitution. While seeking a writ of certiorari, the person moving the petition before the High
Court would be entitled to establish whether the registration has been ordered in breach of the
statutory provisions and is contrary to law. The mere existence of the remedy available before a civil
court, under Section 9 of the CPC to avoid the document or to seek a declaration in regard to its
invalidity, will not divest a person, who complains that the order passed by Registrar for the

15

Veena Singh(Dead) Through Lr vs The District Registrar/ Additional ... on 10 May, 2022

registration of ―76. Order of refusal by Registrar.—(1) Every Registrar refusing—

(a) to register a document except on the ground that the property to which it relates is not situate
within his district or that the document ought to be registered in the office of a Sub-Registrar, or

(b) to direct the registration of a document under Section 72 or Section 75, shall make an order of
refusal and record the reasons for such order in his Book No. 2, and, on application made by any
person executing or claiming under the document, shall, without unnecessary delay, give him a copy
of the reasons so recorded.

(2) No appeal lies from any order by a Registrar under this Section or Section 72.(cid:129) ―77. Suit in case
of order of refusal by Registrar.—(1) Where the Registrar refuses to order the document to be
registered, under Section 72 or Section 76, any person claiming under such document, or his
representative, assign or agent, may, within thirty days after the making of the order of refusal,
institute in the Civil Court, within the local limits of whose original jurisdiction is situate the office
in which the document is sought to be registered, a suit for a decree directing the document to be
registered in such office if it be duly presented for registration within thirty days after the passing of
such decree.

(2) The provisions contained in sub-sections (2) and (3) of Section 75 shall, mutatis mutandis, apply
to all documents presented for registration in accordance with any such decree, and,
notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the document shall be receivable in evidence in
such suit.(cid:129) PART C the document was contrary to statutory provisions, of the remedy which is
available in the exercise of a court‘s writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution.
Undoubtedly, whether a writ should be entertained lies at the discretion of the court and in a given
case, the High Court may decline to do so on the ground that disputed questions of fact arise.
However, it needs to be emphasized that in the exercise of the writ jurisdiction, it would be open to
the High Court to determine as to whether the statutory provisions which guide the power of the
Sub-Registrar or, as the case may be, the Registrar to order the registration of the document have
been duly fulfilled. Even where a decree is passed by the civil court for the cancellation of any
instrument, sub-Section (2) of Section 31 of the Specific Relief Act 1963 provides that:

―31. When cancellation may be ordered.— [...] (2) If the instrument has been
registered under the Indian Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908), the court shall also
send a copy of its decree to the officer in whose office the instrument has been so
registered; and such officer shall note on the copy of the instrument contained in his
books the fact of its cancellation. (cid:129) C.2 Validity of the recourse by the Second
Respondent

31 The Sub-Registrar before whom the sale deed was submitted for registration declined to order the
registration of the sale deed by an order dated 17 February 2012. The order of the Sub-Registrar was
prefaced by the statement of the appellant, which stated that her signatures on the sale deed had
been taken forcibly. PART C Before the Sub-Registrar, the appellant had filed an objection when the
sale deed was presented for registration. The appellant, in the course of her objections before the

16

Veena Singh(Dead) Through Lr vs The District Registrar/ Additional ... on 10 May, 2022

Sub-Registrar specifically adverted to following grievances, namely that: (i) the second respondent
had furnished false and misleading information to her; (ii) the market value of the land
admeasuring 1839.48 square metres was not less than Rs 7 crores and the sale consideration of Rs
1.6 crore was meagre; (iii) the time stipulated in the sale deed had expired; (iv) the signatures of the
appellant had been obtained on an incomplete sale deed; (v) the signatures of the appellant were
taken without furnishing to her a chance to read or peruse the papers, and when she was
surrounded by five persons; (vi) the land area having been manipulated under the sale deed, her
residential house would also been taken away by fraud; (vii) the boundaries mentioned in the sale
deed were incorrect and did not clearly reflect the land which was agreed to be sold; (viii) the sale
deed was incomplete and all the co- sharers had never entered into any partition; (ix) the sale deed
would attract a capital gains tax which would be in excess of the sale consideration; and (x) an active
forgery had been committed by the second respondent. 32 As is evident from the objections filed
before the Sub-Registrar by the appellant, it is clear that she did not deny having signed the sale
deed. The essence of her grievance was that her signatures were taken forcibly; the sale deed did not
reflect the intent of the parties in terms of the area which was intended to be sold; the sale
consideration was undervalued; the consequence of the sale deed was that even the residential
house of the appellant would be sold, contrary to her PART C understanding; and the sale deed had
been procured by fraud. The order of the Sub-Registrar makes it abundantly clear that the appellant
was not ready to register the sale deed, which was claimed to have been executed in a fraudulent
manner and whose execution was thus being denied. Registration was, therefore, refused by the
Sub-Registrar in terms of Section 35(3)(a) of the Registration Act. 33 If a person by whom the
document is purported to be executed denies its execution and registration is refused on those
grounds, an appeal against the order of the Sub-Registrar denying execution would not be
maintainable under Section 72 of the Registration Act. Section 72 clearly stipulates that an appeal
will lie against an order of Sub-Registrar refusing to admit a document to registration ―except where
the refusal is made on the ground of denial of execution(cid:129).

34 In the present case, the Sub-Registrar having specifically denied registration in terms of Section
35(3)(a), the order was not amenable to an appeal under Section

72. However, the Registrar, in the course of entertaining the appeal, instead took recourse to the
powers entrusted under Section 73. As noted earlier in this judgment, Section 73 empowers the
Registrar where the Sub-Registrar has refused to register a document on denial of its execution by a
person purporting to have executed it. Subsequently, the Registrar appears to have followed the
procedure which is emphasized in Section 74. Section 74 provides for a procedure where the
Registrar has a two-fold function of determining: firstly, whether the document has been executed;
and secondly, whether the requirements of the law for the time being in force have been complied
with by the applicant or the person presenting PART C document for registration, so as to entitle
them to have the document registered. Upon such an enquiry under Section 74, Section 75 enables
the Registrar to order the document to be registered if it is found that: (i) the document has been
executed; and (ii) the requirements of the law have been complied with. Section 75(4) also allows
the Registrar to summon and enforce the attendance of witnesses to properly conduct the enquiry
under Section 74.

17

Veena Singh(Dead) Through Lr vs The District Registrar/ Additional ... on 10 May, 2022

35 Undoubtedly, the power of the Registrar while dealing with an application under Section 73 are
wider that the powers which are entrusted to the Sub-Registrar under Section 35. Under Section
35(1)(a), the registering officer shall register the document if all the persons executing the document
appear in person before the officer and admit the execution of the document. Section 35(2)
empowers the registering officer to examine anyone present in the office, for the purpose of
satisfying himself that the persons appearing before him are the persons they represent themselves
to be. In contrast to sub-Section (1) of Section 35, sub-Section (3) stipulates that once execution is
denied by the person who purports to have executed the document, the registering officer shall
refuse to register it. On the other hand, under Sections 73 and 74, the Registrar is entrusted with the
duty to enquire whether the document has been executed and whether all the requirements of the
law for the time being have been complied with. For the purposes of this enquiry, Section 75(4)
provides the Registrar with the power to summon and enforce the attendance of witnesses. Thus,
while the Sub-Registrar under Section 35(3)(a) has to mandatorily refuse registration when the
execution of a document is denied by the PART C person purported to have executed the document,
the Registrar is entrusted with the power to conduct an enquiry on an application under Section 73
by following the procedure under Section 74.

36 In the present case, the appeal before the Registrar was not maintainable under Section 72.
Indeed, the appellant, in response to the memo of appeal filed by the second respondent, specifically
pleaded in her objections that ―hearing the appeal under Section 72 of the Indian Registration Act
or to deliver any judgement will be against law(cid:129). At the same time, however, the appellant also
pleaded that she ―had full right for argument under Section 75(4) of the Indian Registration Act and
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 from the witnesses and the appellant(cid:129). The Registrar is
empowered to summon witnesses under Section 75(4) for the purpose of an enquiry under Sections
73 and 74. It thus emerges that the parties proceeded on the basis that the proceedings would be
decided on the basis of an enquiry under Section 73, and the enquiry was conducted with reference
to the provisions of Section 74. The appellant herself understood this to be the position in her
objections filed to the appeal filed by the second respondent, since she invoked her rights under
Section 75(4), which applies to enquiry proceedings under Section 74. The appeal against the
Sub-Registrar‘s order was not maintainable under Section 72. The remedy of the second respondent,
where the Sub-Registrar refused registration on the ground that the appellant denied execution of
the document, was under

Section 73. The Registrar conducted an enquiry under the provisions of sections 73
and 74. Both parties participated in the enquiry.

PART C

37 Mulla’s commentary on The Registration Act analyses a situation where an application under
Section 73 is wrongly labelled as an appeal under Section 72, in the following extract14:

―If a refusal is made on the ground of denial of execution, appeal would not lie under
s 72 of the Act. When the refusal is denied on the execution, remedy is to file an
application under s 73 of the Act. The mere fact that an application is wrongly headed

18

Veena Singh(Dead) Through Lr vs The District Registrar/ Additional ... on 10 May, 2022

as an appeal and an erroneous section of the statute is mentioned therein is
immaterial, if in fact and in law it is an application under s 73 of the Registration
Act.(cid:129) Similarly, in S P Sen Gupta’s commentary on the Registration Act, it is stated15:

―4. Proceeding erroneously described as "appeal" or vice versa.-A proceeding under
sec. 72 is an appeal whereas a proceeding under sec. 73 is not an appeal; it is merely
an application before the Registrar in order to establish the applicants right to have
the document registered. It is not always easy for the aggrieved party or even by the
Registrar to decide which of the two sections – sec. 72 or sec. 73, would apply on a
given facts circumstances. Law is meant for doing justice. As such the substance of
the proceeding, and not its form, before the Registrar should be taken into account.
As such it would not be fatal if an appeal under sec. 72 is filed as an application under
sec. 73 and vice versa.(cid:129)

38 Thus, it is clear that the mis-labelling of an application under Section 73 as an appeal under
Section 72 would by itself not vitiate the proceedings before the Registrar. This becomes especially
true when proceedings before the Registrar, in substance, were proceedings under Section 73 itself
and both the parties acknowledged them to be so, explicitly or by their conduct. This is clearly what
has Justice K Kannan, Mulla’s The Registration Act (LexisNexis, 2012) pg 416 ("Mulla(cid:136)s The
Registration Act(cid:129)) S P Sen Gupta, Commentaries on the Registration Act, 1908 (Kamal Law House,
2017) pgs 617-618 (―S P Sen Gupta Commentary(cid:129)) PART C happened in the present case as well, as
is evident from the appellant‘s reference to Section 75(4) and her participation in the enquiry
proceedings before the District Registrar. Therefore, we hold that the second respondent‘s
mis-labelling of their application as an appeal under Section 72 will not vitiate the proceedings
which led to the District Registrar‘s order dated 31 March 2012. Hence, for the purpose of these
proceedings, we will now proceed to analyse as to whether the District Registrar validly passed the
order directing the registration of the sale deed.

C.3     Meaning of “execution”

39      Section 35(1)(a) of the Registration Act uses the expression ―admit the

execution of the document(cid:129), while Section 35(3)(a) uses the expression ―denies its execution(cid:129).
Similarly, Section 72(1) has adopted the expression ―denial of execution(cid:129), while Section 73(1) uses
the expression ―denies its execution(cid:129). However, the word ―execution(cid:129) itself is not defined by the
Registration Act. Before us, two possible interpretations have been urged by the parties:

(i) First, that ―execution(cid:129) is tantamount to ―signing(cid:129) a document. Hence, once a
person admits to their signature on a document, they admit to having executed it;
and

(ii) Second, that ―execution(cid:129) cannot be equated with merely signing a document.

19

Veena Singh(Dead) Through Lr vs The District Registrar/ Additional ... on 10 May, 2022

Hence, even if a person‘s signature on the document admitted, they can still PART C deny its
execution if they did not agree to or understand the contents of the document while signing it.

We must now decide which of these two interpretations should be adopted by this Court.

40 The first interpretation of ―execution(cid:129) is supported by the definition provided in the Stamp Act
189916. Section 2(12) defines ―executed(cid:129) and ―execution(cid:129) in the following terms:

―(12) Executed and execution.—―Executed(cid:129) and ―execution(cid:129), used with reference to
instruments, mean ―signed(cid:129) and ―signature(cid:129) and includes attribution of electronic
record within the meaning of Section 11 of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21
of 2000);(cid:129) However, since the Registration Act has been enacted for a purpose
different from the Stamp Act, the definition under Stamp Act is not conclusive.

41 Black’s Law Dictionary defines the expression ―execute(cid:129) and ―executed(cid:129) thus17:

―execute, vb. (14c) 1. To perform or complete (a contract or duty) <once the contract
was fully executed, the parties owed no further contractual duties to each other>…3.
To make (a legal document) valid by signing; to bring (a legal document) into its
final, legally enforceable form <each party executed the contract without a signature
witness>… executed, adj. (16c) 1. (Of a document) that has been signed <an executed
will>… ―[T]he term 'executed' is a slippery word. Its use is to be ―Stamp Act(cid:129) Bryan
A Garner, Black’s Law Dictionary (Thomson Reuters, 2009) pgs 649-650 PART C
avoided except when accompanied by explanation...A contract is frequently said to be
executed when the document has been signed, or has been signed, sealed, and
delivered.

Further, by executed contract is frequently meant one that has been fully performed by both
parties." William R. Anson, Principles of the Law of Contract 26 n.* (Arthur l. Corbin ed., 3d Am. ed.
1919).(cid:129) The expression ―execute(cid:129) has been further defined in Words and Phrases in the following
terms18:

―To complete as a legal instrument; to perform what is required to give validity to.(cid:129)
The definitions in both these dictionaries seem to once again suggest that the signing
of a document can be equivalent to its execution. However, these definitions are by
no means definitive and cannot be taken out of context, since they also do seem to
suggest that executing an agreement is making it fully valid and legally enforceable.

42 Mulla(cid:136)s The Registration Act (supra) notes the following in relation to the meaning of
―execution(cid:129)19:

―Admission of Execution …It is submitted that the mere proof or admission that a
person's signature appears on a document cannot by itself amount to execution of the
document...Where a person had signed a document after being aware of the nature of

20

Veena Singh(Dead) Through Lr vs The District Registrar/ Additional ... on 10 May, 2022

the document, he has executed the document, and, it is submitted, the Registrar
cannot go into the question whether the document has been obtained by coercion;
but Words and Phrases (Permanent Edition) (Thomson Reuters, 2020) Supra at note
15, pgs 254-256 PART C when a signature has been obtained by false representations
and the ostensible executant did not sign with the intention of being bound by the
terms of the document, such a person cannot be said to have executed the
document.(cid:129) (emphasis supplied) Similarly, S P Sen Gupta Commentary (supra) sets
out the following position20:

―A document is liable to be set aside or declared inoperative by a civil court when it
was not voluntarily executed. But that is an altogether different consideration nor
coming within the jurisdiction of Registering Officer. The correct legal position seems
to be that though the Registering Officer cannot take any decision as to the legality
and validity of an instrument which has been presented for registration, there cannot
be any admission of execution when the plea taken by the executant before the
Registering Officer, if found true, would invalidate the deed. An execution does not
mean merely signing but signing by way of assent to the terms embodied in the
document. When the executant admits his signature on the document but takes a
further plea that his signature was taken by force after detaining him in a room or
fraud was practised upon him in obtaining his signatures on the deed or he was
duped to sign on blank papers etc, and there is no material before the Registering
Officer to rebut the plea of the executant, then there cannot be any "admission”
within the meaning of sec. 35(1)(a) of the Act because the mind of the signer did not
accompany the signature…(cid:129) (emphasis supplied) While the above extract deals with
the power of the registering officer under Section 35(1)(a), it does suggest that
―execution(cid:129) happens when a person‘s signature on the Supra at note 16, pgs
389-390, 390, 617-618 PART C document is accompanied by their full consent to the
contents of the document, which they have understood before signing it.

43 This understanding of the phrase ―execution(cid:129) is also adopted by textbooks in relation to the law
of evidence. Section 6821 of the Indian Evidence Act 187222 prescribes the requirement for proving
that a document has been executed. The proviso to Section 68 stipulates that it shall not be
necessary to call an attesting witness to prove the execution of a document if it has been registered
under the Registration Act, provided that its execution is not specifically denied by the person who
is purported to have executed it. In relation to this provision, Sarkar’s Law of Evidence notes23:

―The term ―execution(cid:129) is not defined in any statute. It means completion, i.e., the
last act or acts which complete a document and in English law this is known as
―signing, sealing and delivering.(cid:129) The ordinary meaning of executing a document is
signing it as a consenting party thereto.

[...] [s 67.4] Meaning and Proof of ―Execution(cid:129) [...] Execution consists in signing a
document written out and read over and understood and does not consist of merely
signing a name upon a blank sheet of paper...(cid:129) ―68. Proof of execution of document

21

Veena Singh(Dead) Through Lr vs The District Registrar/ Additional ... on 10 May, 2022

required by law to be attested.—If a document is required by law to be attested, it
shall not be used as evidence until one attesting witness at least has been called for
the purpose of proving its execution, if there be an attesting witness alive, and subject
to the process of the Court and capable of giving evidence:

Provided that it shall not be necessary to call an attesting witness in proof of the
execution of any document, not being a will, which has been registered in accordance
with the provisions of the Indian Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908), unless its
execution by the person by whom it purports to have been executed is specifically
denied.(cid:129) ―Evidence Act(cid:129) Sudipto Sarkar and Dr. H R Jhingta, Sarkar: Law of
Evidence–In India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Burma, Ceylon, Malaysia & Singapore:
Volume 1 (LexisNexis, 2016) PART C Similarly, Ratanlal and Dhirajlal‘s treatise on
the law of evidence states as follows 24:

――[s 67.3] Execution of Document — Meaning [...] Execution of a document is
something different from mere signing of the document. The term execution is not
defined...The ordinary meaning of executing a document is signing it as a consenting
party thereto...Execution of the document means that the executant must have signed
or put his thumb mark/impression, only after the contents of the document have
been fully stated and read by the executant before he put his signature thereon. Mere
admission of the initial by the executant would not be tantamount to an admission of
execution of the document.(cid:129)

44 If we are to now look at the relevant precedent on the subject, in Rajendra Pratap Singh v.
Rameshwar Prasad25, the validity of a decree of the eviction under the Bihar Buildings (Lease, Rent
and Eviction) Control Act 1982 was in question before a two-judge Bench of this Court. This Court,
while considering the provisions of the third paragraph to Section 107 of the Transfer of Property
Act 1882, noted that it required that a registered instrument for the lease of an immovable property
had to be executed both by the lessor and lessee. While elaborating on the meaning of ―executing(cid:129),
this Court held:

―11…An instrument is usually executed through multifarious steps of different
sequences. At the first instance, the parties might deliberate upon the terms and
reach an agreement. Next, the terms so agreed upon would be reduced to writing.
Sometimes one party alone would affix the signature on it and deliver it to the other
party. Sometimes both parties would N Vijayraghavan and Sharath Chandran,
Ratanlal & Dhirajlal: The Law of Evidence (LexisNexis, 2021) (1998) 7 SCC 602
PART C affix their signature on the instrument. If the document is required by law to
be registered, both parties can be involved in the process without perhaps obtaining
the signatures of one of them. In all such instances, the instrument can be said to
have been executed by both parties thereto. If the instrument is signed by both
parties, it is presumptive of the fact that both of them have executed it, of course it is
only rebuttable presumption. Similarly, if an instrument is signed by only one party,
it does not mean that both parties have not executed it together. Whether both

22

Veena Singh(Dead) Through Lr vs The District Registrar/ Additional ... on 10 May, 2022

parties have executed the instrument will be a question of fact to be determined on
evidence if such a determination is warranted from the pleadings of the particular
suit. Merely because the document shows only the signature of one of the parties, it is
not enough to conclude that the non-signing party has not joined in the execution of
the instrument. (cid:129) (emphasis supplied) In view of the above enunciation, the Court
held when the defendant in that case had not disputed in his written statement that
the lease had been validly made, it was not be open to him to raise a contention
subsequently that the instrument was void since it had not been executed both by the
lessor and the lessee. The decree for eviction was thus upheld. However, as a general
principle, the above extract from the decision of this Court, though in a different
statutory context, emphasises that while the signing of an instrument by both the
parties is presumptive of the fact that both of them have executed it, yet this is
rebuttable presumption.

45 In N.M. Ramachandraiah v. State of Karnataka26, a Single Judge of the Karnataka High Court,
while construing power of the Registrar under Section 74 of the Registration Act, observed:

2007 SCC OnLine Kar 192 (―N.M. Ramachandraiah(cid:129)) PART C ―8. The answer to
these questions revolve round the scope of enquiry as contemplated u/s. 74 of the
Act. In an enquiry u/s. 74 of the Act, the Registrar should enquire whether the
document had been executed, and whether the requirements of the law has been
complied with, so as to entitle the document to registration. The Registrar should not
only be satisfied that the party in question has signed the document, but he should
also come to the conclusion that the signature has been affixed by the party after
understanding the contents and the terms of the document. The Registrar should
summon witnesses required by the petitioner to prove execution. The enquiry under
the section should be made by the Registrar himself and once after such enquiry, he
is satisfied that the document not only bears the signatures of the executant, but it is
also duly executed by the executant, after understanding the contents and terms of
the document, he may order the document to be registered. In the said enquiry he
has no power to enter into probabilities and surrounding circumstances. He is merely
to find out whether the document tendered actually is in the state in which it was
executed by the parties to it. The scope of enquiry contemplated under Section 74
have been explained in various judgments, in particular, the meaning of the word
―executed(cid:129).(cid:129) (emphasis supplied) In adopting this view, the Single Judge adverted to
various judgments of the Karnataka High Court, as well as other High Courts, which
we shall now note.

46 A Division Bench of the Madras High Court in Banasettappa Laljichikkanna v. District
Registrar27 held:

―5…Section 74 enjoins upon the District Registrar to hold an enquiry and come to the
conclusion as to ‗whether a document has been executed.‘ In the present case all that
the District Registrar has stated is that he was satisfied that the petitioner had signed

23

Veena Singh(Dead) Through Lr vs The District Registrar/ Additional ... on 10 May, 2022

the sale deed. He should have come to the conclusion that the signature had been
affixed by 1965 SCC OnLine Kar 132 PART C the petitioner after understanding the
contents and the tenor of the document. Execution does not mean merely signing,
but signing by way of assent to the terms of the contract of alienation embodied in the
document.(cid:129) (emphasis supplied)

47 In Sayyapparaju Surayya v. Ramchandar Prasad Singh and others28, a Division Bench of the
Madras High Court, while construing the provisions of Section 35(1)(a) and (b) of the Registration
Act, observed:

―The admission required therefore is admission of the execution of the document…It
is not enough for the person, who is the ostensible executant, to admit his signature
on a paper on which, it may be, the document is ultimately engrossed. The identity of
the papers on which the signature occurs is not sufficient. If a man says that he
signed a blank paper on the representation that it was required for presenting a
petition, as in the present case or if a man signs a completed document on the
representation that his signature or thumb impression is required as an attesting
witness, that admission of the signature or thumb impression in those circumstances
cannot be construed to be an admission of the execution of the document. Far from
its being an admission, it is a clear and unambiguous denial of the execution of the
document. He must admit, in order to attract the provisions of S. 35(1) that he signed
the document…The admission of execution therefore must amount to an admission
that the person admitting entered into an obligation under the instrument; in other
words, that he had executed the document, signed it as a sale deed, mortgage deed, or
a lease deed, as the case may be.(cid:129)

48 In Jogesh Prasad Singh & others v. Ramchandar Prasad Singh and others29, a Division Bench of
the Patna High Court noted that the meaning of the phrase ―execution(cid:129) of a document had been
well settled by another Division Bench 1949 SCC OnLine Mad 227 1950 SCC OnLine Pat 31 (―Jogesh
Prasad Singh(cid:129)) PART C of the High Court in Ebadut Ali v. Muhammad Fareed30. The decision of
the Division Bench in Ebadut Ali (supra), which was cited with approval in Jogesh Prasad Singh
(supra), held:

―In our view, execution consists in signing a document written out and read over and
understood, and does not consist of merely signing a name upon a blank sheet of
paper. To be executed a document must be in existence; where there is no document
in existence, there cannot be execution…Where an executant clearly says that he
signed on blank paper and that the document which he had authorised is not the
document which he contemplated, the statement is a denial not an admission, of
execution.(cid:129)

49 Adverting to the above decisions and to the views of the Calcutta31, Orissa32 and Assam High
Court33, the Single Judge of the Karnataka High Court in N.M. Ramachandraiah (supra)
emphasized that the execution of the document does not mean merely signing it, but signing it after

24

Veena Singh(Dead) Through Lr vs The District Registrar/ Additional ... on 10 May, 2022

having understood its contents in their entirety:

―15. Therefore, the law is well settled. Execution of a document does not mean merely
signing, but signing by way of assent to the terms of the contract embodied in the
document. Execution consists in signing a document written out and read over and
understood, and does not consist of merely signing a name upon a blank sheet of
paper. It is a solemn act of the executant who must own up the recitals in the
instrument and there must be clear evidence that he put the signature after knowing
the contents of document fully. To be executed, a document must be in existence;
where there is no document in existence there cannot be execution. Mere proof or
admission that a person's signature appears on a document cannot by AIR (3) 1916
Pat 206 : 35 Ind. Cas. 56 (―Ebadut Ali(cid:129)) Mohima Chunder Dhur v. Jugul Kishore
Bhutta Charji, ILR Volume VII Calcutta Smt. Uma Devi v. Narayan Nayak, 1984 SCC
OnLine Ori 94 Bhutkani Nath v. Smt. Kamaleswari Nath, AIR 1972 Assam and
Nagaland 15 PART C itself amount to execution of a document. Registration does not
dispense with the necessity of proof of execution when the same is denied. Thus,
execution of document is not mere signing of it.(cid:129) (emphasis supplied)

50 The understanding of the Karnataka High Court in N.M. Ramachandraiah (supra) is consistent
with precedents emanating from the Privy Council and various High Courts in India. In Privy
Council‘s decision in Puran Chand Nahatta v. Monmotho Nath Mukherji and Others34, Viscount
Sumner, while construing the provisions of Section 35 of the Registration Act, observed:

―By section 35 of the Registration Act registration is directed when certain persons
have appeared, have been duly identified, and have admitted the execution of the
document propounded, and the necessary persons are ―the persons executing the
document(cid:129). The appellant contends that in these words executing means and means
only “actually signing”. Their Lordships cannot accept this. A document is executed,
when those who take benefits and obligations under it have put or have caused to be
put their names to it. Personal signature is not required, and another person, duly
authorized, may, by writing the name of the party executing, bring about his valid
execution, and put him under the obligations involved. Hence ‗the words person
executing(cid:129) in the Act cannot be read merely as ―person signing(cid:129). They mean
something more, namely, the person, who by a valid execution enters into obligation
under the instrument. When the appearance referred to is for the purpose of
admitting the execution already accomplished, there is nothing to prevent the
executing person appearing either in person or by any authorized and competent
attorney in order to make a valid admission. Their Lordships have failed to find in the
scheme of the Act anything repugnant to this construction. Any other would involve
risk of confusion and might even defeat the statutory procedure by multiplying the
persons, who have to be traced and induced to attend, either by themselves or by
1927 SCC OnLine PC 100 PART C some representative.(cid:129) (emphasis supplied)

25

Veena Singh(Dead) Through Lr vs The District Registrar/ Additional ... on 10 May, 2022

51 In Ghasita Ram Bajaj v. Raj Kamal Radio Electronic35, a Single Judge of the Delhi High Court,
while differentiating between signatures on ordinary documents and documents stamped in
accordance with the law relating to negotiation of instruments, observed that in the case of ordinary
documents:

―8…The meaning of execution of a document ordinarily implies that a person making
his signature by way of execution knew or should have known the nature of the
document which he was signing…(cid:129)

52 In Kamlabai v. Shantirai36, a Division Bench of the Bombay High Court, in the context of Section
68 of the Evidence Act, held:

―30…In Sarkar's Evidence Act, page 639, the meaning and the proof of the word
―execution(cid:129) has been set out. It says “Executed” means completed. „Execution(cid:136) is
the last act or series of acts which completes it. Execution consists in signing a
document written out and read over and understood and does not consist of merely
signing a name upon a blank sheet of paper. To be executed, a document must be in
existence; where there is no document in existence, there can be no execution”.

31. It seems to us plain that a person cannot be said to execute a document where he
does not do so with the intention of making it. This may appear to be simple, but it is
clearly, in our opinion, full of meaning and import. The word “execution” in a sense
means the making of a document, and a person can be said to have made or
authorised a document where with the intention and knowledge of bringing into
existence a particular kind of document he prepares or gets prepared, such a
document and signs it 1973 SCC OnLine Del 109 1980 SCC OnLine Bom 152 PART C
in token of his having accepted that document, with a desire to bring it into existence.
Mere signing of a document without the intention of bringing that document into
existence, meaning thereby giving effect to it would not properly speaking attract the
expression “execution”…(cid:129) (emphasis supplied)

53 In S. Ramamurthy v. Jayalakshmi Ammal37, a Single Judge of the Madras High Court, while
interpreting Section 35 of the Registration Act, observed:

―11. Let us first examine the meaning of ―admission of the execution of a document
for the purpose of section 35 of the Registration Act,(cid:129) The execution of a document is
not mere signing of it. It is a solemn act of the executant who must own up the
recitals in the instrument and there must be clear evidence that he put his signature
in a document after knowing fully its contents. The executant of a document must,
after fully understanding the contents and the tenor of the document, put his
signature or affix his thumb-impression. In other words, the execution of a document
does not mean merely signing but signing by way of assent to the terms of the
contract of alienation embodied in the document.(cid:129)

26

Veena Singh(Dead) Through Lr vs The District Registrar/ Additional ... on 10 May, 2022

54 In Union Bank of India v. Dhian Pati38, a Single Judge of the Himachal Pradesh High Court had
to determine whether a deed of mortgage had been validly executed. Since the Indian Contract Act
1872 and the Registration Act did not define ―execution(cid:129), the Single Judge deduced the meaning of
the phrase in dictionaries, legal lexicons and precedent. Thereafter, the Single Judge concluded:

―21. Thus, on the basis of the aforesaid meaning of the words ―execution of
document(cid:129) it only signifies that the person executing such a document should sign
such a document 1990 SCC OnLine Mad 501 1996 SCC OnLine HP 90 PART C with
free consent. The execution of a document would be complete in case the executant
had signed the document voluntarily, without any duress, knowing the contents of
the document.(cid:129)

55 While interpreting the provisions of the Evidence Act, In Re Kuttadan Velayudhan39, a Division
Bench of the Kerala High Court determined whether the admission of signature on a document was
tantamount to admission of its execution. After perusing the decisions of the Kerala High Court and
other High Court across India, the Division Bench held:

―9. To sign means to affix the signature. But when it comes to the signing of a written
instrument, it implies more than the act of affixing a signature. It implies more than
the clerical act of writing the name. The intention of the person signing is important.
The person should have affixed the signature to the instrument in token of an
intention to be bound by its conditions. It has been said that for a signing consists of
both the act of writing a person's name and the intention in doing this to execute,
authenticate or to sign as a witness. The execution of a deed or other instrument
includes the performance of all acts which may be necessary to render it complete as
a deed or an instrument importing the intended obligation of every act required to
give the instrument validity, or to carry it into effect or to give it the forms required to
render it valid. Thus, the signature is an acknowledgment that the person signing has
agreed to the terms of the document. This can be achieved only if a person signs after
the documents is prepared and the terms are known to the person signing. In that
view of the matter, mere putting of signature cannot be said to be execution of the
document.(cid:129) (emphasis supplied) 2001 SCC OnLine Ker 14 PART C

56 In Bank of Baroda v. Shree Moti Industries40, a Single Judge of the Bombay High Court, in the
context of proving a document under the Evidence Act, noted:

―21…The term ―execution(cid:129) is not defined in any statute. It means completion, i.e. the
last act or acts which complete a document and in English Law this is known as
―signing, sealing and delivering(cid:129). The ordinary meaning of executing a document is
signing it as a consenting party thereto.(cid:129)

57 The ―execution(cid:129) of a document does not stand admitted merely because a person admits to
having signed the document. Such an interpretation accounts for circumstances where an individual
signs a blank paper and it is later converted into a different document, or when an individual is

27

Veena Singh(Dead) Through Lr vs The District Registrar/ Additional ... on 10 May, 2022

made to sign a document without fully understanding its contents. Adopting a contrary
interpretation would unfairly put the burden upon the person denying execution to challenge the
registration before a civil court or a writ court, since registration will have to be allowed once the
signature has been admitted.

58 In giving meaning to the expression ―execute(cid:129) in the provisions of the Registration Act, it is
necessary to adopt a purposive construction to protect, facilitate and achieve the object of
registration. In Suraj Lamps and Industries Private Limited v. State of Haryana & Another41,
Justice R V Raveendran, speaking for a two-judge Bench of this Court, highlighted the purpose of
registration:

―18. Registration provides safety and security to transactions 2008 SCC OnLine Bom
486 (2009) 7 SCC 363 PART C relating to immovable property, even if the document
is lost or destroyed. It gives publicity and public exposure to documents thereby
preventing forgeries and frauds in regard to transactions and execution of
documents. Registration provides information to people who may deal with a
property, as to the nature and extent of the rights which persons may have, affecting
that property. In other words, it enables people to find out whether any particular
property with which they are concerned, has been subjected to any legal obligation or
liability and who is or are the person(s) presently having right, title, and interest in
the property. It gives solemnity of form and perpetuate documents which are of legal
importance or relevance by recording them, where people may see the record and
enquire and ascertain what the particulars are and as far as land is concerned what
obligations exist with regard to them. It ensures that every person dealing with
immovable property can rely with confidence upon the statements contained in the
registers (maintained under the said Act) as a full and complete account of all
transactions by which the title to the property may be affected and secure
extracts/copies duly certified.(cid:129)

59 In Bharat Indu and ors v. Hakim Mohammad Hamid Ali Khan42, Lord Philimore, speaking for
the Privy Council, emphasized the purpose of the provisions of the Registration Act in the following
terms:

―The provisions of the Registration Act are very carefully designed to prevent
forgeries and the procurement of conveyances or mortgages by fraud or undue
influence, and though it may seem somewhat technical to insist upon exact
compliance with the provisions of the Act, it is necessary so to do. Their Lordships
have already given their sanction to the necessity of strict compliance with these
forms in the case which was referred to at the Bar, Jambu Parshad v. Muhammad
Aftab Ali Khan [L.R. 42 I.A. 22 : s.c. I.L.R. 37 All. 49; 19 C.W.N. 282 (1914).].(cid:129) 1920
SCC OnLine PC 37 PART C

60 The Registration Act exists so that information about documents can be put into the public
domain, where it can be accessed by anyone in order to prevent forgeries and fraud, and so that

28

Veena Singh(Dead) Through Lr vs The District Registrar/ Additional ... on 10 May, 2022

individuals can be aware of the status of properties. If the interpretation conflating signing with
execution is adopted, it would ensure that the Sub-Registrars/Registrars will continuously end up
registering documents whose validity will inevitably be then disputed in a civil suit or a writ petition.
While the suit or writ proceedings continue, the document would remain on the public records as a
registered instrument, which has the potential to cause more disruption. Hence, such an
interpretation should not be adopted by this Court. 61 However, while adopting the current
interpretation – that the admission of one‘s signature on a document is not equivalent to admission
of its execution – it is important to consider the power of the Sub-Registrar/Registrar and their
procedures under the Registration Act.

62 In Smt. Raisa Begam v. District Registrar, Saharanpur and Anr.43, a Single Judge of the
Allahabad High Court observed:

―33. Section 35 requires for satisfaction of the Registrar about execution of the
document. If a document is properly presented and its execution is admitted by the
competent person, as prescribed in statute, the Registrar has no option but to register
the document. The purpose of Registration Act was to mitigate litigation in regard to
property which in the absence of any documentary evidence was creating lot of
administrative and otherwise problem to the then Government. It neither confers
title upon the concerned person nor validates it but only recognizes execution of
document relating to a transaction pertaining to property of 2011 SCC OnLine All
2335 PART C the person concerned and acts like evidence to prove such transaction
in the manner it is written in the document and registered with the Registrar.(cid:129) The
Single Judge then adverted to the UP Registration Manual, more particularly
paragraphs 285, 304, 305, 306 and 307. Paragraphs 285 and 304, which are
extracted in the judgment of the Single Judge, are reproduced below:

―285. When a document is presented for registration the points requiring the
attention of the registering officer may be summarized as follows:

(1) Whether he has jurisdiction to register the document?

(2) Whether the document is time-barred?

(3) Whether the document is free from the objections in sections 19, 20 and 21?

(4) Whether the document is properly stamped?

(5) Whether the document is presented by a proper person?

(6) Whether the document was executed by the persons by whom it purports to have
been executed? (cid:129) [...]

29

Veena Singh(Dead) Through Lr vs The District Registrar/ Additional ... on 10 May, 2022

304. When a document is accepted for registration the prescribed fees should be
levied and the necessary entries made in the fees book. The counterfoil receipt should
then be prepared and the receipts for the document and the fees delivered to the
presenter. The registering officers should then, with as little delay as possible,
enquire whether the document was executed by the alleged executant, and satisfy
himself as to the identity of the person appearing before him to admit execution. He
should also satisfy himself that the person admitting execution has read and
understood the contents of the document and should if the person is illiterate or
cannot read and understand the document will explain the nature and contents to
him. If the presenter be the executant, or his representative, assign or agent, and if
such executant, representative, assign or agent be present, the registering officer shall
make the necessary enquiry at once. When the registering officer is not personally
acquainted with PART C executants, he shall require them to produce persons to
testify to their identity. Such persons shall, if possible, be persons known to the
registering officer personally, or failing these, persons of apparent respectability.
Witnesses who are unknown to the registering officer shall have their thumb
impressions recorded as in the case of executants (vide Rule 308, so far as it is
applicable). Any distinctive physical peculiarity or marked deformity in a party or
witness should be noted in the endorsement. But a descriptive roll need not be
recorded except in suspicious cases. This procedure must be in addition to, and not
take the place of, the procedure required by section 34, that the registering officer
shall satisfy himself of their identity. Such descriptive rolls afford in themselves no
proof identity.(cid:129) The Single Judge held that where a serious question of fraud and
manipulation was raised in a summary proceeding, such as the proceeding before the
District Registrar, it would not have been a substitute to decide a serious civil dispute
which has the effect of transferring an immoveable property from its owners to
others.

Hence, when the document was not presented by the proper person before the Sub- Registrar and
the executant denied its execution, it was held that the remedy lay in filing a civil suit for declaration
and specific performance, and not in the summary proceedings under Sections 72 and 73 of the
Registration Act. 63 Section 73 of the Registration Act envisages that an application may be
submitted to the Registrar by a person in order to establish their rights to have a document
registered, in a situation where the Sub-Registrar has refused to register the document on the
ground that the person by whom it purports to have been executed has denied its execution. Section
74 then lays down the procedure which is to be followed by the Registrar, which contemplates an
enquiry by the Registrar PART C into whether the document has been executed and whether
requirements of law for the time being in force have been complied with on the part of the applicant
or the person presenting the document for registration. When the twin requirements of clauses (a)
and (b) of Section 74 are found by the Registrar to have been fulfilled, sub-Section (1) of Section 75
provides that the Registrar shall order the document be registered. Sub-Section (4) of Section 75
stipulates that for the purpose of the enquiry under Section 74, the Registrar may summon and
enforce the attendance of witnesses and compel them to give evidence as if he is a civil court. The
Registrar is also empowered to impose the obligation of paying the costs of the enquiry on a party,

30

Veena Singh(Dead) Through Lr vs The District Registrar/ Additional ... on 10 May, 2022

and such costs are to be recovered as if they have been charged in a suit under the CPC. Thus,
sub-Section (4) of Section 75 incorporates a deeming fiction from two perspectives – first, in
empowering the Registrar to summon and enforce the attendance of witnesses and for compelling
them to give evidence ―as if he were a civil court(cid:129); and second, in awarding costs which become
recoverable ―as if they have been awarded in a suit(cid:129) under the CPC. The process which is conducted
by the Registrar for the purpose of an enquiry under Section 74 cannot be equated to the powers of
the civil court, though certain powers which are entrusted to a civil court are vested with the
Registrar by the provisions of Section 75(4). A quasi- judicial function is entrusted to the Registrar
for the purpose of conducting an enquiry under Section 74. Where the Registrar refuses to register a
document under Sections 72 or 76, no appeal lies against such an order. Section 77, however,
provides that when the Registrar refuses to order the document to be registered, any person
claiming under such document or its representative, assign or agents may PART C institute a suit
before the civil court within the stipulated time for a decree directing that the document shall be
registered. It is thus clear that the Registrar, when he conducts an enquiry under Section 74, does
not stand constituted as a civil court. The enquiry before the Registrar is summary in nature. The
decision of the Registrar in ordering document to be registered, or for that matter in refusing to
register a document, is not conclusive and is amenable to judicial review. 64 Therefore, in a
situation where an individual admits their signature on a document but denies its execution, the
Sub-Registrar is bound to refuse registration in accordance with Sections 35(3)(a) of the
Registration Act. Subsequently, if an application if filed under Section 73, the Registrar is entrusted
with the power of conducting an enquiry of a quasi-judicial nature under Section 74. If the Registrar
passes an order refusing registration under Section 76, the party presenting the document for
registration has the remedy of filing a civil suit under Section 77 of the Registration Act, where a
competent civil court will be able to adjudicate upon the question of fact conclusively.

65 Finally, our attention has been drawn to Section 58(2) of the Registration Act, which stipulates as
follows:

―58. Particulars to be endorsed on documents admitted to registration.— […] (2) If
any person admitting the execution of a document refuses to endorse the same, the
registering officer shall nevertheless register if, but shall at the same time endorse a
note of such refusal.(cid:129) PART C It is submitted on behalf of the second respondent that
above provision must be read along with paragraph 241 of the UP Registration
Manual, which provides:

―241. Registering officers not concerned with validity of documents. Registering
officers should bear in mind that they are in no way concerned with the validity of
documents brought to them for registration, and that it would be wrong for them to
refuse to register on any such grounds as the following: (1) that the executants was
dealing with property not belonging to him; (2) that the instrument infringed the
rights of third persons not parties to the transaction; (3) that the transaction was
fraudulent or opposed to public policy; (4) that the executants had not agreed to
certain conditions of the document; (5) that the executants was not acquainted with
the conditions of the document; (6) that the executants declared that he had been

31

Veena Singh(Dead) Through Lr vs The District Registrar/ Additional ... on 10 May, 2022

deceived into executing; (7) that the executants is blind and cannot count. These and
such like are matters for decision, if necessary, by competent courts of law, and
registering officers, as such, have nothing to do with them. If the document be
presented in a proper manner, by a competent person, at the proper office, within the
time allowed by law, and if the registering officer be satisfied that the alleged
executants is the person the represents himself to be, and if such person admits
execution, the registering officer is bound to register the document without regard to
its possible effects. But the registering officer shall make a note of such objections of
the kinds mentioned in grounds (1) to (7) above, as may by brought to his notice in
the endorsement required by Section 58.(cid:129) Reliance has been placed on the above
provisions of the UP Registration Manual to highlight that an individual‘s refusal
predicated upon any of the above-mentioned seven grounds shall not impact its
―execution(cid:129) but shall only require an endorsement under Section 58(2). We are
inclined to disagree with this submission. For the reasons already mentioned in the
judgment, we are inclined to accept the interpretation of the term ―execution(cid:129) to
mean that a person has signed a document PART C after having fully understood it
and consented to its terms. Hence, since paragraph 241 and Section 58(2) only come
into the picture when execution is admitted, they are not relevant at the present
stage.

66 At this stage, it would be material to refer to a judgment of this Court in Satya Pal Anand (supra),
where the three-judge Bench was constituted following a difference of opinion between two Judges.
In that case, the mother of the appellant had been allotted a plot of land by a registered deed by a
cooperative society. After her death, the cooperative society executed a deed of extinguishment
unilaterally cancelling the allotment of the plot and executed a registered deed in favour of the fifth
respondent. The appellant objected to the transaction, following which a tripartite deed of
compromise was reached with the society and the fifth respondent. Notwithstanding this, the
appellant moved the Deputy Registrar of Cooperative Societies. During the pendency of the dispute,
the society permitted the transfer of the plot to the sixth and seventh respondents. The appellant
then moved an application before the Sub-Registrar for cancelling the registration of the deed of
extinguishment and the two subsequent deeds, but this application was rejected by the
Sub-Registrar, inter alia, on the ground that he had no jurisdiction to cancel the registration of a
registered document. The appellant then moved the Inspector General of Registration under Section
69 of the Registration Act, who rejected the application. The writ petition filed by the appellant
before the High Court under Article 226, seeking a declaration of the nullity of the deed of
extinguishment and the two subsequent deeds, was also dismissed by the High Court. In this
backdrop, PART C Justice A M Khanwilkar, speaking for the three-judge Bench, observed that the
appellant had entered into a deed of compromise and accepted valuable consideration, in spite of
which he had instituted a dispute under the Madhya Pradesh Cooperative Societies Act 1960.
Further, pending the dispute, an application was filed by the appellant before the Sub-Registrar
seeking the same relief of cancellation of the registration of the deed of extinguishment and the
subsequent deeds in favour of the third party. In view of these circumstances, this Court held that
the High Court was justified in declining to entertain a writ petition at the instance of the appellant:

32

Veena Singh(Dead) Through Lr vs The District Registrar/ Additional ... on 10 May, 2022

―25. It is a well-established position that the remedy of writ under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India is extraordinary and discretionary. In exercise of writ
jurisdiction, the High Court cannot be oblivious to the conduct of the party invoking
that remedy. The fact that the party may have several remedies for the same cause of
action, he must elect his remedy and cannot be permitted to indulge in multiplicity of
actions. The exercise of discretion to issue a writ is a matter of granting equitable
relief. It is a remedy in equity. In the present case, the High Court declined to
interfere at the instance of the appellant having noticed the above clinching facts. No
fault can be found with the approach of the High Court in refusing to exercise its writ
jurisdiction because of the conduct of the appellant in pursuing multiple proceedings
for the same relief and also because the appellant had an alternative and efficacious
statutory remedy to which he has already resorted to…(cid:129) Having held that the writ
petition before the High Court was not maintainable for the above reasons, this Court
also observed that the role of the Sub-Registrar stood discharged once the document
had been registered, since there is no express PART C provision in the Registration
Act which empowers him to recall the registration. This Court held:

―34. The role of the Sub-Registrar (Registration) stands discharged, once the
document is registered (see Raja Mohammad Amir Ahmad Khan [State of U.P. v.
Raja Mohammad Amir Ahmad Khan, AIR 1961 SC 787] )…There is no express
provision in the 1908 Act which empowers the Registrar to recall such registration.
The fact whether the document was properly presented for registration cannot be
reopened by the Registrar after its registration. The power to cancel the registration
is a substantive matter. In absence of any express provision in that behalf, it is not
open to assume that the Sub-Registrar (Registration) would be competent to cancel
the registration of the documents in question. Similarly, the power of the Inspector
General is limited to do superintendence of Registration Offices and make rules in
that behalf. Even the Inspector General has no power to cancel the registration of any
document which has already been registered.(cid:129) This Court observed that Section 35 of
the Registration Act does not confer a quasi-

judicial power on the registering officer, who is not expected to evaluate title or
irregularity in the document. As such, the validity of the registered deed of
extinguishment could be placed in issue only before a court of competent jurisdiction.
On the above facts, this Court upheld the dismissal of the writ petition by the High
Court, with an opportunity being granted to the appellant to pursue a remedy in
accordance with law. Therefore, the decision in Satya Pal Anand (supra) has held that
once a deed of extinguishment had been registered by the registering officer, the
registering officer had no power to recall it nor was it amenable to the supervisory
control of the Inspector General of Registration under Section 69 of the Registration
Act.

PART C

33

Veena Singh(Dead) Through Lr vs The District Registrar/ Additional ... on 10 May, 2022

67 The aforesaid decision does not deal with a situation such as the present case, where
Sub-Registrar had in the first instance declined to order the registration of the document and the
order of the Sub-Registrar was questioned in an appeal under Section 72 filed by the second
respondent. The Registrar, in the course of the appellate proceedings, purported to hold an enquiry
of the nature contemplated under Section 74 of the Registration Act and concluded that the
execution of the sale deed had been established and it was liable to be registered. The Registrar was
evidently seized of a case where the Sub-Registrar had declined to order registration on the ground
that the execution of the document was denied by the appellant under Section 35(3)(a). While
exercising the jurisdiction pursuant to the invocation of the remedy under Section 72, the Registrar
relied on the statements of the scribe of the sale deed and the attesting witnesses to the effect that
the sale deed had been signed by the appellant and that the appellant had also affixed her
fingerprints on it. However, as rightly pointed out by the appellant, the signing of the sale deed by
her and the affixation of her fingerprints is not in dispute. The real issue is whether there was due
execution of the sale deed by the appellant. The appellant in the course of her objections specifically
pleaded fraud, submitting that:

(i) The area which was reflected in the sale deed which was presented for registration
was at variance that what had actually been agreed between the parties;

(ii) The boundaries as reflected in the sale deed did not correspond with the land
agreed to be sold;

PART C

(iii) The sale consideration was seriously undervalued;

(iv) The purported sale deed was resulting not only in the transfer of excessive land but also the
residential house which was in occupation of the appellant after the death of her husband; and

(v) The full consideration payable under the terms of the transaction had not been received by the
appellant.

The plea of the appellant, that the purported sale deed though signed by her was procured by fraud
and undue influence, was a matter which raised a serious substantive dispute. In support of her
contentions, the appellant has also adduced before us the inspection report by the Sub-Registrar and
the Naib Tahsildar. However, we are inclined to hold that we cannot decide on the merits of the
dispute at this stage, since the Registrar clearly exceeded his jurisdiction by adjudicating on the
issue of fraud and undue influence.

68 The Registrar purported to exercise the powers conferred under Section 74 and arrived at a
finding that the sale deed had been duly signed by the appellant and was therefore liable to be
registered. However, the objections of the appellant raised serious issues of a triable nature which
could only have been addressed before and adjudicated upon by a court of competent civil
jurisdiction. As a matter of fact, during the course of the hearing, this Court has been apprised of the

34

Veena Singh(Dead) Through Lr vs The District Registrar/ Additional ... on 10 May, 2022

fact that in respect of the remaining area of 1000 square meters in the front portion of the land, a
suit for specific performance44 has been instituted by the second respondent, Original Suit No 568
of 2014 PART C resulting in a decree for specific performance dated 16 November 2018. As regards
the subject matter of the sale deed, the second respondent has instituted a suit for possession before
the Civil Judge, Senior Division Fast Track Court 45, where certain proceedings are pending. In this
view of the matter, we are clearly of the opinion that the Registrar in the present case acted contrary
to law by directing the sale deed to be registered.

69 In the impugned judgment, the Single Judge of the Allahabad High Court has observed that
registration does not depend upon the consent of the executant but on the Registrar‘s finding that
the executant had actually signed the document. The High Court held that having found in the
course of the enquiry that the sale deed was duly prepared by a scribe, that the attesting witness had
stated that the sale deed was signed by the appellant and she also placed her fingerprints in their
presence, it was open to the Registrar to direct registration in spite of a denial of its execution by the
appellant. In doing so, the Single Judge of the High Court has, with respect, conflated the mere
signing of the sale deed with its execution. For the reasons mentioned earlier in this judgment, such
an approach is completely erroneous and cannot be upheld.

Suit No 264 of 2016

(cid:12)                                                                            PART D

D     Conclusion

70    For the above reasons, we allow the appeal and set aside the impugned

judgment and order of the Single Judge of the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad dated 31 May
2018 in the appellant‘s writ petition. The order passed by the District Registrar on 31 March 2012
shall, in the circumstances, stand set aside. However, it is clarified that the present judgment shall
not affect any of the civil/criminal proceedings that are pending in respect of the subject matter of
the transaction. In the circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs. 71 Pending
application(s), if any, stand disposed of.

. . … … … … . . . … . . . … . . . . . . . … … … … … … . . . . . . . . J .   [ D r   D h a n a n j a y a   Y   C h a n d r a c h u d ]
…..…..…....…........……………….…........J. [A S Bopanna] …..…..…....…........……………….…........J. [Bela M
Trivedi] New Delhi;

May 10, 2022

35