X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September,
2022

Author: D.Y. Chandrachud

Bench: D.Y. Chandrachud, Hima Kohli, Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha

Reportable

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

Civil Appeal No 5802 of 2022
(Arising out of SLP (C) No 12612 of 2022)

X                                                        ... Appellant

versus

The Principal Secretary,
Health and Family Welfare Department,
Govt. of NCT of Delhi & Anr.                                   …Respondents

Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
GULSHAN KUMAR
ARORA
Date: 2022.09.29
12:41:22 IST
Reason:

1
(cid:12)                                                   JUDGMENT

Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, J

1

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

Table of Contents
A.         Background ................................................................................................... 4

B.         Submissions ................................................................................................. 7

C.         The Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act 1971 and the rules framed

thereunder ............................................................................................................ 9

D.         Barriers to accessing safe and legal abortions ....................................... 16

i.         RMPs’ fear of prosecution...................................................................... 16

ii.        Social stigma surrounding unmarried women ..................................... 20

E.         Analysis ....................................................................................................... 22

i.         The rule of purposive interpretation ..................................................... 22

ii.        Transcending the institution of marriage as a source of rights ......... 27

a.      Modern or atypical forms of familial relationships.................................. 29

b.      The equal status of married and unmarried or single women ............... 30

iii. The object and purpose of the MTP Act ............................................... 32

iv. The MTP Act as an aid of interpretation: Understanding “injury to

mental health” ................................................................................................ 39

v.         Construing Rule 3B................................................................................. 43

F.         Constitutional values animating the interpretation of the MTP Act and

MTP Rules .......................................................................................................... 55

2
(cid:12)     i.      The right to reproductive autonomy ..................................................... 55

ii.     The right to dignity.................................................................................. 62

G. Purposive interpretation of Rule 3B furthers the constitutional mandate

66

H.         India’s obligations under international law .............................................. 69

I.         Reiterating the positive obligations of the state...................................... 72

2

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

3
(cid:12)                                                                              PART A

A.   Background

1.   Leave granted.

2.   This appeal arises out of the judgment of a Division Bench of the High Court

of Delhi dated 15 July 2022. The appellant invoked the writ jurisdiction of the

High Court seeking its permission to terminate her pregnancy before the

completion of twenty-four weeks on 15 July 2022. Other ancillary reliefs were

sought. For convenience of reference, the reliefs claimed before the High

Court are extracted below:

“A. Permit the Petitioner to terminate her ongoing
pregnancy through registered medical practitioners at any
approved private or government center or Hospital before
15.07.2022 as her relief will be infructuous after that as the
pregnancy will be of around 24 Weeks by that time;

B. Restrain the Respondent from taking any coercive
action or criminal proceedings against the Petitioner or any
Registered Medical Practitioner terminating the pregnancy
of the petitioner at any approved private center or hospital
registered by Govt NCT of Delhi;

C. Direct the Respondent to include unmarried woman
also within the ambit of the Rule 3B of the Medical
Termination of Pregnancy Rules 2003 (as amended on
21.10.2021) for termination of pregnancy under clause (b)
of sub-section (2) Section 3 of the MTP Act, for a period of
up to twenty-four weeks;

D. Order an immediate Interim Relief of Stay during the
course of proceedings”

3.    The appellant is an Indian citizen and a permanent resident of Manipur. She

is currently residing in New Delhi. The appellant averred that she is the eldest

amongst five siblings and that her parents are agriculturists. At the time of the

3

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

4
(cid:12)                                                                             PART A

institution of the Writ Petition before the High Court of Delhi, 1 the appellant was

carrying a single intrauterine pregnancy corresponding to a gestational age of

twenty-two weeks. The appellant is an unmarried woman aged about twenty-five

years, and had become pregnant as a result of a consensual relationship. The

appellant wished to terminate her pregnancy as “her partner had refused to marry

her at the last stage.” She stated that she did not want to carry the pregnancy to

term since she was wary of the “social stigma and harassment” pertaining to

unmarried single parents, especially women. Moreover, the appellant submitted

that in the absence of a source of livelihood, she was not mentally prepared to

“raise and nurture the child as an unmarried mother.” The appellant stated that the

continuation of the unwanted pregnancy would involve a risk of grave and immense

injury to her mental health.

4.      The appellant sought permission to terminate her pregnancy in terms of

Section 3(2)(b) of the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act 1971 2 and Rule 3B(c)

of the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Rules 2003 3 (as amended on 12 October

2021). The appellant instituted a Criminal Miscellaneous Application 4 for grant of

interim relief to terminate her pregnancy during the pendency of the Writ Petition.

5.      By its order dated 15 July 2022, the High Court issued notice restricted only

to prayer C of the Writ Petition, and rejected the Criminal Miscellaneous

Application, effectively rejecting prayers A and B. The High Court observed that

Section 3(2)(b) of the MTP Act was inapplicable to the facts of the present case

1 WP(C) 10602/2022
2 “MTP Act”

4

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

3 “MTP Rules”
4 CM Application 30708/2022

5
(cid:12)                                                                                PART A

since the appellant, being an unmarried woman, whose pregnancy arose out of a

consensual relationship, was not covered by any of the sub-clauses of Rule 3B of

the MTP Rules. The High Court held that:

“8. The Petitioner, who is an unmarried woman and whose
pregnancy arises out of a consensual relationship, is
clearly not covered by any of the Clauses under the
Medical Termination of Pregnancy Rules, 2003. Therefore,

Section 3(2)(b) of the Act is not applicable to the facts of

this case.

9. Learned counsel for the Petitioner states that Rule 3B of
the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Rules, 2003 is
violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India, 1950,
inasmuch as it excludes an unmarried woman. Whether
such rule is valid or not can be decided only after the said
rule is held ultra vires, for which purpose, notice has to be
issued in the writ petition and has been done so by this
Court.

10. As of today, Rule 3B of the Medical Termination of
Pregnancy Rules, 2003, stands, and this Court, while
exercising its power under Article 226 of the Constitution
of India, 1950, cannot go beyond the Statute. Granting
interim relief now would amount to allowing the writ petition
itself.”

6.       The order of the High Court gave rise to the present appeal. Notice was

issued on the Petition for Special Leave to Appeal on 21 July 2022. This Court, by

its order dated 21 July 2022 modified the order of the High Court and permitted the

appellant to terminate her pregnancy. This Court passed the following ad interim

order:

“22. In the above background, we pass the following ad
interim order:

(i) We request the Director of the All India Institute of

5

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

Medical Sciences, Delhi to constitute a Medical Board in
terms of the provisions of Section 3(2D) of the Act,
extracted in the earlier part of this order, during the course
of 22 July 2022; and

6
(cid:12)                                                                                 PART B

(ii) In the event that the Medical Board concludes that the
fetus can be aborted without danger to the life of the
petitioner, a team of doctors at the All India Institute of
Medical Sciences shall carry out the abortion in terms of
the request which has been made before the High Court
and which has been reiterated both in the Special Leave
Petition and in the course of the submissions before this
Court by counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner.
Before doing so the wishes of the petitioner shall be
ascertained again and her written consent obtained after
due verification of identity.”

7.        Counsel for the petitioner and the respondent stated that a Medical Board

was constituted at the All India Institute of Medical Sciences. 5 The Board noted

that the petitioner had consented to the termination of her pregnancy and the

procedure could be undertaken without danger to her life. The report submitted by

AIIMS indicates that the termination of the pregnancy was safely carried out.

8.        As the case involves a substantial question of law, this Court has taken it up

for further consideration. The Writ Petition before the Delhi High Court shall stand

transferred to this Court. The significant issue which comes up for determination in

this appeal turns on the interpretation of Rule 3B of the MTP Rules.

B.       Submissions

9.        Dr. Amit Mishra, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant made

the following submissions:

a.   The appellant was an unmarried woman whose partner had refused

to marry her. She did not wish to continue the pregnancy and have

6

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

the child out of wedlock as she lacked the financial resources to do

so. She was not employed and her parents were farmers;

5   “AIIMS”

7
(cid:12)                                                                               PART B

b.   She was also not mentally prepared to raise a child by herself. If she

was compelled to do so, it would cause grave injury to her physical

and mental health. The appellant was not prepared to face the social

stigma surrounding unwed mothers; and

c.   Section 3(2)(b) of the MTP Act and Rule 3B of the MTP Rules are

arbitrary and discriminatory because they exclude unmarried women

from their ambit. They discriminate against women on the ground of

marital status, in violation of Article 14 of the Constitution.

10.   Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, learned senior counsel and Additional Solicitor

General has ably assisted this Court in the interpretation of Section 3(2) of the MTP

Act and Rule 3B(c) of the MTP Rules. She made the following submissions in

support of the argument that Rule 3B(c) extends to unmarried or single women

who are in long-term relationships:

a.   The interpretation of legislation must be guided by the text and context

of a statute as well as the object it seeks to achieve. The Statement

of Objects and Reasons of a statute must also guide its interpretation;

b.   Modern legislations ought to be read in view of the evolution of society

from the time of enactment. The literal construction of beneficial

legislations must be avoided, and they ought to be given a purposive

interpretation;

c.   A subordinate legislation should give effect to the statute it is enacted

7

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

under. If two constructions are possible, the interpretation in

consonance with the statutory scheme ought to be adopted;

8
(cid:12)                                                                             PART C

d.   The term “change of marital status” in Rule 3B(c) ought to be

interpreted as “change in the status of a relationship” to include

unmarried or single women as well as women who are not divorced

but are separated or have been deserted;

e.   “Live-in relationships” are equivalent to marital relationships because

in both types of relationships, the woman is entitled to maintenance.

Further, the children born out of such a relationship are vested with

the right of succession. Various national legislations, including the

MTP Act, do not make a distinction between married women and

unmarried or single women; and

f.   Women enjoy the right to bodily integrity and autonomy, as well as

reproductive rights. They are entitled to exercise decisional

autonomy.

C.    The Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act 1971 and the rules framed

thereunder

11.    Before we embark upon a discussion on the law and its application, it must

be mentioned that we use the term “woman” in this judgment as including persons

other than cis-gender women who may require access to safe medical termination

of their pregnancies.

12.    In India, termination of pregnancies is to be done strictly in terms of the MTP

8

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

Act. The preamble of the MTP Act states that it is an “Act to provide for the

termination of certain pregnancies by registered medical practitioners and for

matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.” The MTP Act specifies the

9
(cid:12)                                                                                    PART C

requirements to be fulfilled for terminating a pregnancy, including the persons who

are competent to perform the termination procedure, circumstances when abortion

is permissible, and places where the procedure may be performed.

13.       Section 3 of the MTP Act, as amended by the Medical Termination of

Pregnancy (Amendment) Act 2021 (8 of 2021), 6 provides for when pregnancies

may be terminated:

“Section 3 - When pregnancies may be terminated by
registered medical practitioners

(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal
Code (45 of 1860), a registered medical practitioner shall
not be guilty of any offence under that code or under any
other law for the time being in force, if any pregnancy is
terminated by him in accordance with the provisions of this
Act.

2[(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4), a
pregnancy may be terminated by a registered medical
practitioner,--

(a) where the length of the pregnancy does not exceed
twenty weeks, if such medical practitioner is, or

(b) where the length of the pregnancy exceeds twenty
weeks but does not exceed twenty-four weeks in case of
such category of woman as may be prescribed by rules
made under this Act, if not less than two registered medical
practitioners are, of the opinion, formed in good faith, that-
-

(i) the continuance of the pregnancy would involve a risk to the life of the pregnant woman or of
grave injury to her physical or mental health; or

9

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

(ii) there is a substantial risk that if the child were born, it would suffer from any serious physical or
mental abnormality.

Explanation 1.--For the purposes of clause (a), where any pregnancy occurs as a result of failure of
any device or method used by any woman or her partner for the purpose 6 “MTP Amendment Act
2021” PART C of limiting the number of children or preventing pregnancy, the anguish caused by
such pregnancy may be presumed to constitute a grave injury to the mental health of the pregnant
woman.

Explanation 2.--For the purposes of clauses (a) and (b), where any pregnancy is alleged by the
pregnant woman to have been caused by rape, the anguish caused by the pregnancy shall be
presumed to constitute a grave injury to the mental health of the pregnant woman.

(2A) The norms for the registered medical practitioner whose opinion is required for termination of
pregnancy at different gestational age shall be such as may be prescribed by rules made under this
Act.

(2B) The provisions of sub-section (2) relating to the length of the pregnancy shall not apply to the
termination of pregnancy by the medical practitioner where such termination is necessitated by the
diagnosis of any of the substantial foetal abnormalities diagnosed by a Medical Board.

(2C) Every State Government or Union territory, as the case may be, shall, by notification in the
Official Gazette, constitute a Board to be called a Medical Board for the purposes of this Act to
exercise such powers and functions as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act.

(2D) The Medical Board shall consist of the following, namely:--

(a) a Gynaecologist;

(b) a Paediatrician;

(c) a Radiologist or Sonologist; and

(d) such other number of members as may be notified in the Official Gazette by the
State Government or Union territory, as the case may be.

(3) In determining whether the continuance of a pregnancy would involve such risk
of injury to the health as is mentioned in sub-section (2), account may be taken of the
pregnant woman’s actual or reasonably foreseeable environment.

(4) (a) No pregnancy of a woman, who has not attained the age of eighteen years, or,
who having attained the age of PART C eighteen years, is a mentally ill person, shall
be terminated except with the consent in writing of her guardian.

10

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

(b) Save as otherwise provided in clause (a), no pregnancy shall be terminated except
with the consent of the pregnant woman.”

14. Section 3 provides that registered medical practitioners 7 shall not be guilty of
committing any offence under the Indian Penal Code 1860 8 or under any other law
for the time being in force if they terminate pregnancies in accordance with the MTP
Act. Sub-section (4) of Section 3 stipulates that a pregnancy shall not be terminated
except with the consent of the pregnant woman,9 and if the woman is below 18 years
of age or is mentally ill, with the consent of her guardian.10 Subject to the
requirement contained in sub-section (4) of Section 3, sub-section (2) of Section 3
provides that a pregnancy may be terminated by a registered medical practitioner
subject to the conditions laid down therein. Pregnancies may be terminated where
they do not exceed twenty weeks 11 and for certain categories of women where they
do not exceed twenty-four weeks. 12 Section 3(2)(a) of the MTP Act permits the
termination of a pregnancy where the length of the pregnancy does not exceed twenty
weeks. Section 3(2)(b) of MTP Act permits the termination of a pregnancy, where the
length of the pregnancy is between twenty and twenty-four weeks, of such categories
of women “as may be prescribed by Rules.” These pregnancies under Section 3 may
be terminated if the medical practitioner in

7 “RMP” 8 “IPC” 9 Section 3(4)(b), MTP Act 10 Section 3(4)(a), MTP Act 11 Section 3(2)(a), MTP
Act 12 Section 3(3)(b), MTP Act PART C question (or in the case of pregnancies between twenty and
twenty-four weeks, not less than two registered medical practitioners) is, in good faith, of the
opinion that:

a. The continuance of the pregnancy would put the pregnant woman’s life at risk
(Section 3(2)(i));

b. The continuance of the pregnancy would involve grave danger to the pregnant
woman’s physical health (Section 3(2)(i));

c. The continuance of the pregnancy would involve grave danger to the pregnant
woman’s mental health (Section 3(2)(i)); or d. There is a substantial risk that the
child would suffer from a serious physical or mental abnormality, if it is born (Section
3(2)(ii)).

In determining whether the continuation of the pregnancy would involve grave
danger to the pregnant woman’s physical or mental health, her actual or reasonably
foreseeable environment may be taken into account. 13 We are of the opinion that
significant reliance ought to be placed on each woman’s own estimation of whether
she is in a position to continue and carry to term her pregnancy.

15. The explanations to Section 3(2) provide for two legal presumptions indicating
what constitutes a grave injury to the pregnant woman’s mental health.

11

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

Explanation 1 stipulates that pregnancies which occur due to the failure of a contraceptive device or
method used by a woman or her partner for limiting the 13 Section 3(3), MTP Act PART C number
of children or preventing pregnancy shall be presumed to constitute a grave injury to the mental
health of the pregnant woman, if the pregnancy has not exceeded twenty weeks. A similar legal
presumption is provided for in Explanation 2, which stipulates that where a woman alleges that a
pregnancy was caused as a consequence of rape, the anguish caused by the pregnancy shall be
presumed to constitute a grave injury to her mental health. The legal presumption in Explanation 2
is applicable to all pregnancies which have not exceeded twenty-four weeks.

16. Pregnancies may be terminated only in a hospital established or maintained by the government,
14 or any place approved for the purposes of the MTP Act either by the government or by a District
Level Committee constituted in terms of Section 4(b). Further, the provisions of Section 4 and the
provisions in Section 3(2) (which relate to the length of the pregnancy and the requirement for the
opinion of at least two RMPs) shall not apply to the termination of pregnancies by an RMP, where
the RMP is, in good faith, of the opinion that the termination of the pregnancy is immediately
necessary to save the life of the pregnant woman.15 The MTP Act also seeks to protect the privacy of
a woman who has terminated a pregnancy – any RMP who reveals the name or other particulars of
such a woman shall be liable to be sentenced to imprisonment which may extend to one year, or
with fine, or both.16 The MTP Act vests the Central Government with the power to enact rules to
carry out its provisions 17 and the State Governments with the power to enact regulations in certain
cases. 18 14 Section 4(a), MTP Act 15 Section 5(1), MTP Act 16 Section 5A, MTP Act 17 Section 6,
MTP Act 18 Section 7, MTP Act PART C

17. In exercise of this power, the Central Government notified the MTP Rules. The MTP Rules
govern various aspects of the medical termination of pregnancies:

they include rules on the District Level Committee, 19 the Medical Board, 20 RMPs,
21 and the place where a pregnancy may be terminated.22 Rule 3B, recently amended
by the Medical Termination of Pregnancy (Amendment) Rules 2021, 23 is relevant
for the purposes of the present discussion. It governs the categories of women under
clause (b) of sub-section 2 of Section 3 who may have their pregnancy terminated if
the length of their pregnancy exceeds twenty weeks but does not exceed twenty-four
weeks. It states:

“3-B. Women eligible for termination of pregnancy up to twenty-four weeks.—The
following categories of women shall be considered eligible for termination of
pregnancy under clause (b) of sub-section (2) Section 3 of the Act, for a period of up
to twenty-four weeks, namely—

(a) survivors of sexual assault or rape or incest;

(b) minors;

(c) change of marital status during the ongoing pregnancy (widowhood and divorce);

12

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

(d) women with physical disabilities [major disability as per criteria laid down under
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 (49 of 2016)];

(e) mentally ill women including mental retardation;

(f) the foetal malformation that has substantial risk of being incompatible with life or
if the child is born it may suffer from such physical or mental abnormalities to be
seriously handicapped; and 19 Rule 3, MTP Rules 20 Rule 3A, MTP Rules 21 Rules 4,
4A, MTP Rules 22 Rules 5, 6, 7, 8, MTP Rules 23 ”MTP Amendment Rules” PART D

(g) women with pregnancy in humanitarian settings or disaster or emergency
situations as may be declared by the Government.” D. Barriers to accessing safe and
legal abortions

18. Despite the enactment of the MTP Act, a number of hurdles continue to prevent full access to
safe and legal abortions, pushing women to avail of clandestine, unsafe abortions. These barriers
include insufficient infrastructural facilities, a lack of awareness, social stigma, and failure to ensure
confidential care. In some situations, unmarried women face particular barriers due to gender
stereotypes about women’s sexual autonomy outside marriage. These barriers are a serious
impediment and deter single women from seeking safe and legal abortions. Such barriers may
contribute to a delay in accessing abortion services or a complete denial of such services,
consequently negating women’s right to reproductive autonomy.

i. RMPs’ fear of prosecution

19. It is not only the factors mentioned above which hinder access to safe abortion but also a fear of
prosecution under the country’s criminal laws. Under the current legal framework, the MTP Act
merely lays out exceptions to the provisions criminalizing abortion in Sections 312 to 318 of the IPC.
Section 3(1) of the MTP Act begins with a non-obstante clause and stipulates that “Notwithstanding
anything contained in the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), a registered medical practitioner shall not
be guilty of any offence under that Code or under any other law for the time being in force, if any
pregnancy is terminated by him in accordance with the provisions of this Act.” In terms of Section
3(1), the termination of a PART D pregnancy is a criminal offence under the IPC, unless it fulfils the
conditions laid down in the MTP Act, including who can terminate a pregnancy, the place where
termination can take place, and the specific conditions in accordance with which such termination is
permissible. Section 5(2) provides penalties when termination of pregnancy is carried out by a
person who is not an RMP. Section 5(3) provides penalties when termination of pregnancy is carried
out in a place other than that mentioned in Section 4. RMPs and women seeking termination of
pregnancy are exempted from any legal action under the provisions of the IPC mentioned above
only when these conditions are fulfilled.

20. Presently, under the MTP Act, the opinion of an RMP (in accordance with the restrictions and
grounds laid down in the Act) is decisive. It is on the basis of the opinion formed by RMP(s), either
under Section 3 or under Section 5, that a woman can terminate a pregnancy under the MTP Act.

13

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

This makes the MTP Act a provider-centric law. Since women’s right to access abortion is
conditional on the approval by an RMP, the denial of services by an RMP compels women to
approach courts or seek abortions in unsafe conditions. 24 A fear of prosecution under this complex
labyrinth of laws, including linking of the MTP Act with the IPC, acts as a major barrier to safe
abortion access, by having a chilling effect on the behaviour of RMPs. The chilling effect —
historically associated with protection of freedom of speech and expression under Article 19 25 —
has an impact on the decision-making of medical professionals acting under the MTP Act and 24
Dipika Jain, Time to Rethink Criminalisation of Abortion? Towards a Gender Justice Approach, 12
NUJS Law Review 2 (2019) 25 S. Khushboo v. Kanniammal, (2010) 5 SCC 600; Shreya Singhal v.
Union of India, (2015) 5 SCC 1 PART D consequently impedes access to safe and legal abortions and
the actualization of women’s fundamental right to reproductive autonomy.

21. In Navtej Singh Johar v. Union of India 26 a Constitution Bench of this Court held that Section
377 had a chilling effect on the exercise of freedom of individuals, which posed a grave danger to the
unhindered fulfilment of one’s sexual orientation, as an element of dignity and privacy. One of us,
Dr. DY Chandrachud, J., recognized the impact of the criminalization of homosexuality on the
spread of HIV/AIDS and how fear of prosecution and stigma created barriers to accessing HIV
prevention services, in his concurring opinion. This Court observed that:

“508. The silence and secrecy that accompanies institutional discrimination may
foster conditions which encourage escalation of the incidence of HIV/AIDS. The key
population is stigmatized by health providers, employers and other service providers.
As a result, there exist serious obstacles to effective HIV prevention and treatment as
discrimination and harassment can hinder access to HIV and sexual health services
and prevention programmes.”

22. Although the actions of RMPs done in good faith under the MTP Act are protected under Section
8, the spectre of criminalization casts a chilling effect on them. The fear faced by RMPs of
prosecution under the penal provisions often leads to unnecessary delays. It is a common yet
lamentable practice for RMPs to insist on compliance with extra-legal conditions such as consent
from the woman’s family, documentary proofs, or judicial authorisation. 27 If the woman fails to
comply with these additional requirements, RMPs frequently decline to provide their services in
conducting legal abortions.

26 (2018) 10 SCC 1 27 Centre for Reproductive Rights, “Reform to Address Women’s and Girl’s need
for Abortion after 20 weeks” (2018) PART D

23. These extra-legal requirements have no basis in law. As noted above, it is only the woman’s
consent (or her guardian’s consent if she is a minor or mentally ill) which is material. RMPs must
refrain from imposing extra-legal conditions on women seeking to terminate their pregnancy in
accordance with the law. They need only ensure that the provisions of the MTP Act (along with the
accompanying rules and regulations) are complied with.

14

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

24. Before the MTP Amendment Act 2021 was enacted, the petitioners in a number of cases before
the High Courts also sought permission to terminate pregnancy where the gestation was below
twenty weeks. 28 The unamended MTP Act clearly stated that termination of pregnancy between
twelve and twenty weeks was permissible when two RMPs opined that the request for termination of
pregnancy meets either of the four grounds mentioned in Section 3(2). 29 Thus, there was no legal
requirement to refer cases within the legal limit of twenty weeks to the courts. These cases represent
the barriers faced by women in accessing safe and legal abortions, even when their decision to
terminate their pregnancy is permitted by the law.

25. This Court has recognized the disastrous effects of unnecessary delays and lack of promptitude
in the attitude of authorities when dealing with termination of pregnancies. In Z v. State of Bihar, 30
this Court found that the state authorities, including Patna Medical College and Hospital, had erred
in failing to terminate the 28 See XYZ v. State of Maharashtra, 2018 SCC OnLine Bom 13751;
Prabhavati Dattatray Jadhav v. State of Maharashtra, 2021 SCC Online Bom 9339; ABC v. State of
Maharashtra, (2018) 4 Mah LJ 374, 2018 SCC Online Bom 144; A v. State of Maharashtra, 2022 SCC
OnLine Bom 1361; D. Rajeswari v. State of Tamil Nadu, 1996 Cri LJ 3795; X v. Govt. of NCT of
Delhi, 2013 SCC OnLine Del 4929; Puja Kumari v. State of West Bengal, 2019 SCC Online Cal 1277;
Velunatchiyar v. Govt. of Tamil Nadu, 2021 SCC Online Mad 5047; M. Kala v. The Inspector of
Police, 2015 SCC OnLine Mad 7767 29 Section 3(2)(b), MTP Act 1971 30 (2018) 11 SCC 572 PART D
pregnancy before the passage of twenty weeks, despite the woman seeking an abortion on the
ground that she was a victim of rape. This Court also rebuked the “negligence and carelessness” of
the authorities in failing to terminate the pregnancy as permitted by law. It noted that the
proceedings in the High Court were unduly delayed, leading to a situation where the pregnancy
could not be terminated without endangering the life of the woman in question. Compensation was
awarded to the petitioner (i.e., the pregnant woman).

ii. Social stigma surrounding unmarried women

26. An RMP’s decision to provide medical termination of a pregnancy is also influenced by social
stigma surrounding unmarried women and pre-marital sex, gender stereotypes about women taking
on the mantle of motherhood, and the role of women in society.

27. Due to a widespread misconception that termination of pregnancies of unmarried women is
illegal, a woman and her partner may resort to availing of abortions by unlicensed medical
practitioners in facilities not adequately equipped for such medical procedures, leading to a
heightened risk of complications and maternal mortality. In Surendra Chauhan v. State of Madhya
Pradesh, 31 a two- Judge Bench of this Court upheld the Madhya Pradesh High Court’s order to
convict the accused under Section 314 read with Section 34 of the IPC for causing a woman’s death
by miscarriage. According to the facts of the case, the accused was in an “illicit relation” with the
deceased, an unmarried woman of twenty-four years. The deceased woman had become pregnant as
a result of this relationship. 31 (2000) 4 SCC 110 PART D Both of them had approached the clinic of
a so-called doctor (who was named as a co-accused) to terminate the pregnancy of around 3 months
(approximately 12 weeks). The purported doctor was neither an RMP nor was his clinic approved by
the government, in terms of the requirements laid down in the MTP Act. During the procedure for

15

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

the termination of pregnancy, the woman passed away. This case is illustrative of the dangers of
unsafe abortions, undertaken due to the social stigma surrounding pregnancies among unmarried
women.

28. The social stigma that women face for engaging in pre-marital sexual relations prevents them
from realizing their right to reproductive health in a variety of ways. They have insufficient or no
access to knowledge about their own bodies due to a lack of sexual health education, their access to
contraceptives is limited, and they are frequently unable to approach healthcare providers and
consult them with respect to their reproductive health. Consequently, unmarried and single women
face additional obstacles.

29. The social stigma surrounding single women who are pregnant is even greater and they often
lack support from their family or partner. This leads to the proliferation of persons not qualified /
certified to practice medicine. Such persons offer the possibility of a discreet abortion and many
women may feel compelled by their circumstances to engage the services of such persons instead of
opting for a medically safe abortion. As illustrated in Surendra Chauhan (supra), this often leads to
disastrous consequences for the woman. Keeping in view these barriers to accessing reproductive
healthcare, we now turn to the interpretation of Section 3(2) of the MTP Act and Rule 3B of the MTP
Rules.

(cid:12)                                                                                                    PART E

E.         Analysis

i.       The rule of purposive interpretation

30. The question that arises is whether Rule 3B includes unmarried women, single women, or
women without a partner under its ambit. The answer may be discerned by imparting a purposive
interpretation to Rule 3B.

31. The cardinal principle of the construction of statutes is to identify the intention of the legislature
and the true legal meaning of the enactment. The intention of the legislature is derived by
considering the meaning of the words used in the statute, with a view to understanding the purpose
or object of the enactment, the mischief, and its corresponding remedy that the enactment is
designed to actualise. 32 Ordinarily, the language used by the legislature is indicative of legislative
intent. In Kanailal Sur v. Paramnidhi Sadhu Khan, 33 Gajendragadkar, J. (as the learned Chief
Justice then was) opined that “the first and primary rule of construction is that the intention of the
Legislature must be found in the words used by the Legislature itself.” But when the words are
capable of bearing two or more constructions, they should be construed in light of the object and

16

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

purpose of the enactment. The purposive construction of the provision must be “illumined by the
goal, though guided by the word.”34 Aharon Barak opines that in certain circumstances this may
indicate giving “an unusual and exceptional meaning” to the language and words used.35 Before we
engage in the exercise of purposive 32 JUSTICE G.P SINGH, G.P. SINGH: PRINCIPLES OF
STATUTORY INTERPRETATION, (LexisNexis, 2016), at page 12; State of Himachal Pradesh v.
Kailash Chand Mahajan, 1992 Supp (2) SCC 351; Union of India v. Elphinstone Spinning and
Weaving Co. Ltd., (2001) 4 SCC 139 33 AIR 1957 SC 907 34 Kanta Goel v. B.P Pathak, 1977 SCR (3)
412 35 AHARON BARAK, PURPOSIVE INTERPRETATION IN LAW, (Princeton University Press,
2007), at page 306 PART E construction, we must caution that a court’s power to purposively
interpret a statutory text does not imply that a judge can substitute legislative intent with their own
individual notions. The alternative construction propounded by the judge must be within the ambit
of the statute and should help carry out the purpose and object of the Act in question.

32. The interpretation of a subordinate legislation should be consistent with the enabling Act. 36 A
subordinate legislation must be reasonable and in consonance with the legislative policy. It should
be interpreted in a meaningful manner, so as to give effect to the purpose and object of the enabling
Act. The interpretation which is in consonance with the statutory scheme and gives effect to the
statute must be adopted.

33. In Principles of Statutory Interpretation by Justice G.P. Singh, it is stated that a statute must be
read in its context when attempting to interpret its purpose. 37 Context includes reading the statute
as a whole, referring to the previous state of law, the general scope of the statute, surrounding
circumstances and the mischief that it was intended to remedy. 38 The treatise explains that:

“For ascertaining the purpose of a statute one is not restricted to the internal aid
furnished by the statute itself, although the text of the statute taken as a whole is the
most important material for ascertaining both the aspects of ‘intention’. Without
intending to lay down a precise and exhaustive list of external aids, Lord Somervell
has stated:

“The mischief against which the statute is directed and, perhaps though to an
undefined extent the surrounding 36 Kedarnath Jute Manufacturing Co. v.
Commercial Tax Officer, AIR 1966 SC 12; Union of India v. Tulsiram Patel, (1986) 3
SCC 398; M.L. Kamra v. Chairman-cum-Managing Director, New India Assurance
Co. Ltd. (1992) 1 SCR 220; St Johns Teachers Training Institute v. Regional Director
National Council of Teacher Education, (2003) 3 SCC 321 37 JUSTICE G.P SINGH,
G.P. SINGH: PRINCIPLES OF STATUTORY INTERPRETATION, (LexisNexis,
2016), at page 35 38 Union of India v. Sankalchand Himatlal Sheth, (1977) 4 SCC
193, Reserve Bank of India v. Peerless General Finance and Investment Co. Ltd.,
(1987) 1 SCC 424 PART E circumstances can be considered. Other statutes in pari
materia and the state of the law at the time are admissible.” These external aids are
also brought in by widening the concept of ‘context’ “as including not only other
enacting provisions of the same statute, but its preamble, the existing state of the law,
other statutes in pari materia, and the mischief which the statute was intended to

17

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

remedy.” In the words of Chinappa Reddy, J.: “Interpretation must depend on the
text and the context. They are the bases of interpretation. One may well say if the text
is the texture, context is what gives colour. Neither can be ignored. Both are
important. That interpretation is best which makes the textual interpretation match
the contextual. A statute is best interpreted when we know why it was enacted.”

34. The rule of purposive interpretation was first articulated in Heydon’s case 39 in the following
terms:

“for the sure and true interpretation of all statutes in general (be they penal or
beneficial, restrictive or enlarging of the common law) four things are to be discerned
and considered:

1st. What was the common law before the making of the Act.

2nd. What was the mischief and defect for which the common law did not provide.

3rd. What remedy Parliament hath resolved and appointed to cure the disease of the
commonwealth.

And, 4th. The true reason of the remedy; and then the office of all the Judges is
always to make such construction as shall suppress the mischief, and advance the
remedy, and to suppress subtle inventions and evasions for continuance of the
mischief, and pro privato commodo, and to add force and life to the cure and remedy,
according to the true intent of the makers of the Act, pro bono publico” 39 (1584) 3
Co Rep 7a PART E

35. In Bengal Immunity Co. v. State of Bihar,40 the Constitution Bench applied the mischief rule in
Heydon’s case in the construction of Article 286 of the Constitution. In Kehar Singh v. State (Delhi
Admn.),41 a three-judge Bench of this Court held:

“231. During the last several years, the “golden rule” has been given a go-by. We now
look for the “intention” of the legislature or the “purpose” of the statute. First, we
examine the words of the statute. If the words are precise and cover the situation in
hand, we do not go further. We expound those words in the natural and ordinary
sense of the words. But, if the words are ambiguous, uncertain or any doubt arises as
to the terms employed, we deem it as our paramount duty to put upon the language
of the legislature rational meaning. We then examine every word, every section and
every provision. We examine the Act as a whole. We examine the necessity which
gave rise to the Act. We look at the mischiefs which the legislature intended to
redress. We look at the whole situation and not just one-to-one relation. We will not
consider any provision out of the framework of the statute. We will not view the
provisions as abstract principles separated from the motive force behind. We will
consider the provisions in the circumstances to which they owe their origin. We will

18

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

consider the provisions to ensure coherence and consistency within the law as a
whole and to avoid undesirable consequences.

…

233. For this purpose, we call in external and internal aids:

“External aids are: the Statement of Objects and Reasons when the Bill was presented
to Parliament, the reports of the Committee, if any, preceding the Bill, legislative
history, other statutes in pari materia and legislation in other States which pertain to
the same subject matter, persons, things or relations.

Internal aids are: Preamble, scheme, enacting parts of the statutes, rules of languages
and other provisions in the statutes.” 40 (1955) 2 SCR 603 41 (1988) 3 SCC 609
PART E

36. A catena of decisions emanating from this Court, including Kerala Fishermen's Welfare Fund
Board v. Fancy Food, 42 Bharat Singh v. Management of New Delhi Tuberculosis Centre, New
Delhi,43 Bombay Anand Bhavan Restaurant v. ESI Corpn.,44 Union of India v. Prabhakaran Vijaya
Kumar, 45 settle the proposition that progressive and beneficial legislation must be interpreted in
favour of the beneficiaries when it is possible to take two views of a legal provision.

37. In S. Gopal Reddy v. State of A.P., 46 while interpreting the Dowry Prohibition Act 1961 (a
beneficial legislation), this Court interpreted the meaning of “dowry” by adopting the purposive
interpretation approach:

“12. It is a well-known rule of interpretation of statutes that the text and the context
of the entire Act must be looked into while interpreting any of the expressions used in
a statute. The courts must look to the object which the statute seeks to achieve while
interpreting any of the provisions of the Act. A purposive approach for interpreting
the Act is necessary. We are unable to persuade ourselves to agree with Mr Rao that it
is only the property or valuable security given at the time of marriage which would
bring the same within the definition of “dowry” punishable under the Act, as such an
interpretation would be defeating the very object for which the Act was enacted.
Keeping in view the object of the Act, “demand of dowry” as a consideration for a
proposed marriage would also come within the meaning of the expression dowry
under the Act. If we were to agree with Mr Rao that it is only the “demand” made at
or after marriage which is punishable under Section 4 of the Act, some serious
consequences, which the legislature wanted to avoid, are bound to follow. Take for
example a case where the bridegroom or his parents or other relatives make a
“demand” of dowry during marriage negotiations and later on after bringing the
bridal party to the bride's house find that the bride or her 42 (1995) 4 SCC 341 43
(1986) 2 SCC 614 44 (2009) 9 SCC 61 45 (2008) 9 SCC 527 46 (1996) 4 SCC 596
PART E parents or relatives have not met the earlier “demand” and call off the

19

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

marriage and leave the bride's house, should they escape the punishment under the
Act. The answer has to be an emphatic “no”. It would be adding insult to injury if we
were to countenance that their action would not attract the provisions of Section 4 of
the Act. Such an interpretation would frustrate the very object of the Act and would
also run contrary to the accepted principles relating to the interpretation of statutes.”
(emphasis in original) This principle has consistently been applied by this Court
while construing beneficial legislation. Most recently in KH Nazar v. Mathew K
Jacob,47 Nageshwar Rao, J. writing for a two-judge Bench observed:

“ 1 1 .   P r o v i s i o n s   o f   a   b e n e f i c i a l   l e g i s l a t i o n   h a v e   t o   b e   c o n s t r u e d   w i t h   a
purpose-oriented approach. The Act should receive a liberal construction to promote
its objects. Also, literal construction of the provisions of a beneficial legislation has to
be avoided. It is the court's duty to discern the intention of the legislature in making
the law. Once such an intention is ascertained, the statute should receive a purposeful
or functional interpretation.” ii. Transcending the institution of marriage as a source
of rights

38. While much of law’s benefits were (and indeed are) rooted in the institution of marriage, the law
in modern times is shedding the notion that marriage is a precondition to the rights of individuals
(alone or in relation to one another). Changing social mores must be borne in mind when
interpreting the provisions of an enactment to further its object and purpose. Statutes are
considered to be “always speaking.” 48 47 (2020) 14 SCC 126 48 Dharni Sugars and Chemicals Ltd
v. Union of India, (2019) 5 SCC 480 PART E

39. In Badshah v. Urmila Badshah Godse, 49 this Court reaffirmed that the law should be
interpreted in terms of the changing needs of the times and circumstances. AK Sikri, J. speaking for
a two-judge Bench of this Court, observed that it is the duty of courts to bridge the gap between law
and society by advancing a purposive interpretation of statutes:

“16. The law regulates relationships between people. It prescribes patterns of
behaviour. It reflects the values of society. The role of the court is to understand the
purpose of law in society and to help the law achieve its purpose. But the law of a
society is a living organism. It is based on a given factual and social reality that is
constantly changing. Sometimes change in law precedes societal change and is even
intended to stimulate it. In most cases, however, a change in law is the result of a
change in social reality. Indeed, when social reality changes, the law must change too.
Just as change in social reality is the law of life, responsiveness to change in social
reality is the life of the law. It can be said that the history of law is the history of
adapting the law to society's changing needs. In both constitutional and statutory
interpretation, the court is supposed to exercise discretion in determining the proper
relationship between the subjective and objective purposes of the law.” (emphasis
supplied)

20

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

40. In Navtej Singh Johar (supra), this Court emphasized the transformative nature of our
Constitution. Transformative constitutionalism promotes and engenders societal change by
ensuring that every individual is capable of enjoying the life and liberties guaranteed under the
Constitution. This Court observed that transformative constitutionalism places a duty on the
judiciary to “ensure and uphold the supremacy of the Constitution, while at the same time ensuring
that a sense of transformation is ushered constantly and endlessly in the society by 49 (2014) 1 SCC
188 PART E interpreting and enforcing the Constitution as well as other provisions of law in
consonance with the avowed object.” 50 a. Modern or atypical forms of familial relationships

41. The law must remain cognizant of the fact that changes in society have ushered in significant
changes in family structures. In S. Khusboo v. Kanniammal, 51 a three-judge Bench of this Court
acknowledged that live-in relationships and pre-marital sex should not be associated with the lens of
criminality. The Court observed:

“46. […] While there can be no doubt that in India, marriage is an important social
institution, we must also keep our minds open to the fact that there are certain
individuals or groups who do not hold the same view. To be sure, there are some
indigenous groups within our country wherein sexual relations outside the marital
setting are accepted as a normal occurrence. Even in the societal mainstream, there
are a significant number of people who see nothing wrong in engaging in premarital
sex. Notions of social morality are inherently subjective and the criminal law cannot
be used as a means to unduly interfere with the domain of personal autonomy.
Morality and criminality are not coextensive.”

42. In Deepika Singh v. Central Administrative Tribunal, 52 a two-Judge Bench of this Court (of
which one of us, Dr. DY Chandrachud, J. was a part) recognized that family units may manifest in
atypical ways:

“26. The predominant understanding of the concept of a “family” both in the law and
in society is that it consists of a single, unchanging unit with a mother and a father
(who remain constant over time) and their children. This assumption ignores both,
the many circumstances which may lead to a change in one's familial structure, and
the 50 Navtej Singh Johar v. Union of India, (2018) 10 SCC 1, at paragraph 122 51
(2010) 5 SCC 600 52 2022 SCC OnLine SC 1088 PART E fact that many families do
not conform to this expectation to begin with. Familial relationships may take the
form of domestic, unmarried partnerships or queer relationships.

A household may be a single parent household for any number of reasons, including the death of a
spouse, separation, or divorce. Similarly, the guardians and caretakers (who traditionally occupy the
roles of the “mother” and the “father”) of children may change with remarriage, adoption, or
fostering. These manifestations of love and of families may not be typical but they are as real as their
traditional counterparts. Such atypical manifestations of the family unit are equally deserving not
only of protection under law but also of the benefits available under social welfare legislation. The
black letter of the law must not be relied upon to disadvantage families which are different from

21

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

traditional ones. The same undoubtedly holds true for women who take on the role of motherhood
in ways that may not find a place in the popular imagination.”

43. Societal reality, as observed by this Court in Deepika Singh (supra), indicates the need to legally
recognize non-traditional manifestations of familial relationships. Such legal recognition is
necessary to enable individuals in non- traditional family structures to avail of the benefits under
beneficial legislation, including the MTP Act.

b. The equal status of married and unmarried or single women

44. Over the years, the Parliament has enacted legislation bringing about a congruence between the
rights of married and unmarried women. The Maternity Benefit Act 1961 was enacted to provide
maternity benefits to women employed in any establishment. In terms of Section 5 of the Maternity
Benefit Act 1961, the payment of maternity benefits is extended to all women (including unmarried
women) by the use of the phrase “every woman.” PART E

45. The Hindu Succession Act 1956 was enacted to codify the law relating to intestate succession
among Hindus. Section 6 of the Hindu Succession Act 1956 pertains to devolution of interest in
coparcenary property. In terms of this provision a daughter, irrespective of her marital status, is a
coparcener in her own right in the same manner as the son by virtue of the Hindu Succession
(Amendment) Act 2005.

46. Section 8 of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act 1956 stipulates that any female Hindu
regardless of her marital status has the capacity to take a son or daughter in adoption. Sections 7
and 8 of the Guardian and Wards Act 1890 allows for persons to apply for an order of guardianship
without making any distinction between men or women, married or unmarried.

47. Through the above enactments, the law has emphasized that unmarried women have the same
rights as married women in terms of adoption, succession, and maternity benefits. Importantly,
these legislations also signify that both married and unmarried women have equal decisional
autonomy to make significant choices regarding their own welfare.

48. In the evolution of the law towards a gender equal society, the interpretation of the MTP Act and
MTP Rules must consider the social realities of today and not be restricted by societal norms of an
age which has passed into the archives of history. As society changes and evolves, so must our mores
and conventions. A changed social context demands a readjustment of our laws. Law must not
remain static and its interpretation should keep in mind the changing social context and advance
the cause of social justice.

PART E iii. The object and purpose of the MTP Act

49. The purpose or object of an enactment is the mischief at which the enactment is directed and the
remedy which the lawmakers have devised to address the mischief. A number of decisions, such as
Chiranjit Lal Chowdhury v. Union of India, 53 A. Thangal Kunju Musaliar v. M. Venkatachalam

22

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

Potti, 54 State of Himachal Pradesh v. Kailash Chand Mahajan,55 and National Insurance Co. Ltd. v.
Swaran Singh 56 lay down that it is desirable to look into the legislative history and the Statement of
Objects and Reasons of an enactment to appreciate the background and state of affairs leading up to
the legislation and the circumstances which were prevalent at the time the statute was enacted.

50. Prior to the enactment of the MTP Act, the medical termination of pregnancy was governed by
the IPC. Chapter XVI of the IPC contains a segment titled “Of the causing of miscarriage, of injuries
to unborn children, of the exposure of infants, and of the concealment of births”, with Sections 312
to 318 forming a part of this segment. Section 312 criminalizes abortion, making any person
(including the pregnant woman herself) liable for causing the miscarriage of a woman with an
unborn foetus, except where the procedure is done in good faith in order to save the woman’s life.
Section 313 stipulates a penalty of imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term which may
extend to ten years when the offence of ‘causing miscarriage’ is committed without the consent of
the woman. Section 312 to Section 316 of the IPC failed to make a distinction between wanted and
53 1950 SCR 869 54 1950 SCR 869 55 1992 Supp (2) SCC 351 56 (2004) 3 SCC 297 PART E
unwanted pregnancies, thereby making it extremely onerous for women to access safe abortions.
Before 1971, the criminalization of abortion under the IPC often compelled women to seek unsafe,
unhygienic and unregulated abortions, leading to an increase in maternal morbidity and mortality.

51. In this background, the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Bill 57 was drafted and introduced in
the Rajya Sabha on 17 November 1969. On 2 August 1971, the MTP Bill was introduced in the Lok
Sabha with the intent to “liberalise some of the restrictions under section 312 of the IPC.” 58 The
MTP Act was enacted by Parliament as a “health” measure, “humanitarian” measure and “eugenic”
measure. The relevant portion of the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the MTP Act is extracted
below:

“1. The provisions regarding the termination of pregnancy in the Penal Code, 1860
which were enacted about a century ago were drawn up in keeping with the then
British Law on the subject. Abortion was made a crime for which the mother as well
as the abortionist could be punished except where it had to be induced in order to
save the life of the mother. It has been stated that this very strict law has been
observed in the breach in a very large number of cases all over the country.
Furthermore, most of these mothers are married women, and are under no particular
necessity to conceal their pregnancy.

2. In recent years, when health services have expanded and hospitals are availed of to
the fullest extent by all classes of society, doctors have often been confronted with
gravely ill or dying pregnant women whose pregnant uterus have been tampered with
a view to causing an abortion and consequently suffered very severely.

3. There is thus avoidable wastage of the mother's health, strength and, sometimes,
life. The proposed measure which seeks to liberalise certain existing provisions
relating to termination of pregnancy has been conceived 57 “MTP Bill” 58 Lok Sabha
Debates, Fifth Series, Vol. VII, No. 53 (2 August 1972), at page 159 PART E (1) as a

23

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

health measure—when there is danger to the life or risk to physical or mental health
of the woman; (2) on humanitarian grounds-such as when pregnancy arises from a
sex crime like rape or intercourse with a lunatic woman, etc.; and (3) eugenic
grounds—where there is substantial risk that the child, if born, would suffer from
deformities and diseases.” The whole tenor of the MTP Act is to provide access to safe
and legal medical abortions to women. The MTP Act is primarily a beneficial
legislation, meant to enable women to access services of medical termination of
pregnancies provided by an RMP. Being a beneficial legislation, the provisions of the
MTP Rules and the MTP Act must be imbued with a purposive construction. The
interpretation accorded to the provisions of the MTP Act and the MTP Rules must be
in consonance with the legislative purpose.

52. The MTP Amendment Act 2021 intended to extend the benefits of the statute to all women,
including single and unmarried women. The MTP Amendment Act 2021, which came into force
from 24 September 2021, introduced a major change in Section 3 of the MTP Act by extending the
upper limit for permissible termination of pregnancy from twenty weeks to twenty-four weeks. In
terms of the unamended MTP Act, a pregnancy could only be terminated under Section 3(2) if it did
not exceed twenty weeks. The MTP Amendment Act 2021 extended the upper limit and allowed
termination of pregnancy up to twenty-four weeks for specific categories of women based on the
opinion of two RMPs.

53. The MTP Amendment Act 2021 also extended the benefit of the legal presumption of a grave
injury to the mental health of a woman on account of the failure of contraception, to all women and
not just married women. In the unamended MTP Act, Explanation II provided that the anguish
caused by a PART E pregnancy resulting from a failure of any device or method used by any
“married woman or her husband” for the purpose of limiting the number of children may be
presumed to constitute a grave injury to the mental health of the woman. After the MTP
Amendment Act 2021, Explanation I provides that the anguish caused by a pregnancy (up to twenty
weeks) arising from a failure of a contraceptive device used by “any woman or her partner” either for
limiting the number of children or for preventing pregnancy can be presumed to constitute a grave
injury to a woman’s mental health. By eliminating the word “married woman or her husband” from
the scheme of the MTP Act, the legislature intended to clarify the scope of Section 3 and bring
pregnancies which occur outside the institution of marriage within the protective umbrella of the
law.

54. The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Amendment Act locates the purpose within the
framework of reproductive rights:

“With the passage of time and advancement of medical technology for safe abortion,
there is a scope for increasing upper gestational limit for terminating pregnancies
especially for vulnerable women and for pregnancies with substantial foetal
anomalies detected late in pregnancy. Further, there is also a need for increasing
access of women to legal and safe abortion service in order to reduce maternal
mortality and morbidity caused by unsafe abortion and its complications.

24

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

Considering the need and demand for increased gestational limit under certain
specified conditions and to ensure safety and well-being of women, it is proposed to
amend the said Act. The proposed Bill is a step towards safety and well-being of
women and will enlarge the ambit and access of women to safe and legal abortion
without compromising on safety and quality of care. The proposal will also ensure
dignity, autonomy, confidentiality and justice for women who need to terminate
pregnancy.” (emphasis supplied) PART E

55. The Statement of Objects and Reasons indicates that the MTP Amendment Act 2021 is primarily
concerned with increasing access to safe and legal abortions to reduce maternal mortality and
morbidity. The increase in the upper gestational limit for terminating pregnancies under “certain
specified conditions” was considered necessary to fulfil the goal of ensuring “dignity, autonomy,
confidentiality and justice for women who need to terminate pregnancy.”

56. The unamended MTP Act of 1971 was largely concerned with “married women”, as evident from
paragraph 1 of its Statement of Objects and Reasons, which stated that most of the women seeking
abortions were married, and thus “under no particular necessity to conceal their pregnancy.”
Significantly, the 2021 Statement of Objects and Reasons does not make a distinction between
married and unmarried women. Rather, all women are entitled to the benefit of safe and legal
abortions.

57. This is consistent with the Reply of the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare to the Report on
‘Women’s Healthcare: Policy Options’ by the Committee on Empowerment of Women (2020-2021).
The Ministry responded that “to increase the access of safe abortion services to all women, the
provision of abortion services is proposed for all women irrespective of their marital status.” 59 The
Committee on Empowerment of Women had recommended a “raise [in] the permissible period of
abortions to 24 weeks” and the deletion of the word “married” in the legislation, so 59 Committee of
Empowerment of Women (2020-2021), “Fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the action
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report (Sixteenth Lok
Sabha) on Women’s Healthcare: Policy Options” (2021), at page 33 PART E that “anyone can get an
abortion without having to depend on sham clinics as a last recourse.”

58. The legislative history of the MTP Act, including the speech of the Minister of Health and Family
Welfare while introducing the Amendment Bill, sheds light on the social context which necessitated
the MTP Amendment Act 2021. Dr. Harsh Vardhan (who was, at the time, the Union Minister for
Health and Family Welfare) stated that the purpose of extending the upper gestational limit was to
strengthen access to comprehensive abortion care, 60 especially for special categories of women. 61
Elaborating on the prevailing circumstances, the Union Minister for Health and Family Welfare
stated that “26 petitions have been filed in the Supreme Court and over hundred petitions have been
filed before High Courts”, seeking permission for aborting pregnancies at a gestational age beyond
the twenty week limit. In view of this, the “long-awaited amendment” was introduced. 62
Responding to the objections raised on the inclusion of a woman and her partner instead of a
married woman and her husband, the Minister opined that in keeping abreast with the evolution of
social norms, the failure of contraceptive must encompass access to abortion facilities to all

25

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

women.63 Explaining the object behind this amendment, the Minister observed that taking into
consideration an ever-changing society, rights of single women, widows, and sex workers must be
considered. 64 After the amendment, the scheme of the MTP Act does not make a distinction
between married and unmarried women for the purpose of medical termination of 60 Lok Sabha
Debates, Seventeenth Series, Vol. VIII, Third Session, 2020/1041, No. 19 (17 March 2020), at page
271 (“Lok Sabha Debates, Seventeenth Series”) 61 Lok Sabha Debates, Seventeenth Series, at page
336 62 Lok Sabha Debates, Seventeenth Series, at page 272 63 Lok Sabha Debates, Seventeenth
Series, at page 337 64 Lok Sabha Debates, Seventeenth Series, at page 337 PART E pregnancies. The
Amendment Bill was termed as a “progressive legislation” introduced to uphold women’s right to
live with dignity. 65

59. A statutory text concerned with a significant aspect of the right to life and enhancing access to
reproductive rights should be given the widest construction. The legislative history of the MTP
Amendment Act 2021 provides insight into the hardship at which the amendment aimed. During the
Parliamentary debates concerning the MTP Amendment Act 2021, statistics were shared on the
connection between unsafe abortions and maternal deaths. The continuing crisis of unsafe abortions
looms large in the parliamentary history of the MTP Act since 1971. Unsafe abortions are a leading
but preventable cause of maternal mortality and morbidity. However, despite the enactment of the
MTP Act in 1971, unsafe abortions continue to be the third leading cause of maternal mortality, and
close to eight women in India die each day due to causes related to unsafe abortions.66 Another
study published in the BMJ Global Health points out to the grim statistics of unsafe abortions in
India: between the years 2007 and 2011, an estimate of 67% of abortions carried out were classified
as unsafe. 67 It further observes that disadvantaged women in India, including women from a lower
socio-economic status, are at a higher risk of undergoing unsafe abortions. By denying access to safe
abortion services, restrictive abortion laws have been shown to increase the incident of unsafe
abortions. 68 In view of the serious social malady due to illegal 65 Lok Sabha Debates, Seventeenth
Series, at page 274 66 United Nations Population Fund, “Seeing the Unseen: The case for action in
the neglected crisis of unintended pregnancy, State of World Populations” (2022) 67 Ryo Yokoe,
Choudhury SS, et al., Unsafe abortion and abortion-related death among 1.8 million women in
India, 4(3) BMJ Global Health (2019) 68 Jonathan Baerak, et al., Unintended pregnancy and
abortion by income, region, and the legal status of abortion:

estimates from a comprehensive model for 1990–2019, 8(9) Lancet Global Health
(2020) PART E and unsafe abortions, the MTP Amendment Act 2021 intended to
improve the availability and quality of legal abortion care for women by liberalizing
certain restrictive features of the unamended MTP Act and by increasing the legal
limit of the gestational period within which abortions could be conducted from
twenty to twenty-four weeks.

iv. The MTP Act as an aid of interpretation: Understanding “injury to mental health”

60. When interpreting a sub-clause or part of a statutory provision, the entire section
should be read together with different sub-clauses being a part of an integral whole.
69 In terms of Section 3(2)(b) of the MTP Act, not less than two RMPs must, in good

26

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

faith, be of the opinion that the continuation of the pregnancy of any woman who
falls within the ambit of Rule 3B would involve (i) a risk to her life; (ii) grave injury to
her physical health; or (iii) grave injury to her mental health.

Alternatively, not less than two RMPs must, in good faith, be of the opinion that there is a
substantial risk of the child suffering from a serious physical or mental abnormality, if born. Women
who seek to avail of the benefit under Rule 3B of the MTP Rules continue to be subject to the
requirements of Section 3(2) of the MTP Act.

61. One of the grounds on the basis of which termination of pregnancy may be carried out is when
the continuance of a pregnancy would involve risk of injury to the mental health of the woman. The
expression “grave injury to her physical or 69 Balasinor Nagrik Co-operative Bank Ltd. v. Bababhai
Shankerlal Pandya, (1987) 1 SCC 606; Madanlal Fakirchand v. Shree Changdeo Sugar Mills Ltd.,
1962 Supp (3) SCR 973 PART E mental health” used in Section 3(2) is used in an overarching and
all-encompassing sense. The two explanations appended to Section 3(2) provide the circumstances
under which the anguish caused by a pregnancy may be presumed to constitute a grave injury to the
mental health of a woman.

62. Courts in the country have permitted women to terminate their pregnancies where the length of
the pregnancy exceeded twenty weeks (the outer limit for the termination of the pregnancy in the
unamended MTP Act) by expansively interpreting Section 5, which permitted RMPs to terminate
pregnancies beyond the twenty week limit when it was necessary to save the life of the woman. In X
v. Union of India, 70 Mamta Verma v. Union of India,71 Meera Santosh Pal v. Union of India, 72
Sarmishtha Chakrabortty v. Union of India, 73 this Court permitted the termination of post twenty
week pregnancies after taking into account the risk of grave injury to the mental health of a pregnant
woman by carrying the pregnancy to term.

63. The grounds for approaching courts differ and include various reasons such as a change in the
circumstances of a woman’s environment during an ongoing pregnancy, including risk to life, 74
risk to mental health, 75 discovery of foetal anomalies, 76 late discovery of pregnancy in case of
minors and women with 70 (2017) 3 SCC 458 71 (2018) 14 SCC 289 72 (2017) 3 SCC 462 73 (2018)
13 SCC 339 74 A v. Union of India, (2018) 14 SCC 75; X v. Union of India, (2017) 3 SCC 458; Meera
Santosh Pal v. Union of India, (2017) 3 SCC 462; Tapasya Umesh Pisal v. Union of India, (2018) 12
SCC 57; Mamta Verma v. Union of India, (2018) 14 SCC 289 75 X v. Union of India, (2017) 3 SCC
458; Meera Santosh Pal v. Union of India, (2017) 3 SCC 462; Sarmishtha Chakrabortty v. Union of
India, (2018) 13 SCC 339; Mamta Verma v. Union of India, (2018) 14 SCC 289; Z v. State of Bihar,
(2018) 11 SCC 572 76 A v. Union of India, (2018) 14 SCC 75; Sarmishtha Chakrabortty v. Union of
India, (2018) 13 SCC 339; Tapasya Umesh Pisal v. Union of India, (2018) 12 SCC 57; Mamta Verma
v. Union of India, (2018) 14 SCC 289 PART E disabilities, 77 and pregnancies resulting from sexual
assault or rape. 78 These are illustrative situations thrown up by cases which travel to the court.
Although the rulings in these cases recognized grave physical and mental health harms and the
violation of the rights of women caused by the denial of the option to terminate unwanted
pregnancies, the relief provided to the individual petitioner significantly varied.

27

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

64. The expression “mental health” has a wide connotation and means much more than the absence
of a mental impairment or a mental illness. The World Health Organization defines mental health as
a state of “mental well-being that enables people to cope with the stresses of life, realize their
abilities, learn well and work well, and contribute to their community.” 79 The determination of the
status of one’s mental health is located in one’s self and experiences within one’s environment and
social context. Our understanding of the term mental health cannot be confined to medical terms or
medical language, but should be understood in common parlance. The MTP Act itself recognizes the
need to look at the surrounding environment of the woman when interpreting injury to her health.
Section 3(3) states that while interpreting “grave injury to her physical or mental health”, account
may be taken of the pregnant woman’s actual or reasonably foreseeable environment. The
consideration of a woman’s “actual or reasonably foreseeable environment” becomes pertinent,
especially when determining the risk of injury to the mental health of a woman.

77 X v. Union of India, (2020) 19 SCC 806 78 Z v. State of Bihar, (2018) 11 SCC 572; X v. Union of
India, (2020) 19 SCC 806 79 World Health Organization, “Promoting mental health: concepts,
emerging evidence, practice (Summary Report)” PART E

65. There have been numerous decisions of the High Courts where a purposive interpretation is
given to the phrase mental health as used in the MTP Act. In High Court on its Own Motion v. State
of Maharashtra,80 the High Court of Bombay correctly held that compelling a woman to continue
any unwanted pregnancy violates a woman’s bodily integrity, aggravates her mental trauma and has
a deleterious effect on the mental health of the woman because of the immediate social, financial
and other consequences flowing from the pregnancy.

66. In Sidra Mehboob Shaikh v. State of Maharashtra, 81 the High Court of Bombay permitted the
petitioner to undergo medical termination of her pregnancy on the ground that compelling her to
continue with her unwanted pregnancy would be oppressive, and would likely cause a grave injury
to her mental health. The petitioner, a victim of domestic violence, had approached the court to
allow her to undergo an abortion as she pleaded that she did not want to raise a child in the absence
of financial and emotional support from her husband; and raising a child on her own would be
burdensome. The High Court observed that “mental state of a person is a continuum with good
mental health being at one end and diagnosable mental illness at the opposite end. Therefore,
mental health and mental illness, although sound similar, are not the same.” 82

67. We note the correct interpretation adopted in two other judgments from the Bombay High
Court, where the Court permitted unmarried petitioners to abort, after purposively construing the
effects of carrying an unwanted pregnancy on the 80 2016 SCC OnLine Bom 8426 81 2021 SCC
Online Bom 1839 82 2021 SCC Online Bom 1839, at paragraph 22 PART E mental health of a
woman. In XYZ v. State of Maharashtra,83 an unmarried petitioner aged about 18 years was allowed
to terminate her pregnancy in the 26th week after considering her socio-economic condition, and
the impact of the continuation of pregnancy on her mental health. In Siddhi Vishwanath Shelar v.
State of Maharashtra, 84 a twenty-three year old petitioner contended that she was not mentally
ready to be an unwed mother and sought the termination of her pregnancy of approximately
twenty-three weeks. The Petitioner was engaged in a consensual relationship but had since parted

28

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

ways from her partner, and thus wanted to terminate the unwanted pregnancy. While permitting the
abortion, the High Court of Bombay observed that insisting upon continuance of pregnancy would
involve a grave injury to the petitioner’s health. The High Court took note of the woman’s
submissions regarding her actual and foreseeable environment.

v. Construing Rule 3B

68. By framing Rule 3B, the legislature intended to solve the mischief, so to speak, of women being
unable to access abortions when their lives underwent significant changes impacting their physical
and mental health, and their decision to have a child was impacted after the length of the pregnancy
exceeded twenty weeks. The Minutes of the Meeting of the Expert Committee held on 22 June 2021
for deliberating upon and drafting the MTP Rules dealt with, inter alia, category of women under
Rule 3B. The members of the Expert Committee suggested different categories of women such as
“survivors of sexual violence/ rape; mentally challenged women, minors, women with disabilities;
foetal anomalies; conception 83 Judgment dated 6 October 2021 in WP(L) 21977 of 2021 (Bombay
High Court) 84 2020 SCC OnLine Bom 11672 PART E in lactational amenorrhea period; single
women (such as unwed women (major), divorced and widowed, separated women); women who are
facing difficulties in contexts of humanitarian setting/ emergencies and/or natural disasters; women
victims of domestic violence/ gender-based violence etc.” The members of the Expert Committee
urged the inclusion of women in Rule 3B, who often delay revealing the pregnancy or making
decisions as to its continuance, for various reasons.

69. The common thread running through each category of women mentioned in Rule 3B is that the
woman is in a unique and often difficult circumstance, with respect to her physical, mental, social,
or financial state. All the different categories in Rule 3B represent women who seek an abortion after
twenty weeks either due to a delay in recognizing pregnancy, or some other change in their
environment impacting their decision on whether the pregnancy is wanted or unwanted. The law
recognizes the myriad ways in which a pregnancy may cause distress in such situations and cause
grave injury to her physical and mental health. It gives such women latitude in seeking out the
termination of an unwelcome pregnancy by extending the gestational period up to which the
termination is legally permissible.

70. Rule 3B(a) is based on an acknowledgement of the reality that survivors of sexual assault, rape,
or incest may face immense stigma if and when they share the fact of their assault with others,
including family members. It is no secret that a culture of shame surrounds sexual violence in India.
Survivors are often hesitant to speak about the violence inflicted upon them. This is doubly the case
with victims of incestuous sexual assault or rape, whose close relatives abuse their power and PART
E authority over the woman and other family members oftentimes being unwilling to believe that
the perpetrator (that is to say, their relative) is guilty of sexual violence. Many survivors, including
minors, may not even be aware that pregnancy is a possible consequence of rape. Hence, the delay
in revealing the fact that a man has raped them may lead to a delay in discovering the pregnancy.
Alternatively, the woman in question may be unable to access medical facilities in a timely fashion
and may therefore find herself unable to terminate the pregnancy before the completion of twenty
weeks.

29

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

71. Married women may also form part of the class of survivors of sexual assault or rape. The
ordinary meaning of the word ‘rape’ is sexual intercourse with a person, without their consent or
against their will, regardless of whether such forced intercourse occurs in the context of matrimony.
A woman may become pregnant as a result of non-consensual sexual intercourse performed upon
her by her husband. We would be remiss in not recognizing that intimate partner violence is a
reality and can take the form of rape. The misconception that strangers are exclusively or almost
exclusively responsible for sex- and gender-based violence is a deeply regrettable one. Sex- and
gender-based violence (in all its forms) within the context of the family has long formed a part of the
lived experiences of scores of women.

72. Existing Indian laws recognize various forms of familial violence – the Pre- Conception and
Pre-Natal Diagnostic Techniques Act 1994 criminalises the communication of the sex of the foetus
to the pregnant woman or her relatives. Section 498A of the IPC criminalises physical, mental, and
emotional abuse. The PART E Dowry Prohibition Act 1961 criminalises the giving and taking of
dowry (a form of economic and social violence). Physical abuse or sexual abuse by family members
and female infanticide are also criminalized under the IPC. Marital assault merely forms a part of a
long list of deeds that amount to violence in the context of the family.

73. It is not inconceivable that married women become pregnant as a result of their husbands
having “raped” them. The nature of sexual violence and the contours of consent do not undergo a
transformation when one decides to marry. The institution of marriage does not influence the
answer to the question of whether a woman has consented to sexual relations. If the woman is in an
abusive relationship, she may face great difficulty in accessing medical resources or consulting
doctors.

74. It is only by a legal fiction that Exception 2 to Section 375 of the IPC removes marital rape from
the ambit of rape, as defined in Section 375. Understanding “rape” under the MTP Act and the rules
framed thereunder as including marital rape does not have the effect of striking down Exception 2 to
Section 375 of the IPC or changing the contours of the offence of rape as defined in the IPC. Since
the challenge to Exception 2 to Section 375 of the IPC is pending consideration before a different
Bench of this Court, we would leave the constitutional validity to be decided in that or any other
appropriate proceeding. PART E

75. Notwithstanding Exception 2 to Section 375 of the IPC, 85 the meaning of the words “sexual
assault” or “rape” in Rule 3B(a) includes a husband’s act of sexual assault or rape committed on his
wife. The meaning of rape must therefore be understood as including marital rape, solely for the
purposes of the MTP Act and any rules and regulations framed thereunder. Any other interpretation
would have the effect of compelling a woman to give birth to and raise a child with a partner who
inflicts mental and physical harm upon her.

76. In order to avail the benefit of Rule 3B(a), the woman need not necessarily seek recourse to
formal legal proceedings to prove the factum of sexual assault, rape or incest. Neither Explanation 2
to Section 3(2) nor Rule 3B(a) require that the offender be convicted under the IPC or any other
criminal law for the time being in force before the pregnant woman can access an abortion. Further,

30

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

there is no requirement that an FIR must be registered or the allegation of rape must be proved in a
court of law or some other forum before it can be considered true for the purposes of the MTP Act.
Such a requirement would be contrary to the object and purpose of the MTP Act. In fact,
Explanation 2 triggers the legal presumption as to mental trauma “where any pregnancy is alleged
by the pregnant woman to have been caused by rape.”

77. Rule 3B(b) includes minors within the category of women who may terminate their pregnancy
up to twenty-four weeks. They have been included in the list of special categories of women because
adolescents who engage in consensual 85 See Exception 2 to Section 375, IPC – Sexual intercourse
by a man with his own wife, the wife not being under fifteen years of age, is not rape. It is to be noted
that in Independent Thought v. Union of India (2017) 10 SCC 800, this Court read Exception 2 to
Section 375 down such that the words “eighteen years” replaced the words “fifteen years” thereby
raising the age of consent to eighteen years, notwithstanding the marital status of the woman. PART
E sexual activity may be unaware that sexual intercourse often results in pregnancy or be unable to
identify the signs of a pregnancy. The Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act 2012 86 is
gender neutral and criminalizes sexual activity by those below the age of eighteen. Under the POCSO
Act, factual consent in a relationship between minors is immaterial. The proscription contained in
the POCSO Act does not – in actuality – prevent adolescents from engaging in consensual sexual
activity. We cannot disregard the truth that such activity continues to take place and sometimes
leads to consequences such as pregnancy. The legislature was no doubt alive to this fact when it
included adolescents within the ambit of Rule 3B of the MTP Rules.

78. The absence of sexual health education in the country means that most adolescents are unaware
of how the reproductive system functions as well as how contraceptive devices and methods may be
deployed to prevent pregnancies. The taboos surrounding pre-marital sex prevent young adults
from attempting to access contraceptives. The same taboos mean that young girls who have
discovered the fact that they are pregnant are hesitant to reveal this to their parents or guardians,
who play a crucial role in accessing medical assistance and intervention.

79. Furthermore, Section 19(1) of the POCSO Act requires that any person, including a child, who
has knowledge of the commission of an offence punishable under the POCSO Act, or an
apprehension that such an offence may be committed, is mandatorily required to provide
information to the Special Juvenile Police Unit or the local police. Section 19(2) of the POCSO Act
stipulates that every 86 “POCSO Act” PART E such report under Section 19(1) shall be ascribed an
entry number and recorded in writing, read over to the informant, and entered in a book to be kept
by the police unit. Failure to report, as mandated by Section 19, is a punishable offence under
Section 21 of the POCSO Act. Neither the POCSO Act nor the Protection of Children from Sexual
Offences Rules 2012 prescribe a template or a format for the report mandated under Section 19(1).

80. When a minor approaches an RMP for a medical termination of pregnancy arising out of a
consensual sexual activity, an RMP is obliged under Section 19(1) of the POCSO Act to provide
information pertaining to the offence committed, to the concerned authorities. An adolescent and
her guardian may be wary of the mandatory reporting requirement as they may not want to entangle
themselves with the legal process. Minors and their guardians are likely faced with two options –

31

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

one, approach an RMP and possibly be involved in criminal proceedings under the POCSO Act, or
two, approach an unqualified doctor for a medical termination of the pregnancy. If there is an
insistence on the disclosure of the name of the minor in the report under Section 19(1) of POCSO,
minors may be less likely to seek out RMPs for safe termination of their pregnancies under the MTP
Act.

81. To ensure that the benefit of Rule 3B(b) is extended to all women under 18 years of age who
engage in consensual sexual activity, it is necessary to harmoniously read both the POCSO Act and
the MTP Act. For the limited purposes of providing medical termination of pregnancy in terms of
the MTP Act, we clarify that the RMP, only on request of the minor and the guardian of the minor,
need not disclose the identity and other personal details of the minor in the information PART E
provided under Section 19(1) of the POCSO Act. The RMP who has provided information under
Section 19(1) of the POCSO Act (in reference to a minor seeking medical termination of a pregnancy
under the MTP Act) is also exempt from disclosing the minor’s identity in any criminal proceedings
which may follow from the RMP’s report under Section 19(1) of the POCSO Act. Such an
interpretation would prevent any conflict between the statutory obligation of the RMP to
mandatorily report the offence under the POCSO Act and the rights of privacy and reproductive
autonomy of the minor under Article 21 of the Constitution. It could not possibly be the legislature’s
intent to deprive minors of safe abortions.

82. As opposed to consensual sexual activity among adolescents, minors are often subjected to
sexual abuse by strangers or family members. In such cases, minor girls may (due to their tender
age) be unaware of the nature of abuse the abuser or rapist is subjecting them to. In such cases, the
guardian of minor girls may belatedly discover the fact of the pregnancy, necessitating the leeway
granted by Rule 3B.

83. Rule 3B(d) includes women with physical disabilities within the special category of women. They
may face additional complications arising from their disabilities and be unable to carry the
pregnancy to term. They may also decide against carrying their pregnancy to term due to any
personal difficulties (mental or physical) which may arise from their disability, either directly or
indirectly.

84. Women who are mentally ill (including “mental retardation”) are covered by Rule 3B(e). It
extends to all categories of women who have mental illness. Women with mental illnesses may
realize the fact of their pregnancy or determine that they PART E do not want to carry it to term,
later than usual. Further, men often sexually assault women with mental illnesses, especially if they
have speech or communication disabilities, or reside in psychiatric care facilities. Their speech /
communication disability may inhibit them from expressing that somebody has raped them. This
may lead to a delay in the discovery of the pregnancy and its termination. This was found to be the
case in X v. Union of India,87 where a woman with Down’s Syndrome had been raped by an
unknown person. Her guardian discovered the pregnancy after the passage of twenty weeks.

85. Rule 3B(f) includes that class of women where foetal anomalies have a substantial risk of being
incompatible with life or where the child, if born, may suffer from physical or mental

32

“abnormalities” and be seriously handicapped.

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

86. Rule 3B(g) comprehends within its fold a change in the material circumstances of the pregnant
woman by accounting for pregnant women in “humanitarian settings or disaster or emergency
situations.” Refugees who have had to flee their homes for any reason or those who find themselves
the victims of a natural or man-made disaster, or otherwise in an emergency would fall within the
ambit of this rule. They may not realise that they are pregnant due to difficulty in accessing medical
facilities. For instance, in Siddhi Vishwanath Shelar (supra), the petitioner was unable to visit a
doctor due to the lockdown instituted by the government in light of the COVID-19 pandemic and
became aware of her pregnancy only after twenty weeks had elapsed.

87 2017 SCC OnLine Bom 9334 PART E

87. Further, the decision to give birth to and raise a child is necessarily informed by one’s material
circumstances. By this, we mean the situational, social, and financial circumstances of a woman or
her family may be relevant to her decision to carry the pregnancy to term. Those who fall victim to
emergencies or disasters may unexpectedly find themselves without a home or separated from their
families. They may have lost loved ones. Their livelihood may be adversely affected and they may
undergo other deeply impactful changes in their lives, both material and psychological. The
possibility that they have suffered grave injuries which alter their mobility or quality of life cannot
be discounted. The myriad changes that may take place in the aftermath of a disaster, emergency, or
humanitarian crisis cannot be exhaustively listed or envisaged. Each woman’s circumstances are
unique and we have merely listed (by way of illustration) some of the many potential repercussions
of the catastrophes accounted for in Rule 3B(g).

88. A woman in such situations may have decided to have a child before the emergency or disaster
which changed her material circumstances. However, this change may understandably impact each
woman’s evaluation of her ability to raise a child as well as her willingness to carry the pregnancy to
term. While many women may decide to carry the pregnancy to term, others may no longer find the
pregnancy to be a viable or practical option. It is ultimately the prerogative of each woman to
evaluate her life and arrive at the best course of action, in view of the changes to her material
circumstances.

89. Rule 3B(c) states that a “change in the marital status during the ongoing pregnancy (widowhood
and divorce)” renders women eligible for termination of PART E their pregnancy under Section
3(2)(b). The impact of the continuance of an unwanted pregnancy on a woman’s physical or mental
health should take into consideration various social, economic, and cultural factors operating in her
actual or reasonably foreseeable environment, as provided in Section 3(3). The rationale behind
Rule 3B(c) is comparable to the rationale for Rule 3B(g) i.e., a change in a woman’s material
circumstances during the ongoing pregnancy.

90. Rule 3B(c) is based on the broad recognition of the fact that a change in the marital status of a
woman often leads to a change in her material circumstances. A change in material circumstance
during the ongoing pregnancy may arise when a married woman divorces her husband or when he

33

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

dies, as recognized by the examples provided in parenthesis in Rule 3B(c). The fact that widowhood
and divorce are mentioned in brackets at the tail end of Rule 3B(c) does not hinder our
interpretation of the rule because they are illustrative.

91. A change in material circumstance may also result when a woman is abandoned by her family or
her partner. When a woman separates from or divorces her partner, it may be that she is in a
different (and possibly less advantageous) position financially. She may no longer have the financial
resources to raise a child. This is of special concern to women who have opted to be a homemaker
thereby forgoing an income of their own. Moreover, a woman in this situation may not be prepared
to raise a child as a single parent or by coparenting with her former partner. Similar consequences
may follow when a woman’s partner dies.

92. Women may undergo a sea change in their lives for reasons other than a separation with their
partner (Rule 3B(c)), detection of foetal “abnormalities” (Rule PART E 3B(f)), or a disaster or
emergency (Rule 3B(g)). They may find themselves in the same position (socially, mentally,
financially, or even physically) as the other categories of women enumerated in Rule 3B but for
other reasons. For instance, it is not unheard of for a woman to realise that she is pregnant only
after the passage of twenty weeks. 88 Other examples are if a woman loses her job and is no longer
financially secure, or if domestic violence is perpetrated against her,89 or if she suddenly has
dependents to support. Moreover, a woman may suddenly be diagnosed with an acute or chronic or
life-threatening disease, which impacts her decision on whether to carry the pregnancy to term. If
Rule 3B(c) was to be interpreted such that its benefits extended only to married women, it would
perpetuate the stereotype and socially held notion that only married women indulge in sexual
intercourse, and that consequently, the benefits in law ought to extend only to them. This artificial
distinction between married and single women is not constitutionally sustainable. The benefits in
law extend equally to both single and married women.

93. A recognition of the fact that there may be a change in a woman’s material circumstance
animates Rule 3B(c), Rule 3B(g) and Rule 3B(f). However, Rule 3B does not enumerate all the
potential changes that a woman’s material circumstances may undergo. It merely specifies some of
the potential changes to a woman’s material circumstances, in sub-rules (c), (f) and (g). From the
object and purpose of the MTP Act, its overall scheme, and the categories of women specified in
Rule 3B, it is evident that it was not the intention of the legislature to 88 Siddhi Vishwanath Shelar
v. State of Maharashtra, 2020 SCC OnLine Bom 11672 89 Sidra Mehboob Shaikh v. State of
Maharashtra, 2021 SCC OnLine Bom 1839 PART F restrict the benefit of Section 3(2)(b) and Rule
3B only to women who may be confronted with a material alteration in the circumstances of their
lives in the limited situations enumerated in Rule 3B. Rather, the benefit granted by Rule 3B must
be understood as extending to all women who undergo a change of material circumstances.

94. It is not possible for either the legislature or the courts to list each of the potential events which
would qualify as a change of material circumstances. Suffice it to say that each case must be tested
against this standard with due regard to the unique facts and circumstances that a pregnant woman
finds herself in. F. Constitutional values animating the interpretation of the MTP Act and the MTP
Rules

34

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

95. Certain constitutional values, such as the right to reproductive autonomy, the right to live a
dignified life, the right to equality, and the right to privacy have animated our interpretation of the
MTP Act and the MTP Rules. A brief discussion of these values is undertaken below.

i. The right to reproductive autonomy

96. The ambit of reproductive rights is not restricted to the right of women to have or not have
children. It also includes the constellation of freedoms and entitlements that enable a woman to
decide freely on all matters relating to her sexual and reproductive health. Reproductive rights
include the right to access education and information about contraception and sexual health, the
right to decide whether and what type of contraceptives to use, the right to choose whether PART F
and when to have children, the right to choose the number of children, the right to access safe and
legal abortions, and the right to reproductive healthcare. Women must also have the autonomy to
make decisions concerning these rights, free from coercion or violence.

97. Zakiya Luna has, in a 2020 publication, argued that reproduction is both biological and political.
90 According to Luna, it is biological since physical bodies reproduce, and it is political since the
decision on whether to reproduce or not is not solely a private matter. This decision is intimately
linked to wider political, social, and economic structures. A woman’s role and status in family, and
society generally, is often tied to childbearing and ensuring the continuation of successive
generations.

98. To this, we may add that a woman is often enmeshed in complex notions of family, community,
religion, and caste. Such external societal factors affect the way a woman exercises autonomy and
control over her body, particularly in matters relating to reproductive decisions. Societal factors
often find reinforcement by way of legal barriers restricting a woman’s right to access abortion. The
decision to have or not to have an abortion is borne out of complicated life circumstances, which
only the woman can choose on her own terms without external interference or influence.
Reproductive autonomy requires that every pregnant woman has the intrinsic right to choose to
undergo or not to undergo abortion without any consent or authorization from a third party.

90ZAKIYA LUNA, REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS AS HUMAN RIGHTS: WOMEN OF COLOR AND
FIGHT FOR REPRODUCTIVE JUSTICE (NYU Press, 2020) PART F

99. The right to reproductive autonomy is closely linked with the right to bodily autonomy. As the
term itself suggests, bodily autonomy is the right to take decisions about one’s body. The
consequences of an unwanted pregnancy on a woman’s body as well as her mind cannot be
understated. The foetus relies on the pregnant woman’s body for sustenance and nourishment until
it is born. The biological process of pregnancy transforms the woman’s body to permit this. The
woman may experience swelling, body ache, contractions, morning sickness, and restricted mobility,
to name a few of a host of side effects. Further, complications may arise which pose a risk to the life
of the woman. A mere description of the side effects of a pregnancy cannot possibly do justice to the
visceral image of forcing a woman to continue with an unwanted pregnancy. Therefore, the decision
to carry the pregnancy to its full term or terminate it is firmly rooted in the right to bodily autonomy

35

and decisional autonomy of the pregnant woman.

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

100. In K S Puttaswamy v. Union of India,91 a nine-judge bench of this Court recognized the right to
privacy as a constitutionally protected right under Article 21 of the Constitution. In Puttaswamy
(supra), this Court held that the right to privacy enables individuals to retain and exercise autonomy
over the body and mind. The autonomy of the individual was defined as “the ability to make decision
on vital matters of concern to life.” 92 The judgement delivered on behalf of four judges described
the right to privacy in the following terms:

“297. … Privacy postulates the reservation of a private space for the individual,
described as the right to be let alone. The concept is founded on the autonomy of the
individual. The ability of an individual to make choices lies 91 (2017) 10 SCC 1 92 KS
Puttaswamy v. Union of India (2017) 10 SCC 1, at paragraph 298 (“Puttaswamy”)
PART F at the core of the human personality. The notion of privacy enables the
individual to assert and control the human element which is inseparable from the
personality of the individual. The inviolable nature of the human personality is
manifested in the ability to make decisions on matters intimate to human life. The
autonomy of the individual is associated over matters which can be kept private.
These are concerns over which there is a legitimate expectation of privacy. The body
and the mind are inseparable elements of the human personality. The integrity of the
body and the sanctity of the mind can exist on the foundation that each individual
possesses an inalienable ability and right to preserve a private space in which the
human personality can develop. Without the ability to make choices, the inviolability
of the personality would be in doubt.” (emphasis supplied)

101. Importantly, Puttaswamy (supra) also deals with facets of reproductive autonomy.
Chelameshwar, J. held that a “woman’s freedom of choice whether to bear a child or abort her
pregnancy are areas which fall in the realm of privacy.”93 This Court recognized the right to bodily
integrity as an important facet of the right to privacy. Puttaswamy (supra) considered Suchita
Srivastava v. Chandigarh Administration 94 to reiterate that the statutory right of a woman to
undergo termination of pregnancy under the MTP Act is relatable to the constitutional right to make
reproductive choices under Article 21 of the Constitution.95

102. In Suchita Srivastava (supra) this Court explicitly recognized the concept of reproductive
autonomy. In this case, the victim, an orphaned woman of around 19 years, with mental retardation,
became pregnant as a result of a rape that took place while she was an inmate at a government-run
welfare institution. After the 93 Puttaswamy, at paragraph 373 94 (2009) 9 SCC 1 95 Puttaswamy, at
paragraph 82 PART F discovery of her pregnancy, the Chandigarh Administration approached the
High Court of Punjab and Haryana seeking approval for the termination of her pregnancy. The High
Court constituted an expert body to conduct an enquiry into the facts. The expert body recorded that
the victim had expressed her willingness to bear the child and accordingly recommended the
continuation of the pregnancy. However, the High Court directed the termination of the pregnancy
on the ground that the victim was mentally incapable of making an informed decision on her own.

36

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

103. A three-judge Bench of this Court disagreed with the High Court’s decision. In a judgment
authored by K G Balakrishnan, C.J., this Court emphasized that the consent of the pregnant woman
is an essential requirement to proceed with the termination of a pregnancy under the MTP Act. It
was held that the state administration cannot claim guardianship of the woman as she was a major.
It was further held that the woman only had “mild mental retardation” and was therefore competent
to give her consent in terms of Section 3(4)(a) of the MTP Act. This Court concluded that the state
must respect the reproductive rights of women with “mental retardation” with regard to decisions
about terminating their pregnancy. In the process, this Court recognized that a woman’s right to
reproductive autonomy is a dimension of Article 21 of the Constitution:

“22. There is no doubt that a woman's right to make reproductive choices is also a
dimension of “personal liberty” as understood under Article 21 of the Constitution of
India. It is important to recognise that reproductive choices can be exercised to
procreate as well as to abstain from procreating. The crucial consideration is that a
woman's right to privacy, dignity and bodily integrity should be respected. This
means that there should be no restriction whatsoever on the exercise of reproductive
choices such as a woman's right to refuse participation in sexual activity or
alternatively the insistence on use of PART F contraceptive methods. Furthermore,
women are also free to choose birth control methods such as undergoing sterilisation
procedures. Taken to their logical conclusion, reproductive rights include a woman's
entitlement to carry a pregnancy to its full term, to give birth and to subsequently
raise children. However, in the case of pregnant women there is also a “compelling
State interest” in protecting the life of the prospective child. Therefore, the
termination of a pregnancy is only permitted when the conditions specified in the
applicable statute have been fulfilled. Hence, the provisions of the MTP Act, 1971 can
also be viewed as reasonable restrictions that have been placed on the exercise of
reproductive choices.”

104. Suchita Srivastava (supra) rightly recognised that the right of women to make reproductive
choices is a dimension of personal liberty under Article 21. It held that reproductive rights include a
woman’s entitlement to carry the pregnancy to full term, give birth, and raise children. More
importantly, it also recognised that the right to reproductive choice also includes the right not to
procreate. In doing so, it situated the reproductive rights of women within the core of constitutional
rights.

105. Decisional autonomy is an integral part of the right to privacy. Decisional autonomy is the
ability to make decisions in respect of intimate relations.96 In Puttaswamy (supra) this Court held
that personal aspects of life such as family, marriage, procreation, and sexual orientation are all
intrinsic to the dignity of the individual. 97 The right to privacy safeguards and respects the
decisional autonomy of the individual to exercise intimate personal choices and control over the
vital aspects of their body and life. In Common Cause v. Union of India, 98 this Court observed that
right to privacy protects decisional autonomy in matters related to bodily integrity:

37

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

96 Puttaswamy, at paragraph 248 97 Puttaswamy, at paragraph 298 98 (2018) 5 SCC
1 PART F “441. The right to privacy resides in the right to liberty and in the respect of
autonomy. The right to privacy protects autonomy in making decisions related to the
intimate domain of death as well as bodily integrity. Few moments could be of as
much importance as the intimate and private decisions that we are faced regarding
death. Continuing treatment against the wishes of a patient is not only a violation of
the principle of informed consent, but also of bodily privacy and bodily integrity that
have been recognised as a facet of privacy by this Court.”

106. The right to decisional autonomy also means that women may choose the course of their lives.
Besides physical consequences, unwanted pregnancies which women are forced to carry to term may
have cascading effects for the rest of her life by interrupting her education, her career, or affecting
her mental well- being.

107. In High Court on its Own Motion (supra), an under-trial prisoner requisitioned for obtaining
permission to terminate her 4-month pregnancy to a judge of the City Civil & Sessions Court visiting
the prison. The woman stated that it would be too difficult for her to maintain another child in
addition to her five-month- old child, who was suffering from various malaises such as epilepsy,
hernia and other illnesses. In such circumstances, the woman stated that it was difficult for her to
maintain and take care of another child. The judge forwarded a letter to the High Court of Bombay
along with the woman’s requisition for information and further action, which was converted into a
suo moto PIL. The High Court referred to the relevant provisions of the MTP Act to observe that
mental health can deteriorate if the pregnancy is forced or unwanted:

“14. A woman's decision to terminate a pregnancy is not a frivolous one. Abortion is
often the only way out of a very difficult situation for a woman. An abortion is a
carefully considered decision taken by a woman who fears that the PART F welfare of
the child she already has, and of other members of the household that she is obliged
to care for with limited financial and other resources, may be compromised by the
birth of another child. These are decisions taken by responsible women who have few
other options. They are women who would ideally have preferred to prevent an
unwanted pregnancy, but were unable to do so. If a woman does not want to continue
with the pregnancy, then forcing her to do so represents a violation of the woman's
bodily integrity and aggravates her mental trauma which would be deleterious to her
mental health.”

108. A woman can become pregnant by choice irrespective of her marital status. In case the
pregnancy is wanted, it is equally shared by both the partners. However, in case of an unwanted or
incidental pregnancy, the burden invariably falls on the pregnant woman affecting her mental and
physical health. Article 21 of the Constitution recognizes and protects the right of a woman to
undergo termination of pregnancy if her mental or physical health is at stake. Importantly, it is the
woman alone who has the right over her body and is the ultimate decision- maker on the question of
whether she wants to undergo an abortion.

38

ii. The right to dignity

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

109. The right to dignity encapsulates the right of every individual to be treated as a self-governing
entity having intrinsic value. It means that every human being possesses dignity merely by being a
human, and can make self-defining and self- determining choices. Dignity has been recognized as a
core component of the right to life and liberty under Article 21.

110. If women with unwanted pregnancies are forced to carry their pregnancies to term, the state
would be stripping them of the right to determine the immediate and long-term path their lives
would take. Depriving women of autonomy not only PART F over their bodies but also over their
lives would be an affront to their dignity. The right to choose for oneself – be it as significant as
choosing the course of one’s life or as mundane as one’s day-to-day activities – forms a part of the
right to dignity. It is this right which would be under attack if women were forced to continue with
unwanted pregnancies.

111. In Kesavananda Bharati v. State of Kerala, 99 it was held that dignity forms a part of the basic
structure of the Constitution. Such is its fundamental value in our legal system - the concept of
dignity forms the very foundation to the Constitution and the rights enshrined in it. Dignity inheres
in every individual and is an inalienable aspect of one’s humanity.

112. In Francis Coralie Mullin v. Administrator, Union Territory of Delhi, 100 a two-judge bench of
this Court was dealing with the rights of detenus under the Conservation of Foreign Exchange and
Prevention of Smuggling Activities Act. This Court recognized that the right to dignity is an essential
part of the right to life under Article 21 of the Constitution. It was observed:

“8. … We think that the right to life includes the right to live with human dignity and
all that goes along with it, namely, the bare necessaries of life such as adequate
nutrition, clothing and shelter and facilities for reading, writing and expressing
oneself in diverse forms, freely moving about and mixing and commingling with
fellow human beings. Of course, the magnitude and content of the components of this
right would depend upon the extent of the economic development of the country, but
it must, in any view of the matter, include the right to the basic necessities of life and
also the right to carry on such functions and activities as constitute the bare
minimum expression of the human-self. Every act which offends against or impairs
human dignity would constitute deprivation pro tanto of this right to live 99 (1973) 4
SCC 225 100 (1981) 1 SCC 608 PART F and it would have to be in accordance with
reasonable, fair and just procedure established by law which stands the test of other
fundamental rights.”

113. In Puttaswamy (supra) one of us (Dr. D Y Chandrachud, J.) emphasized the interlinkage
between privacy, dignity, and liberty as follows:

“298. Privacy of the individual is an essential aspect of dignity. Dignity has both an
intrinsic and instrumental value. As an intrinsic value, human dignity is an

39

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

entitlement or a constitutionally protected interest in itself. In its instrumental facet,
dignity and freedom are inseparably intertwined, each being a facilitative tool to
achieve the other. The ability of the individual to protect a zone of privacy enables the
realisation of the full value of life and liberty. Liberty has a broader meaning of which
privacy is a subset. All liberties may not be exercised in privacy. Yet others can be
fulfilled only within a private space. Privacy enables the individual to retain the
autonomy of the body and mind. The autonomy of the individual is the ability to
make decisions on vital matters of concern to life. Privacy has not been couched as an
independent fundamental right. ... The intersection between one's mental integrity
and privacy entitles the individual to freedom of thought, the freedom to believe in
what is right, and the freedom of self-determination. When these guarantees intersect
with gender, they create a private space which protects all those elements which are
crucial to gender identity. The family, marriage, procreation and sexual orientation
are all integral to the dignity of the individual. Above all, the privacy of the individual
recognises an inviolable right to determine how freedom shall be exercised. … Dignity
cannot exist without privacy. Both reside within the inalienable values of life, liberty
and freedom which the Constitution has recognised.”

114. In Navtej Singh Johar (supra), this Court read down Section 377 of the IPC insofar as it
criminalized consensual sexual conduct between adults of same sex. Importantly, this Court also
recognised that the members of the LGBTQ+ community are entitled to a full range of constitutional
rights protected under the Constitution, including the right to dignity. Dipak Misra, CJ indicated the
importance of dignity:

PART F “144. Dignity is that component of one's being without which sustenance of
his/her being to the fullest or completest is inconceivable. In the theatre of life,
without possession of the attribute of identity with dignity, the entity may be allowed
entry to the centre stage but would be characterised as a spineless entity or, for that
matter, projected as a ruling king without the sceptre. The purpose of saying so is
that the identity of every individual attains the quality of an “individual being” only if
he/she has the dignity. Dignity while expressive of choice is averse to creation of any
dent. When biological expression, be it an orientation or optional expression of
choice, is faced with impediment, albeit through any imposition of law, the
individual's natural and constitutional right is dented. Such a situation urges the
conscience of the final constitutional arbiter to demolish the obstruction and remove
the impediment so as to allow the full blossoming of the natural and constitutional
rights of individuals. This is the essence of dignity and we say, without any inhibition,
that it is our constitutional duty to allow the individual to behave and conduct
himself/herself as he/she desires and allow him/her to express himself/herself, of
course, with the consent of the other. That is the right to choose without fear. It has
to be ingrained as a necessary prerequisite that consent is the real fulcrum of any
sexual relationship.” (emphasis supplied)

40

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

115. In Independent Thought v. Union of India, 101 this Court held that sexual intercourse with a
girl below 18 years of age is rape regardless of whether or not she is married. This Court
emphatically rejected the argument that the state had a compelling state interest in preserving the
institution of marriage (even child marriages), and observed that the impact of Exception 2 to
Section 375 IPC has to be considered with the social realities of the present. It is important to note
that the broader issue of marital rape of adult women was not dealt with since the issue was not
specifically raised in that case. In the context of right to dignity, it was observed:

101 (2017) 10 SCC 800 PART G “90. We must not and cannot forget the existence of
Article 21 of the Constitution which gives a fundamental right to a girl child to live a
life of dignity. The documentary material placed before us clearly suggests that an
early marriage takes away the self-esteem and confidence of a girl child and subjects
her, in a sense, to sexual abuse. Under no circumstances can it be said that such a girl
child lives a life of dignity. The right of a girl child to maintain her bodily integrity is
effectively destroyed by a traditional practice sanctified by IPC. Her husband, for the
purposes of Section 375 IPC, effectively has full control over her body and can subject
her to sexual intercourse without her consent or without her willingness since such
an activity would not be rape. Anomalously, although her husband can rape her but
he cannot molest her for if he does so he could be punished under the provisions of
IPC. This was recognised by LCI in its 172nd Report but was not commented upon. It
appears therefore that different and irrational standards have been laid down for the
treatment of the girl child by her husband and it is necessary to harmonise the
provisions of various statutes and also harmonise different provisions of IPC inter
se.”

116. In the context of abortion, the right to dignity entails recognising the competence and authority
of every woman to take reproductive decisions, including the decision to terminate the pregnancy.
Although human dignity inheres in every individual, it is susceptible to violation by external
conditions and treatment imposed by the state. The right of every woman to make reproductive
choices without undue interference from the state is central to the idea of human dignity.
Deprivation of access to reproductive healthcare or emotional and physical well- being also injures
the dignity of women.

G. Purposive interpretation of Rule 3B furthers the constitutional mandate

117. Where two constructions of a provision are possible, courts ought to prefer the construction
which gives effect to the provision rather than rendering the PART G provision inoperative. 102
Courts must prefer a construction which is in favour of the constitutionality of the statutory
provision. 103 A narrow, strict interpretation of a statutory provision which runs counter to the
constitutional mandate should be avoided.

118. It seems to us that to give Rule 3B a restrictive and narrow interpretation would render it
perilously close to holding it unconstitutional, for it would deprive unmarried women of the right to
access safe and legal abortions between twenty and twenty-four weeks if they face a change in their

41

material circumstances, similar to married women.

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

119. The Constitution Bench in Express Newspapers Ltd v. Union of India, 104 gave a wider
meaning to Section 9(1) of the Working Journalists (Condition of Service) and Miscellaneous
Provision Act 1955, 105 to avoid rendering it unconstitutional. The Working Journalists Act
provides for the relevant criteria for the fixation of the rate of wages. The petitioners in that case
argued that the Working Journalists Act imposed unreasonable restrictions on the freedom to carry
on business inter alia on the ground that the capacity of the industry to pay was not set out as one of
the criteria in the fixation of wages by the Wage Board. This Court held that the capacity of the
industry to pay was one of the essential circumstances which should be taken into consideration for
fixation of rate of wages, higher than the bare subsistence or minimum wage. 102 JUSTICE G.P
SINGH, G.P. SINGH: PRINCIPLES OF STATUTORY INTERPRETATION, (LEXISNEXIS, 2016), at
page 48; CIT v. S. Teja Singh, AIR 1959 SC 352; M. Pentiah v. Veeramallappa Muddal, 1961 (2) SCR
295; Tinsukhia Electric Supply Co. Ltd. v. State of Assam, (1989) 3 SCC 709 103 K.P. Varghese v.
ITO, (1981) 4 SCC 173; M.L. Kamra v. Chairman-cum-Managing Director, New India Assurance Co.
Ltd, 1992 SCR(1) 220 104 1959 SCR 12, AIR 1958 SC 578 105 “Working Journalists Act” PART G

120. In Githa Hariharan v. Reserve Bank of India,106 a three-Judge Bench of this Court had to
interpret the term “after him” in Section 6(a) of the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act 1956,
which provides that the natural guardian of a Hindu minor, in the case of a boy or an unmarried girl,
is “the father and after him the mother.” This Court interpreted “after him” to mean “in the absence
of” to further the constitutional mandate of gender equality as enshrined in Article 14 and Article 15
of the Constitution. This Court stated that narrowly interpreting the phrase to mean a
disqualification of a mother to act as a guardian during the lifetime of the father, would have made
the section unconstitutional for violating the constitutional prohibition against discrimination on
the grounds of sex.

121. The object of Section 3(2)(b) of the MTP Act read with Rule 3B is to provide for abortions
between twenty and twenty-four weeks, rendered unwanted due to a change in the material
circumstances of women. In view of the object, there is no rationale for excluding unmarried or
single women (who face a change in their material circumstances) from the ambit of Rule 3B. A
narrow interpretation of Rule 3B, limited only to married women, would render the provision
discriminatory towards unmarried women and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution. Article 14
requires the state to refrain from denying to any person equality before the law or equal protection
of laws. Prohibiting unmarried or single pregnant women (whose pregnancies are between twenty
and twenty-four weeks) from accessing abortion while allowing married women to access them
during the same period would fall foul of the spirit guiding Article 14. The law should not decide the
beneficiaries of 106 (1999) 2 SCC 228 PART H a statute based on narrow patriarchal principles
about what constitutes “permissible sex”, which create invidious classifications and excludes groups
based on their personal circumstances. The rights of reproductive autonomy, dignity, and privacy
under Article 21 give an unmarried woman the right of choice on whether or not to bear a child, on a
similar footing of a married woman.

42

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

122. In view of the purposive interpretation accorded to Rule 3B, we are not required to adjudicate
upon its constitutional validity.

H. India’s obligations under international law

123. Article 51 of the Constitution requires the state to foster respect for international law and treaty
obligations in the dealings of organised people with one another. The Protection of Human Rights
Act 1993 recognises and incorporates international conventions and treaties as part of Indian
human rights law. 107 International human rights norms contained in treaties and covenants
ratified by India are binding on the state to the extent that they elucidate and effectuate the
fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution. 108

124. Article 6 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights recognises and protects the
inherent right to life of all human beings. The UN Human Rights Committee has remarked that, in
terms of Article 6, State Parties have the responsibility to provide safe, legal, and effective access to
abortion.109 Further, it was suggested that State Parties should disseminate quality and 107 Section
2(1)(d), Protection of Human Rights Act 1993 108 People’s Union of Civil Liberties v. Union of
India, (1997) 3 SCC 433 109 Human Rights Committee, General Comment No. 36 (2018) on article
6 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, on the right to life, CCPR/C/GC/36 (30
October 2018) PART H evidence-based information and education about sexual and reproductive
health to prevent stigmatisation of women and girls seeking abortion.

125. India has also ratified the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 110
which enumerates in detail the right to mental and physical health. The Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights in their comment on Article 12 of ICESCR has observed that the right to
sexual and reproductive health is an integral part of the right to the highest attainable physical and
mental health. 111

126. India has ratified the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women. 112 Article 12 of CEDAW requires the State Parties to take appropriate measures to
eliminate discrimination against women in the field health care services in connection with family
planning, pregnancy, confinement, and post-natal period. Similarly, Article 16 urges State Parties to
eliminate all forms of discrimination against women and to ensure that they have the same right to
decide freely and responsibly on the number and spacing of children and access the relevant
information to effectively exercise these rights. 110 “ICESCR” 111 Economic and Social Council,
General Comment No. 22 (2016) on the right to sexual and reproductive health (article 12 of the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights), E/C.12/GC/22 (2 May 2016) 112
“CEDAW” PART H

127. The UN Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women emphasized that
State Parties should undertake appropriate measures to eliminate discrimination against women in
their access to health-care services, particularly in areas of family planning, pregnancy and
confinement, and post-natal period.113 It is also urged that State Parties should refrain from
imposing barriers on women who seek to pursue their right to access healthcare, including

43

reproductive healthcare.

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

128. India’s obligations under international law require the state to bring the MTP Act in conformity
with said obligations. The reproductive rights of women must be harmonised in light of the
principles laid down under the Constitution as well as the principles of international law codified in
the various international conventions ratified by India. Our interpretation of the MTP Act and the
MTP Rules furthers India’s obligations under international law. However, the state must act
proactively in order to ensure that women in India are able to actualize their right to reproductive
health and healthcare, in line with the obligations assumed by the country under international law.

113 Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women, General Recommendation
No. 24: Article 12 of the Convention (Women and Health), A/54/38/Rev.1, chap. I (1999) PART I I.
Reiterating the positive obligations of the state

129. True realization of reproductive autonomy is possible only by addressing problems in the
societal contexts within which individuals, particularly women, are situated. It is not only social
stigma which prevents women from realizing the right to health but also caste and economic
location. The cost of an abortion at a private hospital may be prohibitive for those whose monthly
salaries are a fraction of that cost. Public hospitals in rural areas are often not equipped with the
resources to provide the kind and quality of healthcare that ought to be provided free of cost or at
highly subsidized rates. A lack of awareness about the resources that public hospitals offer coupled
with the discriminatory attitudes of many health providers only serve to exacerbate this problem.

130. The MTP Act recognises the reproductive autonomy of every pregnant woman to choose
medical intervention to terminate her pregnancy. Implicitly, this right also extends to a right of the
pregnant woman to access healthcare facilities to attain the highest standard of sexual and
reproductive health. It is meaningless to speak of the latter in the absence of the former.
Reproductive health implies that women should have access to safe, effective, and affordable
methods of family planning and enabling them to undergo safe pregnancy, if they so choose.

131. The Directive Principles of State Policy in Part IV of the Constitution lay down the fundamental
principles in the governance of the country and press upon the state to apply them while making
laws. Article 38(2) of the Constitution requires the state to promote the welfare of people and
eliminate inequalities in opportunities:

PART I “Article 38. State to secure a social order for the promotion of welfare of the
people - *** (2) The State shall, in particular, strive to minimize the inequalities in
income, and endeavour to eliminate inequalities in status, facilities and
opportunities, not only amongst individuals but also amongst groups of people
residing in different areas or engaged in different vocations.”

132. Article 47 of the Constitution contains a call to the state to improve public health:

44

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

“47. Duty of the State to raise the level of nutrition and the standard of living and to
improve public health – The State shall regard the raising of the level of nutrition and
the standard of living of its people and the improvement of public health as among its
primary duties and, in particular, the State shall endeavour to bring about the
prohibition of the consumption except for medicinal purposes of intoxicating drinks
and of drugs which are injurious to health.”

133. In Devika Biswas v. Union of India,114 the petitioners challenged the mass sterilisation
program that was implemented by the government in highly unsanitary conditions. This Court
recognized the need to respect and protect different facets of reproductive health as delineated in
international human rights law. It noted that government policies affecting reproductive freedoms
must be aimed at remedying the systemic discrimination prevailing in society and ensuring
substantive equality. In Paschim Banga Khet Mazdoor Samiti v. State of West Bengal, 115 this Court
observed that Article 21 imposes an obligation on the state to safeguard the right to health and the
right to life of every person. It was held that this constitutional obligation exhorts the state to
provide adequate medical services to the people and to ensure timely medical treatment to everyone.
The above conspectus of cases 114 (2016) 10 SCC 726 115 (1996) 4 SCC 37 PART I reveals that the
state has a positive obligation under Article 21 to protect the right to health, and particularly
reproductive health of individuals. In terms of reproductive rights and autonomy, the state has to
undertake active steps to help increase access to healthcare (including reproductive healthcare such
as abortion).

134. The state must ensure that information regarding reproduction and safe sexual practices is
disseminated to all parts of the population. Further, it must see to it that all segments of society are
able to access contraceptives to avoid unintended pregnancies and plan their families. Medical
facilities and RMPs must be present in each district and must be affordable to all. The government
must ensure that RMPs treat all patients equally and sensitively. Treatment must not be denied on
the basis of one’s caste or due to other social or economic factors. It is only when these
recommendations become a reality that we can say that the right to bodily autonomy and the right
to dignity are capable of being realized.

135. We clarify that nothing in this judgment must be construed as diluting the provisions of the
Pre-Conception and Pre-Natal Diagnostic Techniques (Prohibition of Sex Selection) Act 1994.

PART I

136. We dispose of the present appeal in terms of the reasons stated above. The writ petition before
the High Court shall accordingly stand disposed of.

137. Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.

. . … … … … . . . … . . . … . . . . . . . … … … … … … . . . . . . . . J .   [ D r   D h a n a n j a y a   Y   C h a n d r a c h u d ]
…..…..…....…........……………….…........J. [A S Bopanna] …..…..…....…........……………….…........J. [J B
Pardiwala] New Delhi;

45

September 29, 2022

X vs The Principal Secretary Health And ... on 29 September, 2022

46