Yamuna Expressway Industrial ... vs M/S Shakuntla Education And Welfare ... on 19 May, 2022

Yamuna Expressway Industrial ... vs M/S Shakuntla Education
And Welfare ... on 19 May, 2022

Author: B.R. Gavai

Bench: B.R. Gavai, L. Nageswara Rao

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NOS.4178−4197 OF 2022
[Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) Nos.10015−
10034 of 2020]

YAMUNA EXPRESSWAY INDUSTRIAL
DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY ETC.                 ...APPELLANT(S)

VERSUS
SHAKUNTLA EDUCATION AND WELFARE
SOCIETY & ORS. ETC.             ...RESPONDENT(S)

WITH

CIVIL APPEAL NOS.4198−4217 OF 2022
[Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) Nos.9891−9910
of 2020]

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4218 OF 2022
[Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) No.14141 of
2020]

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4219 OF 2022
[Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) No.300 of 2022]

1
(cid:12)                         JUDGMENT
B.R. GAVAI, J.

1. Leave granted.

2. This batch of appeals challenge the judgment and order dated 28th May, 2020, passed by the
Allahabad High Court in various writ petitions filed by the allottees of plots of land. The writ
petitions were filed challenging the demand of additional amount made by the appellant herein−

1

Yamuna Expressway Industrial ... vs M/S Shakuntla Education And Welfare ... on 19 May, 2022

Yamuna Expressway Industrial Development Authority (hereinafter referred to as “YEIDA”) in
respect of plots of land leased out to the allottees; the resolution of the Board of YEIDA dated 15 th
September, 2014, and the Government Order dated 29th August, 2014, vide which the State
Government had permitted YEIDA to recover the additional amount from the allottees.

3. The facts in the present case are not in dispute. For the sake of convenience, we will refer to the
factual details as are found in Writ Petition No.28968 of 2018, filed before the High Court of
Allahabad by M/s Shakuntla Education and Welfare Society (the respondent No.1 herein).

4. A vast area of land was acquired by the State of Uttar Pradesh in Gautam Budh Nagar district for
public purposes. The said area of land was acquired for the benefit of YEIDA. After the land was
acquired, YEIDA invited applications for the allotment of plots of land in the area developed by it. In
response to the notice inviting applications for such allotment, various allottees including the
respondent No.1 herein applied and were allotted plots admeasuring different sizes.

5. The respondent No.1 was informed by letter dated 14 th September, 2009, that a plot of 50 acres
of land has been reserved for it. Subsequently, a letter of allotment dated 10 th December, 2009 was
issued to the respondent No.1, allotting plot No.2 in Sector 7−A, having an area of 50 acres, i.e.,
equivalent to 2,02,350 sq. meter. In the allotment letter, it was stated that the premium of the land
allotted was Rs.1,055/− per sq. meter. It was also mentioned that the respondent No.1 had deposited
10% of the premium amount and the balance 90% of the premium amount was payable in monthly
installments as specified in the chart contained therein. The allotment letter further stated that the
lease deed shall be executed and the possession of the land shall be handed over after completion of
the acquisition proceedings. It was stated that the land was already in possession of YEIDA.

6. It was the contention of the respondent No.1 that on the basis of the aforesaid allotment letter, a
lease deed came to be executed in favour of the respondent No.1 on 22 nd January, 2010 for a period
of 90 years after the respondent No.1 had made substantial compliance with the terms and
conditions of the allotment and had deposited the necessary amount. The lease deed provided that
in addition to the amount payable by the respondent No.1, as mentioned in the allotment letter, a
further amount, i.e., 2.5% of the total premium of the plot was payable as annual lease rent.

7. It was further the case of the respondent No.1 that during measurement, it was found that the plot
allotted to it, had an excess area of about 2 acres. The said excess land was also leased out to it on
the same terms and conditions. It was further the case of the respondent No.1 that it was thereafter
given possession of the aforesaid land and on it, a University known as Galgotias University was
developed.

8. It was further the case of the respondent No.1 that subsequently YEIDA came out with a policy
and gave an option to the respondent No.1 to deposit the entire premium amount in lump−sum
rather than in installments. This was subject to certain rebate. It was stated that in accordance with
the said policy, a lump−sum amount was worked out by YEIDA and the same was also paid by the
respondent No.1. An undertaking was also taken from the respondent No.1 on an affidavit on 7 th
June, 2012, that in the event there was any clerical error or miscalculation of the lump−sum

2

Yamuna Expressway Industrial ... vs M/S Shakuntla Education And Welfare ... on 19 May, 2022

amount, the respondent No.1 would make good the deficiency.

9. The State of Uttar Pradesh had also made large−scale acquisition of lands for the benefit of New
Okhla Industrial Development Authority (“NOIDA” for short) and Greater NOIDA. A number of writ
petitions came to be filed by farmers challenging the said acquisition on various grounds before the
Allahabad High Court. The main ground of challenge was that there was no urgency for acquiring
the land and as such, invoking Section 17 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (hereinafter referred to
as “the L.A. Act”) was not warranted. It was contended that on account of invoking of Section 17 of
the L.A. Act, a valuable right available to the writ petitioners under Section 5A of the L.A. Act was
taken away. All the said writ petitions came to be decided vide the judgment and order dated 21st
October, 2011. In the leading case, i.e., Gajraj and others vs. State of U.P. and others 1, the Full
Bench of the Allahabad High Court came to a finding that the urgency clause ought not to have been
invoked and the farmers were unlawfully denied the benefit of Section 5A of the L.A. Act, wherein
they could 1 2011 SCC OnLine All 1711 raise objections to the acquisition of the land. However,
taking into consideration the subsequent developments that the lands had already been developed
and third party rights had accrued, the Full Bench of the Allahabad High Court in the case of Gajraj
(supra) considered it appropriate not to disturb the acquisition. In order to balance the equities, the
Full Bench of the Allahabad High Court directed payment of additional compensation of 64.7% plus
some other benefits to certain class of farmers. It also directed certain other benefits to be given to
the farmers. The aforesaid additional compensation of 64.7% was worked out by the Court taking
into consideration the fact that in respect of one of the villages, i.e., Patwari, NOIDA itself had
entered into negotiations with the farmers and had extended the benefit of additional compensation
at the aforesaid rate over and above the compensation awarded.

10. The aforesaid judgment and order of the Full Bench of the Allahabad High Court in the case of
Gajraj (supra) came to be confirmed by this Court in the case of Savitri Devi vs. State of Uttar
Pradesh and others2.

11. Since the farmers, whose lands were acquired for the benefit of NOIDA and Greater NOIDA,
were being paid additional compensation of 64.7%, there was unrest amongst the farmers whose
lands were acquired for YEIDA. It appears that on account of agitation by the farmers, vast stretches
of lands could not be developed. As such, the Chief Executive Officer (hereinafter referred to as
“CEO”) of YEIDA addressed a letter dated 10th April, 2013, to the State Government, requesting to
find a solution. The State Government, acting on the said letter, instructed the Commissioner,
Meerut Division, Meerut, vide its letter of the same day, i.e., dated 10 th April, 2013, to meet various
groups of farmers and submit a report.

12. Accordingly, the Commissioner held a meeting with various groups of farmers and the concerned
District Magistrates, and submitted a report to the State Government 2 (2015) 7 SCC 21 on 16th
July, 2013, recommending constitution of a High−Level Committee.

13. The State Government vide Office Memo dated 3 rd September, 2013, constituted a High−Level
Committee under the Chairmanship of Sri Rajendra Chaudhary, Minister of Prison, State of Uttar
Pradesh (hereinafter referred to as “the Chaudhary Committee”). The Chaudhary Committee also

3

Yamuna Expressway Industrial ... vs M/S Shakuntla Education And Welfare ... on 19 May, 2022

consisted of the Divisional Commissioner of the concerned Division and the Collector of concerned
District. The Chaudhary Committee submitted its recommendations to the State Government, inter
alia, recommending for the payment of 64.7% additional amount as “no litigation incentive” to the
farmers and for its reimbursement from the allottees in the appropriate proportion.

14. The State Government accepted the recommendations of the Chaudhary Committee and issued a
Government Order dated 29th August, 2014 (hereinafter referred to as “the said G.O.”). The said
G.O. provided that the farmers should be offered 64.7% additional amount on the condition that
they withdraw their petitions challenging the acquisition proceedings and undertake not to institute
any litigation and create any hindrance in the development work of YEIDA. It was clarified in the
said G.O. that the Government would not bear the burden of the additional amount.

15. The said G.O. was placed before the Board of YEIDA in its meeting, held on 15th September,
2014, and the same was approved in the said meeting on the very same day, vide Resolution dated
15th September, 2014.

16. In pursuance to the said G.O. and the Resolution dated 15th September, 2014 of the Board of
YEIDA, additional demand notices were issued to various allottees. In case of the respondent No.1,
an additional premium at the rate of Rs.600/− per sq. meter, for the land allotted and leased out,
came to be demanded, totaling to Rs.12,14,10,000/−.

17. It was in this background that various writ petitions came to be filed before the Allahabad High
Court, including Writ Petition No.28968 of 2018, filed by the respondent No.1.

18. By the impugned judgment and order dated 28th May, 2020, the Allahabad High Court allowed
the said writ petitions holding that:−

(i) the decision in the case of Gajraj (supra), as approved by this Court in the case of Savitri Devi
(supra), was not a judgment in rem and could not have been applied to proceedings for acquiring
the land under different notifications or for YEIDA;

(ii) the said G.O. and the Resolution of the Board of YEIDA dated 15th September, 2014 were
violative of the provisions of the L.A. Act; and

(iii) the policy of the State Government was unfair, unreasonable, arbitrary and in violation of the
provisions of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882.

19. Being aggrieved thereby, the present appeals by way of special leave have been filed on behalf of
YEIDA, State of Uttar Pradesh and farmers whose lands were acquired.

20. We have heard Shri C.A. Sundaram, Shri C.U. Singh and Shri Maninder Singh, learned Senior
Counsel appearing on behalf of YEIDA, Shri Vinod Diwakar, learned Additional Advocate General
appearing on behalf of the State of Uttar Pradesh, Shri Rakesh U. Upadhyay and Dr. Surat Singh,
learned counsel appearing on behalf of the farmers whose lands were acquired, Shri Nakul Dewan,

4

Yamuna Expressway Industrial ... vs M/S Shakuntla Education And Welfare ... on 19 May, 2022

Shri Sunil Gupta, Shri Ravindra Srivastava and Shri Sanjiv Sen, learned Senior Counsel appearing
on behalf of the respondents−original allottees of land.

21. The main contention of the appellants in the present appeals is that the said G.O. was a policy
decision of the State Government, taken in public interest. It is submitted that the said policy
decision was taken after taking into consideration the farmers’ agitation, the report of the
Chaudhary Committee and all other relevant factors. It is submitted that in order to avoid
acquisitions from being declared illegal, the Cabinet of Ministers of the State Government had taken
a considered decision to adopt a formula, which was carved out by the judgment of the Full Bench of
the Allahabad High Court in the case of Gajraj (supra) and approved by this Court in the case of
Savitri Devi (supra).

22. It is also the contention on behalf of the appellants that the policy of the State Government was
in consonance with the decision of this Court in the case of Centre for Public Interest Litigation and
others vs. Union of India and others 3, wherein this Court has held that it is obligatory on the State
to ensure that people are adequately compensated for the transfer of resource to the private domain.
Relying on the judgment of this Court in the case of Narmada Bachao Andolan vs. Union of India
and others4, it is submitted that the policy of the State Government was formulated by looking at
the welfare of 3 (2012) 3 SCC 1 4 (2000) 10 SCC 664 the people at large rather than restricting the
benefit to a small section of the society. Relying on various judgments of this Court, it is submitted
that when the change in the policy of the State is in public interest, it will override all private
agreements entered into by the State.

23. It is further submitted on behalf of the appellants that, as a matter of fact, on account of
agitation of the farmers, development could not take place in the concerned area. It is submitted
that various plot owners had approached the State Government and its authorities for finding out a
solution to these problems, so that the development could proceed further. It is submitted that the
proceedings of the Chaudhary Committee would itself reveal that all the stakeholders including the
representatives of allottees were heard by the Chaudhary Committee. Not only that, but various
allottees had, in writing, agreed that they are willing to pay the additional compensation so that the
hindrance in the development is removed. It is therefore submitted that it does not lie in the mouth
of the respondents to question the said G.O. and oppose the payment of additional compensation.

24. Relying on various judgments of this Court, it is further submitted on behalf of the appellants
that the lease deed itself permitted additions, alterations or modifications in the terms and
conditions of the lease. As such, even as per the lease deed, the appellants were entitled to modify or
alter the terms and conditions of the lease. It is submitted that the word “modify” has to be used in a
broader sense and not in a narrower sense.

25. Learned counsel for the appellants further submitted that the High Court fell in great error in
holding that no writ petitions were pending. It is submitted that, as a matter of fact, more than 600
writ petitions were pending when the policy decision was taken by the State Government. It is
submitted that the policy decision was taken so as to save the acquisition, which was otherwise liable
to be quashed and set aside. It is submitted that it is, in fact, the respondents, who are the

5

Yamuna Expressway Industrial ... vs M/S Shakuntla Education And Welfare ... on 19 May, 2022

beneficiaries of the said measure and as such, having taken benefit of the said measure, they cannot
be permitted to refuse to pay the additional compensation.

26. It is also submitted on behalf of the appellants that the allotees had an option, either to make
additional payment or to take refund with interest. Having opted not to seek refund with interest, it
does not lie in the mouth of the respondents to refuse to pay the additional compensation.

27. It is also submitted on behalf of appellant−YEIDA that it had specifically submitted that stay
orders passed by the High Court were in force in most of the cases related to residential plots, due to
which the development work could not be completed.

28. Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the farmers also support the stand of YEIDA. It is
submitted that the builders had already recovered additional compensation from the homebuyers.
As such, the additional compensation was already passed on by the builders to the homebuyers. It is
submitted that if the contention of the respondents is accepted, it will amount to nothing else but
allowing of unjust enrichment.

29. It is further submitted that the respondents were not entitled to the discretionary relief under
Article 226 of the Constitution of India. The writ petitions filed by them before the Allahabad High
Court were filed without impleading the farmers who were necessary parties as respondents to the
writ petitions.

30. Elaborate arguments have been advanced on behalf of the respondents. To summarize, they are
as under:

(i) The respondents had not given any undertaking to pay additional compensation,
as stated;

(ii) The term “modification/addition” with regard to payment was restricted only to
any clerical or technical error;

(iii) The High Court has rightly held that Gajraj (supra) and Savitri Devi (supra)
applied only to the peculiar facts and circumstances of those cases. In the case of
Gajraj (supra), the High Court had done elaborate exercise of categorizing the cases
into three types. In any case, it is submitted that the State itself was aggrieved by the
decision in Gajraj (supra), which has been challenged by it before this Court;

(iv) In the present case, many of the acquisitions were by private negotiations and as
such, there is no question of applicability of either Section 17 or Section 5A of the L.A.
Act;

(v) There were concluded contracts entered between the allottees and YEIDA. As
such, it was not open for YEIDA to unilaterally change the terms and conditions of
the contract and enhance the lease premium;

6

Yamuna Expressway Industrial ... vs M/S Shakuntla Education And Welfare ... on 19 May, 2022

(vi) The High Court has rightly held that the so−called policy of the State Government
was arbitrary, irrational and therefore not sustainable in law;

(vii) On behalf of the respondent No.19−Supertech Limited, an additional submission
was made that the appropriate authority has already passed an order admitting the
petition filed under Section 7 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016;

(viii) On behalf of the individual plot owners, it is submitted that the said plot
owners, who belong to the middle class section of the society cannot be burdened
with the additional amount.

(ix) The respondents also placed reliance on the judgment of this Court in the case of
ITC Limited vs. State of Uttar Pradesh and others5 to support the proposition that
concluded contracts cannot be interfered with or reopened.

5 (2011) 7 SCC 493

31. With the assistance of the learned counsel for the parties, we have perused the material on
record.

32. The main reasons that weighed with the High Court while allowing the writ petitions are thus:

(i) That the lands which were acquired for YEIDA in the present case were under
different notification than the notification which fell for consideration in the case of
Gajraj (supra);

(ii) That this Court in the case of Savitri Devi (supra) has categorically held that the
directions given in the case of Gajraj (supra) were issued by the High Court in the
peculiar facts and circumstances of the case and therefore, the same could not have
been applied to the facts of the present case;

(iii) That some other petitions filed before the High Court claiming the benefit on the
basis of Gajraj (supra) were ultimately rejected by the High Court;

(iv) That the State Government has to strictly act in accordance with the law or
statutory provisions. It cannot act arbitrarily or in an unfair manner in breach of
specific provisions of law;

(v) That it is only for the Courts to grant equitable relief and the Government is not
entitled to pass order on equitable ground of law.

33. We are called upon to examine the correctness of these findings.

7

Yamuna Expressway Industrial ... vs M/S Shakuntla Education And Welfare ... on 19 May, 2022

34. The relevant portion of the judgment of the Full Bench of the High Court in the case of Gajraj
(supra) is reproduced by this Court in the case of Savitri Devi (supra). It will be apposite to refer to
following observations in the case of Savitri Devi (supra):

“20. In a nutshell, relief was categorised in three compartments. In the first instance,
those writ petitions which were filed belatedly were dismissed. In the second
category, three villages, namely, Devala (Group 40), Village Yusufpur Chak Sahberi
(Group 38) and Village Asdullapur (Group 42) the acquisition was set aside. Land
acquisition in respect of remaining 61 villages is concerned, the acquisition was
allowed to remain but the additional compensation was increased to 64.7%with
further entitlement for allotment of development abadi plot to the extent of 10%of
the acquired land of those landowners subject to maximum of 2500 sq m.

21. We now reproduce the exact nature of direction [2011 SCC OnLine All 1711] given
by the High Court, which reads as follows: (Gajraj case [2011 SCC OnLine All 1711] ,
SCC OnLine All) “In view of the foregoing conclusions we order as follows:

1. Writ Petition No. 45933 of 2011, Writ Petition No. 47545 of 2011 relating to Village
Nithari, Writ Petition No. 47522 of 2011 relating to Village Sadarpur, Writ Petition
No. 45196 of 2011, Writ Petition No. 45208 of 2011, Writ Petition No. 45211 of 2011,
Writ Petition No. 45213 of 2011, Writ Petition No. 45216 of 2011, Writ Petitions Nos.
45223−24 of 2011, Writ Petition No. 45226 of 2011, Writ Petitions Nos. 45229−30 of
2011, Writ Petition No. 45235 of 2011, Writ Petition No. 45238 of 2011, Writ Petition
No. 45283 of 2011 relating to Village Khoda, Writ Petition No. 46764 of 2011, Writ
Petition No. 46785 of 2011 relating to Village Sultanpur, Writ Petition No. 46407 of
2011 relating to Village Chaura Sadatpur and Writ Petition No. 46470 of 2011 relating
to Village Alaverdipur which have been filed with inordinate delay and laches are
dismissed.

2. (i) The writ petitions of Group 40 (Village Devla) being Writ Petition No. 31126 of
2011, Writ Petition No. 59131 of 2009, Writ Petition No. 22800 of 2010, Writ Petition
No. 37118 of 2011, Writ Petition No. 42812 of 2009, Writ Petition No. 50417 of 2009,
Writ Petition No. 54424 of 2009, Writ Petition No. 54652 of 2009, Writ Petition No.
55650 of 2009, Writ Petition No. 57032 of 2009, Writ Petition No. 58318 of 2009,
Writ Petition No. 22798 of 2010, Writ Petition No. 37784 of 2010, Writ Petition No.
37787 of 2010, Writ Petitions Nos. 31124−25 of 2011, Writ Petition No. 32234 of
2011, Writ Petition No. 32987 of 2011, Writ Petition No. 35648 of 2011, Writ Petition
No. 38059 of 2011, Writ Petition No. 41339 of 2011, Writ Petition No. 47427 of 2011
and Writ Petition No. 47412 of 2011 are allowed and Notifications dated 26−5− 2009
and 22−6−2009 and all consequential actions are quashed. The petitioners shall be
entitled for restoration of their land subject to deposit of compensation which they
had received under agreement/award before the Authority/Collector.

8

Yamuna Expressway Industrial ... vs M/S Shakuntla Education And Welfare ... on 19 May, 2022

(ii) Writ Petition No. 17725 of 2010 Omveer v. State of U.P. (Group 38) relating to Village Yusufpur
Chak Sahberi is allowed. Notifications dated 10−4−2006 and 6−9−2007 and all consequential
actions are quashed. The petitioners shall be entitled for restoration of their land subject to return of
compensation received by them under agreement/award to the Collector.

(iii) Writ Petition No. 47486 of 2011 (Rajee v. State of U.P.) of Group 42 relating to Village
Asdullapur is allowed. Notifications dated 27−1−2010 and 4−2− 2010 as well as all subsequent
proceedings are quashed. The petitioners shall be entitled to restoration of their land.

3. All other writ petitions except as mentioned above at (1) and (2) are disposed of with the following
directions:

(a) The petitioners shall be entitled for payment of additional compensation to the
extent of same ratio (i.e. 64.70%) as paid for Village Patwari in addition to the
compensation received by them under the 1997 Rules/award which payment shall be
ensured by the Authority at an early date. It may be open for the Authority to take a
decision as to what proportion of additional compensation be asked to be paid by the
allottees.

Those petitioners who have not yet been paid compensation may be paid the compensation as well
as additional compensation as ordered above. The payment of additional compensation shall be
without any prejudice to rights of landowners under Section 18 of the Act, if any.

(b) All the petitioners shall be entitled for allotment of developed abadi plot to the extent of 10%of
their acquired land subject to maximum of 2500 sq m. We however, leave it open to the Authority in
cases where allotment of abadi plot to the extent of 6%or 8%has already been made either to make
allotment of the balance of the area or may compensate the landowners by payment of the amount
equivalent to balance area as per average rate of allotment made of developed residential plots.

4. The Authority may also take a decision as to whether benefit of additional compensation and
allotment of abadi plot to the extent of 10%be also given to:

(a) those landholders whose earlier writ petition challenging the notifications has
been dismissed upholding the notifications; and

(b) those landholders who have not come to the Court, relating to the notifications
which are the subject− matter of challenge in the writ petitions mentioned at
Direction 3.

5. Greater Noida and its allottees are directed not to carry on development and not to implement the
Master Plan 2021 till the observations and directions of the National Capital Regional Planning
Board are incorporated in Master Plan 2021 to the satisfaction of the National Capital Regional
Planning Board. We make it clear that this direction shall not be applicable in those cases where the
development is being carried on in accordance with the earlier Master Plan of Greater Noida duly

9

Yamuna Expressway Industrial ... vs M/S Shakuntla Education And Welfare ... on 19 May, 2022

approved by the National Capital Regional Planning Board.

6. We direct the Chief Secretary of the State to appoint officers not below the level of Principal
Secretary (except the officers of Industrial Development Department who have dealt with the
relevant files) to conduct a thorough inquiry regarding the acts of Greater Noida (a) in proceeding to
implement Master Plan 2021 without approval of NCRP Board, (b) decisions taken to change the
land use, (c) allotment made to the builders, and (d) indiscriminate proposals for acquisition of
land, and thereafter the State Government shall take appropriate action in the matter.” (emphasis in
original)

22. We may point out at this stage that in respect of all these three categories, the High Court has
provided its justification for granting relief in the aforesaid nature. We shall be referring to the same
while discussing the cases of the appellants belonging to one or the other category.”

35. After considering various judgments, this Court in the case of Savitri Devi (supra) observed thus:

“46. Thus, we have a scenario where, on the one hand, invocation of urgency
provisions under Section 17 of the Act and dispensing with the right to file objection
under Section 5−A of the Act, is found to be illegal. On the other hand, we have a
situation where because of delay in challenging these acquisitions by the landowners,
developments have taken place in these villages and in most of the cases, third−party
rights have been created. Faced with this situation, the High Court going by the spirit
behind the judgment of this Court in Bondu Ramaswamy [(2010) 7 SCC 129 : (2010)
3 SCC (Civ) 1] came out with the solution which is equitable to both sides. We are,
thus, of the view that the High Court considered the ground realities of the matter
and arrived at a more practical and workable solution by adequately compensating
the landowners in the form of compensation as well as allotment of developed abadi
land at a higher rate i.e. 10%of the land acquired of each of the landowners against
the eligibility and to (sic under) the policy to the extent of 5%and 6%of Noida and
Greater Noida land respectively.

36. It could thus be seen that this Court in the said case has found that a peculiar situation arose,
where on one hand invocation of urgency provisions under Section 17 of the L.A. Act and dispensing
with the right to file objections under Section 5A of the L.A. Act, were found to be illegal, while on
the other hand, the developments had already taken place in the villages and in most of the cases,
third−party rights were created. Faced with this situation, the High Court came out with the solution
which was equitable to both sides. This Court found that the High Court considered the ground
realities of the matter and arrived at a more practical and workable solution by adequately
compensating the landowners in the form of compensation as well as allotment of developed abadi
land at a higher rate.

37. No doubt that this Court in paragraph 50 of the judgment in the case of Savitri Devi (supra)
makes it clear that the directions of the High Court were given in the unique and peculiar/specific
background and therefore, it would not form precedent for future cases.

10

Yamuna Expressway Industrial ... vs M/S Shakuntla Education And Welfare ... on 19 May, 2022

38. It is to be noted that in the case of Greater Noida Industrial Development Authority vs. Savitri
Mohan (Dead) Through Legal Representatives and others6, this Court was considering the
judgment of the Allahabad High Court, wherein it had quashed and set aside the Notification under
Section 4(1) and Section 17(4) of the L.A. Act as well as the Notification under Section 6 read with
Section 17(1) of the L.A. Act. A specific question was framed by this Court in the said case in
paragraph 10, which reads thus:

“10. The only question for consideration is whether the matter is covered by the
judgment of this Court in Savitri Devi [Savitri Devi v. State of U.P., (2015) 7 SCC 21 :
(2015) 3 SCC (Civ) 473] , as claimed by the appellant in which case 6 (2016) 13 SCC
210 the respondents will be entitled to relief of higher compensation and allotment of
land instead of quashing of acquisition proceedings.”

39. Answering the aforesaid question, this Court in the said case observed thus:

“13. A perusal of the above shows that compensation had already been disbursed to
the extent of 76%.

Thereafter, for the entire land of Village Chhapraula falling in Group 18, the relief
granted is payment of additional compensation and allotment of land. As already
noted, the part of the order where relief of quashing of notification has been given is
not of the category of the present case. In these circumstances, we find merit in the
contention raised on behalf of the appellant that the Division Bench was in error in
distinguishing the present case from the judgment in Gajraj [Gajraj v. State of U.P.,
(2011) 11 ADJ 1 : 2011 SCC OnLine All 1711] .

14. As observed by this Court in Savitri Devi [Savitri Devi v. State of U.P., (2015) 7
SCC 21 : (2015) 3 SCC (Civ) 473] , in spite of the finding that invocation of urgency
clause was uncalled for, the relief of setting aside the acquisition was not granted
having regard to the development that had already been undertaken on substantial
part of the land. However, to balance the equities higher compensation and allotment
of land was ordered to meet the ends of justice. [Savitri Devi v. State of U.P., (2015) 7
SCC 21, para 17]”

40. It could thus clearly be seen that though this Court in the case of Savitri Devi (supra) observed
that the judgment in the case of Gajraj (supra) has to be construed particularly in the unique and
peculiar/specific background, in the case of Savitri Mohan (Dead) (supra), this Court had followed
the principle laid down in the cases of Gajraj (supra) and Savitri Devi (supra) and held that to
balance the equities, it was appropriate to issue directions for payment of higher compensation and
allotment of additional land. It was observed that it was necessary to do so to meet the ends of
justice.

41. At this juncture, we will have to consider the policy decision of the State Government as
formulated in the said G.O. in the peculiar facts and circumstances of the present case.

11

Yamuna Expressway Industrial ... vs M/S Shakuntla Education And Welfare ... on 19 May, 2022

42. After the decision of this Court in the cases of Gajraj (supra) and Savitri Devi (supra), 64.7%
additional compensation and 10% of the land acquired of each of the land owners, instead of 5% and
6% was made available to the farmers whose lands were acquired for the benefit of NOIDA as well as
Greater NOIDA. The lands acquired for the benefit of YEIDA were also for the development of
adjoining areas. Feeling discriminated that they were being paid compensation at much lesser rate
as compared to the farmers whose lands were acquired for NOIDA and Greater NOIDA, various
farmers’ organizations started agitations. It is some of the allottees who made representations to the
CEO of YEIDA. One of such representations was made by the respondent No.19−Supertech Private
Limited to the CEO of YEIDA on 22nd November, 2013, stating therein that on account of agitation
by the Bhartiya Kisan Union, they had to stop their work with effect from 20 th November, 2013.
The said letter/representation stated that that the main grievance of the office−holders of the
Bhartiya Kisan Union was that they want increased compensation and for compensating the same,
the Authority wants money from the Builders. The said representation states that:

““the Authority is not resolving the problems of the Farmers. The main issue of
farmers is that they want increased compensation, and for compensating the same,
the Authority wants money from the Builders. Builders are not ready to pay this
amount, due to which, we are stopping the construction works of Builders.” During
the discussion, it was said by the Company that “We are not against the farmers or
against their rights and company gives it’s consent on this fact that whatever the
consent would be made out between the Authority and Government on the
compensation amount of farmers, that would be accepted by the company.”

43. The said letter/representation categorically states that the Company was not against the farmers
or against their rights and that it was willing to abide by whatever decision was arrived at between
the Authority and the Government on the compensation amount of farmers.

44. Similar representations were made by Orris Greenbay Golf Village on the same day, by Sunworld
City Pvt. Ltd. on 26 th November, 2013, and by Gaursons Realtech Pvt. Ltd. on 4 th December, 2013.

45. It could thus be seen that on account of farmers’ resistance and their agitation, the development
work of the projects was stalled. When this was brought to the notice of the State Government, the
State Government nominated the Commissioner, Meerut Division, Meerut vide order dated 10 th
April, 2013, for looking into the issue. The Commissioner after holding various meetings with the
farmers’ organization/representatives submitted his report on 16 th July, 2013, stating therein that
the lands have been acquired by YEIDA at large scale and taking into consideration the nature of
demands having wide implications, it was necessary that a High−Level Committee at the State
Government level for examining the demands of farmers be constituted. In this background, the
State Government vide order dated 3 rd September, 2013 constituted a Committee under the
Chairmanship of Shri Rajendra Chaudhary, Minister of Prison, State of Uttar Pradesh. The
Divisional Commissioner of the concerned Division and the Collector of the concerned District were
also the members of the Chaudhary Committee. The Chaudhary Committee was constituted for the
purpose of resolving the problems of the villagers/farmers and the problems related to the
industries. The Chaudhary Committee considered the following issues:

12

Yamuna Expressway Industrial ... vs M/S Shakuntla Education And Welfare ... on 19 May, 2022

“a.    Demands raised by the Farmers/
Farmers'          Organizations/
Representatives              and
Memorandums/ Demand Letters
produced by them and the favour
put forth by them during the
personal hearing.

b.     Favour     put   forth   by     the

Industrialists/ Builders/ Allottees during personal hearing.

c. Favour and opinion of Yamuna Expressway Authority.”

46. The Chaudhary Committee conducted its proceedings on 30th September, 2013 with the
representatives of the farmers. The said Committee thereafter held deliberations with the
representatives of the allottees on 29 th October, 2013. It will be apposite to refer to the relevant
part of the discussion that took place in the meeting held with the representatives of the allottees on
29th October,2013, which reads thus:

“2. It was informed by the representative of M/s. SDIL that due to the agitation of
local farmers on the issues of their problems/demands, at present, we are not
available to carry out any work on the spot, therefore, whatever the decision will be
taken by the Committee/ Government for disposal of the problems of farmers, we will
cooperate in the same.

3. It was informed by the representative of M/s. Supertech Pvt. Ltd. that the farmers
are agitating in the entire area and they are interrupting the development work. It is
necessary to solve the problems of farmers. It was also informed by him that he will
cooperate in the decision to be taken by the Government/Committee for disposal of
the problems.

4 .   I t   w a s   i n f o r m e d   b y   t h e   r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s   o f   M / s .   S i l v e r l i n e   a n d   o t h e r
Units/Institutions that due to interrupting their development works as a result of the
demands being raised by the farmers of the area, the project cost is getting escalated.
Due to solving the problems of farmers, the investment will be increased in the area
and in disposal of the same, they will provide their assistance.

5. Regarding the demand of giving 10% abadi land in place of 7% abadi land to be
given to the ancestral farmers, it was said by the representative of M/s. J.P. Infratech
Pvt. Ltd. namely Sh. Sameer Gaur that earlier, they have been paid value of 7% abadi
land and development charges, now, if any other cost is imposed, then, company is
not in position to bear the same.”

13

Yamuna Expressway Industrial ... vs M/S Shakuntla Education And Welfare ... on 19 May, 2022

47. It could thus be seen that even the representatives of the allottees were of the opinion that on
account of the agitation of the local farmers, the developers were not in a position to carry out any
work on the spot. It was also impressed upon that on account of this, the cost of the project was
getting escalated. As such, it was urged to solve the problem.

48. The Chaudhary Committee also considered the submissions made on behalf of the appellant−
YEIDA. It was submitted on behalf of the appellant−YEIDA that on account of the judgment
delivered in a similar case, i.e., in the case of Gajraj (supra), the farmers, whose lands were acquired,
were also demanding the compensation on similar lines.

49. After considering the rival submissions, the Chaudhary Committee gave its recommendation as
under:

“Recommendation of Committee:− The opinion of Authority as well as the demands
of the Farmers' Organizations were carefully considered by the Committee. In the
common order passed in the different Writ Petitions filed by Noida and Greater
Noida Authorities, the Hon'ble High Court by not finding the proceedings conducted
under Section 17 of Land Acquisition Act, 1894 to be proper, had directed that the
Authority shall pay 64.7% additional compensation to the farmers and return them
10% developed land. Also in the Yamuna Expressway Authority, around 700 Writ
Petitions have been filed by the farmers by challenging the different notifications,
wherein, stay orders have been passed in the most of the Petitions, the circumstances
which were existing in the acquisition made by Noida and Greater Noida Authority,
same circumstances are also existed in the most of the cases of acquisition of Yamuna
Expressway. The lands acquired by the Authority, have been allotted to the different
allottees for different projects, due to which, the third party rights have been created
in this acquired land and if order is passed against the Authority in the Petitioners
filed against the Acquisition Proceedings, then, many difficulties would arise.
Therefore, keeping in view the legal expected legal complications, it is required to do
the out of court settlement with the affected farmers. At the time of discussion, it was
assured by the farmers' representatives that if the Government/ Authority agrees to
give 64.7% additional compensation, then, the farmers will withdraw the Petitions
filed in the Court.

Therefore, Committee recommends that:− I .(a) If, all the farmers/ Petitioners of a village related to
the land acquired/ purchased by the Yamuna Expressway Authority, withdraw their Petitions filed
in the Hon'ble High Court or in any other Court and if they give written assurance for future that
they will not file any claim against the Authority or it's allottees in any Court and will not cause any
obstruction in the Development Works, then, like the Greater Noida Authority, the Authority may
consider to give amount equivalent to 64.7% additional compensation in the form of No Litigation
Incentive/ Additional Compensation, which may be compensated proportionally from the
concerned allottees and same may also be imposed proportionally in the costing of allotment of land
available with the Authority.

14

Yamuna Expressway Industrial ... vs M/S Shakuntla Education And Welfare ... on 19 May, 2022

These benefits shall be allowed also to those farmers, whose' lands have been purchased by the
Authority vide Sale Deed on mutual consent basis.

(b) The process of payment of additional compensation, be completed villagewise in accordance
with the Schemes/ Priorities of Authority after obtaining physical possession of on the spot and after
withdrawal of all the Writ petitions/ Cases of concerned village after doing settlement with the
farmers. In view of the financial condition of Authority, if the payment of additional compensation is
not possible in lumpsum, then, the consideration could also be made regarding payment in
installments or in the form of developed land.

2. Regarding allotment of 10% developed land in place of 7% developed land, the proceedings be
conducted according to the order of Appeal/SLP filed by the Noida/Greater Noida Authorities.

3. The proceedings of amendment proposed by the Authority in Abadi Rules, are at final stage of
approval, the proceedings be conducted as per the decision of Government.

4. Regarding abolishing the distinction between ancestral and non−ancestral, this decision has been
taken in the 48th meeting dated 08.01.2014 of Yamuna Expressway Authority Board, that such land
owners of the lands acquired or to be acquired/purchased by the Authority, whose' names have
remained recorded in Six Yearly Register/ Khatauni on the acquired land prior to the date of
establishment of Authority i.e. 24.04.2001, and the landowners are residents of any village related
to any District lying within the notified area of Yamuna Expressway Authority, then, the benefit of
7% abadi land be granted to him against his acquired land. In the decision of Authority Board, this
facility has also been allowed to the successors of eligible land owners, who fulfill the aforesaid
conditions. The further proceedings be conducted as per the decision of Authority Board.

5. In view of the demands of farmers organizations and local public of District Mathura, after taking
into consideration the proposal submitted by Concessionaire namely M/s. J.P. Infratech Ltd., in the
48th meeting dated 08.01.2014 of Yamuna Expressway Authority Board, a decision in principle has
been taken for construction of Exist & Entry Ramps at Bajna−Nauhjheel Road at Yamuna
Expressway and by making necessary amendments in DPR accordingly, a letter has been sent to the
Concessionaire namely M/s. J,P. Infratech for necessary action. The further proceedings be
conducted as per the decision of Authority Board.

It is recommended by the Committee that the aforementioned additional benefits be granted to the
landowners only in that case when they will handover the physical possession of land to the
Authority and withdraw Writ Petition/Case pending in Hon'ble High Court or any other Court and
agreement for not causing any obstruction in future in the development works of allottees and for
not filing any claim in any Court against the acquisition of land in future. Regarding the other
demands, the Committee will give it's recommendation after further consideration.”

50. It could thus be seen that the recommendations of the Chaudhary Committee were principally
intended to resolve the issue between the farmers and the allottees, and to find out a workable
solution to the problem. The Chaudhary Committee recommended similar treatment to be given to

15

Yamuna Expressway Industrial ... vs M/S Shakuntla Education And Welfare ... on 19 May, 2022

the farmers whose lands were acquired for YEIDA, as was given to the farmers whose lands were
acquired for the benefit of NOIDA and Greater NOIDA. The Chaudhary Committee found that the
same benefits as were given to the farmers whose lands were acquired for the benefit of NOIDA and
Greater NOIDA in view of the judgment of the High Court in the case of Gajraj (supra), as affirmed
by this Court in the case of Savitri Devi (supra) should also be given to the farmers whose lands were
acquired for the benefit of YEIDA. However, this was made conditional. Additional benefit was
granted to the landowners on the condition that they would handover the physical possession of
land to YEIDA and withdraw the writ petitions/cases filed by them pending before the High Court.

51. The State Government vide the said G.O. gave effect to the recommendations of the Chaudhary
Committee. YEIDA too, in its Board meeting dated 15 th September, 2014, resolved to implement
the decision of the State Government. Accordingly, demand notices came to be issued to the
allottees.

52. It could thus be seen that the policy decision of the State Government is preceded by various
factors. Firstly, the farmers’ agitation, after they were denied the benefits which were granted to the
farmers whose lands were acquired for the benefit of NOIDA and Greater NOIDA; the report of the
Commissioner, the appointment of the Chaudhary Committee, the deliberations of the Chaudhary
Committee with various stakeholders, and thereafter the recommendations of the Chaudhary
Committee.

53. It will be relevant to refer to the judgment of this Court in the case of the Kasinka Trading and
another vs. Union of India and another7, wherein this Court has referred to various earlier
pronouncements and the treatise of Prof. S.A. de Smith on “Judicial Review of Administrative
Action”. The relevant paragraphs of the said judgment read thus:

“12. It has been settled by this Court that the doctrine of promissory estoppel is
applicable against the Government also particularly where it is necessary to prevent
fraud or manifest injustice. The doctrine, however, cannot be pressed into aid to
compel the Government or the public authority “to carry out a representation or
promise which is contrary to law or which was outside the authority or power of the
officer of the Government or of the public authority to make”. There is
preponderance of judicial opinion that to invoke the doctrine of promissory estoppel
clear, sound and positive foundation must be laid in the petition itself by the party
invoking the doctrine and that bald expressions, without any supporting material, to
the effect that the doctrine is attracted because the party invoking the doctrine has
altered its position relying on the assurance of the Government would not be
sufficient to press into aid the doctrine. In our opinion, the doctrine of promissory 7
(1995) 1 SCC 274 estoppel cannot be invoked in the abstract and the courts are bound
to consider all aspects including the results sought to be achieved and the public good
at large, because while considering the applicability of the doctrine, the courts have to
do equity and the fundamental principles of equity must for ever be present to the
mind of the court, while considering the applicability of the doctrine. The doctrine
must yield when the equity so demands if it can be shown having regard to the facts

16

Yamuna Expressway Industrial ... vs M/S Shakuntla Education And Welfare ... on 19 May, 2022

and circumstances of the case that it would be inequitable to hold the Government or
the public authority to its promise, assurance or representation.

13. The ambit, scope and amplitude of the doctrine of promissory estoppel has been
evolved in this country over the last quarter of a century through successive decisions
of this Court starting with Union of India v. Indo−Afghan Agencies Ltd. [(1968) 2
SCR 366 : AIR 1968 SC 718] Reference in this connection may be made with
advantage to Century Spg. & Mfg. Co.

Ltd. v. Ulhasnagar Municipal Council [(1970) 1 SCC 582 : (1970) 3 SCR 854] ; Motilal
Padampat Sugar Mills Co.

Ltd. v. State of U.P. [(1979) 2 SCC 409 :

1979 SCC (Tax) 144 : (1979) 2 SCR 641] ; Jit Ram Shiv Kumar v. State of Haryana
[(1981) 1 SCC 11 : (1980) 3 SCR 689] ; Union of India v. Godfrey Philips India Ltd.
[(1985) 4 SCC 369 : 1986 SCC (Tax) 11] ; Indian Express Newspapers (Bom) (P) Ltd.
v. Union of India [(1985) 1 SCC 641 : 1985 SCC (Tax) 121] ; Pournami Oil Mills v.
State of Kerala [1986 Supp SCC 728 : 1987 SCC (Tax) 134] ; Shri Bakul Oil Industries
v. State of Gujarat [(1987) 1 SCC 31 : 1987 SCC (Tax) 74 : (1987) 1 SCR 185] ; Asstt.
CCT v. Dharmendra Trading Co. [(1988) 3 SCC 570 : 1988 SCC (Tax) 432] ; Amrit
Banaspati Co. Ltd. v. State of Punjab [(1992) 2 SCC 411] and Union of India v.
Hindustan Development Corpn. [(1993) 3 SCC 499 : JT (1993) 3 SC 15] In Godfrey
Philips India Ltd. [(1985) 4 SCC 369 : 1986 SCC (Tax) 11] this Court opined: (SCC p.
388, para 13) “We may also point out that the doctrine of promissory estoppel being
an equitable doctrine, it must yield when the equity so requires; if it can be shown by
the Government or public authority that having regard to the facts as they have
transpired, it would be inequitable to hold the Government or public authority to the
promise or representation made by it, the Court would not raise an equity in favour of
the person to whom the promise or representation is made and enforce the promise
or representation against the Government or public authority. The doctrine of
promissory estoppel would be displaced in such a case, because on the facts, equity
would not require that the Government or public authority should be held bound by
the promise or representation made by it.”

14. In Excise Commissioner, U.P. v. Ram Kumar [(1976) 3 SCC 540 : 1976 SCC (Tax)
360 : AIR 1976 SC 2237] four learned Judges of this Court observed: (SCC p.

545, para 19) “The fact that sales of country liquor had been exempted from sales tax vide
Notification No. ST−1149/X−802 (33)−51 dated 6−4−1959 could not operate as an estoppel against
the State Government and preclude it from subjecting the sales to tax if it felt impelled to do so in
the interest of the revenues of the State which are required for execution of the plans designed to
meet the ever− increasing pressing needs of the developing society. It is now well settled by a catena
of decisions that there can be no question of estoppel against the Government in the exercise of its

17

Yamuna Expressway Industrial ... vs M/S Shakuntla Education And Welfare ... on 19 May, 2022

legislative, sovereign or executive powers.”

15. Prof. S.A. de Smith in his celebrated treatise Judicial Review of Administrative Action, 3rd Edn.,
at p. 279 sums up the position thus:

“Contracts and covenants entered into by the Crown are not to be construed as being
subject to implied terms that would exclude the exercise of general discretionary
powers for the public good. On the contrary they are to be construed as incorporating
an implied term that such powers remain exercisable. This is broadly true of other
public authorities also. But the status and functions of the Crown in this regard are of
a higher order. The Crown cannot be allowed to tie its hands completely by prior
undertakings is as clear as the proposition that the Courts cannot allow the Crown to
evade compliance with ostensibly binding obligations whenever it thinks fit. If a
public authority lawfully repudiates or departs from the terms of a binding contract
in order to have been bound in law by an ostensibly binding contract because the
undertakings would improperly fetter its general discretionary powers the other party
to the agreement has no right whatsoever to damages or compensation under the
general law, no matter how serious the damages that party may have suffered.”

54. It has been held by this Court that the doctrine of promissory estoppel cannot be
invoked in the abstract and the courts are bound to consider all aspects including the
results sought to be achieved and the public good at large. It has been held that while
considering the applicability of the doctrine, the courts have to do equity and the
fundamental principles of equity must for ever be present to the mind of the court,
while considering the applicability of the doctrine. It has been held that the doctrine
being an equitable doctrine, it must yield when the equity so requires, if it can be
shown by the Government or Public Authority that having regard to the facts and
circumstances as they have transpired, it would be inequitable to hold the
Government or the Public Authority to the promise, assurance or representation
made by it. The judgment of this Court in the case of Kasinka Trading (supra) has
been consistently followed.

55. If we apply the principle as laid down in the case of Kasinka Trading (supra) to
the facts of the present case, it will be clear that the policy decision of the State
Government was not only in the larger public interest but also in the interest of the
respondents. The projects were stalled on account of the farmers’ agitation. The
farmers felt discriminated as they found that the compensation paid to them was
much lesser than the one being paid to the equally circumstanced farmers in NOIDA
and Greater NOIDA. It was the allottees of the land who had approached the State
Government for redressal of the problem.

In these circumstances, the Government took cognizance of the problem and appointed the
Commissioner to look into the issue. Since the Commissioner recommended appointment of a
High−Level Committee, the Chaudhary Committee was appointed. The Chaudhary Committee had

18

Yamuna Expressway Industrial ... vs M/S Shakuntla Education And Welfare ... on 19 May, 2022

threadbare discussions with all the stakeholders. It also took into consideration that on account of
stay orders passed by the High Court in various writ petitions, the development of the project was
stalled. On account of pendency of the writ petitions, there was always a hanging sword over the
entire acquisition of it being declared unlawful. In this premise, in order to find out a workable
solution and that too, on the basis of the law laid down by the High Court in the case of Gajraj
(supra) as affirmed by this Court in the case of Savitri Devi (supra) and followed by this Court in the
case of Savitri Mohan (Dead) (supra), recommendations were made by the Chaudhary Committee.
The Chaudhary Committee specifically recommended that the additional compensation and other
incentives would be paid only if the landowners agree to handover physical possession of the land to
YEIDA and withdraw all the litigations.

56. It could thus be seen that the recommendations, which were accepted by the State Government
and formulated in the policy, were made taking into consideration the interests of all the
stakeholders. As held by this Court, it is not only the interest of a small section of the allottees which
should weigh with the Government, but the Government should also give due weightage to the
interest of the large section of farmers, whose lands were acquired.

57. We further find that the High Court fell in error in observing that no writ petitions were filed
challenging the acquisition for YEIDA. The report of the Chaudhary Committee itself would clarify
that YEIDA had itself submitted that insofar as the residential plots are concerned, there were stay
orders operating in majority of the writ petitions due to which the development of the project work
was stalled.

58. We are therefore of the considered view that the policy decision of the State Government was in
the larger public interest. It was taken considering entire material collected by the Chaudhary
Committee after due deliberations with all the stakeholders. The factors which were taken into
consideration by the State Government were relevant, rational and founded on ground realities. In
this view of the matter, the finding of the High Court that the policy decision of the State
Government was arbitrary, irrational and unfair, is totally incorrect.

59. The law with regard to interference in the policy decision of the State is by now very well
crystalized. This Court in the case of Essar Steel Limited vs Union of India and others8 had an
occasion to consider the scope of interference in the policy decision of the State. After referring to
various decisions of this Court, the Court observed thus:

“43. Before we can examine the validity of the impugned policy decision dated 6−3−
2007, it is crucial to understand the extent of the power vested with this Court to
review policy decisions.

44. In DDA [DDA v. Allottee of SFS Flats, (2008) 2 SCC 672 : (2008) 1 SCC (Civ)
684] on issue of judicial review of policy decisions, the power of the Court is
examined and observed as under: (SCC pp.

19

Yamuna Expressway Industrial ... vs M/S Shakuntla Education And Welfare ... on 19 May, 2022

697−98, paras 64−65) “64. An executive order termed as a policy decision is not beyond the pale of
judicial review. Whereas the superior courts may not interfere with the nitty− gritty of the policy, or
substitute one by the other but it will not be correct to contend that the court shall lay its judicial
hands off, when a plea is raised that the impugned decision is a policy 8 (2016) 11 SCC 1 decision.
Interference therewith on the part of the superior court would not be without jurisdiction as it is
subject to judicial review.

65. Broadly, a policy decision is subject to judicial review on the following grounds:

(a) if it is unconstitutional;

(b) if it is dehors the provisions of the Act and the Regulations;

(c) if the delegatee has acted beyond its power of delegation;

(d) if the executive policy is contrary to the statutory or a larger policy.”

45. Thus, we will test the impugned policy on the above grounds to determine
whether it warrants our interference under Article 136 or not. Further, this Court
neither has the jurisdiction nor the competence to judge the viability of such policy
decisions of the Government in exercise of its appellate jurisdiction under Article 136
of the Constitution of India.

In Arun Kumar Agrawal v. Union of India [Arun Kumar Agrawal v. Union of India,
(2013) 7 SCC 1] , this Court has further held as under: (SCC p. 17, para 41) “41. … This
Court sitting in the jurisdiction cannot sit in judgment over the commercial or
business decision taken by parties to the agreement, after evaluating and assessing its
monetary and financial implications, unless the decision is in clear violation of any
statutory provisions or perverse or taken for extraneous considerations or improper
motives. States and its instrumentalities can enter into various contracts which may
involve complex economic factors. State or the State undertaking being a party to a
contract, have to make various decisions which they deem just and proper. There is
always an element of risk in such decisions, ultimately it may turn out to be a correct
decision or a wrong one. But if the decision is taken bona fide and in public interest,
the mere fact that decision has ultimately proved to be wrong, that itself is not a
ground to hold that the decision was mala fide or taken with ulterior motives.”
(emphasis supplied)

46. In Villianur Iyarkkai Padukappu Maiyam v. Union of India [Villianur Iyarkkai
Padukappu Maiyam v. Union of India, (2009) 7 SCC 561] , it was held as under: (SCC
p. 605, para 169) “169. It is neither within the domain of the courts nor the scope of
judicial review to embark upon an enquiry as to whether a particular public policy is
wise or whether better public policy can be evolved. Nor are the courts inclined to
strike down a policy at the behest of a petitioner merely because it has been urged

20

Yamuna Expressway Industrial ... vs M/S Shakuntla Education And Welfare ... on 19 May, 2022

that a different policy would have been fairer or wiser or more scientific or more
logical. Wisdom and advisability of economic policy are ordinarily not amenable to
judicial review. In matters relating to economic issues the Government has, while
taking a decision, right to “trial and error” as long as both trial and error are bona
fide and within the limits of the authority. For testing the correctness of a policy, the
appropriate forum is Parliament and not the courts.” (emphasis supplied)

47. A three−Judge Bench of this Court in Narmada Bachao Andolan v. Union of India
[Narmada Bachao Andolan v. Union of India, (2000) 10 SCC 664] cautioned against
courts sitting in appeal against policy decisions. It was held as under:

(SCC p. 763, para 234) “234. In respect of public projects and policies which are
initiated by the Government the courts should not become an approval authority.
Normally such decisions are taken by the Government after due care and
consideration. In a democracy welfare of the people at large, and not merely of a
small section of the society, has to be the concern of a responsible Government. If a
considered policy decision has been taken, which is not in conflict with any law or is
not mala fide, it will not be in public interest to require the court to go into and
investigate those areas which are the function of the executive. For any project which
is approved after due deliberation the court should refrain from being asked to review
the decision just because a petitioner in filing a PIL alleges that such a decision
should not have been taken because an opposite view against the undertaking of the
project, which view may have been considered by the Government, is possible. When
two or more options or views are possible and after considering them the
Government takes a policy decision it is then not the function of the court to go into
the matter afresh and, in a way, sit in appeal over such a policy decision.” (emphasis
supplied)

48. A similar sentiment was echoed by a Constitution Bench of this Court in Peerless
General Finance & Investment Co. Ltd. v. RBI [Peerless General Finance &
Investment Co. Ltd. v. RBI, (1992) 2 SCC 343] , wherein it was observed as under:

(SCC p. 375, para 31) “31. … Courts are not to interfere with economic policy which is
the function of experts. It is not the function of the courts to sit in judgment over
matters of economic policy and it must necessarily be left to the expert bodies. In
such matters even experts can seriously and doubtlessly differ. Courts cannot be
expected to decide them without even the aid of experts.”

49. A perusal of the abovementioned judgments of this Court would show that this
Court should exercise great caution and restraint when confronted with matters
related to the policy regarding commercial matters of the country.

Executive policies are usually enacted after much deliberation by the Government.

21

Yamuna Expressway Industrial ... vs M/S Shakuntla Education And Welfare ... on 19 May, 2022

Therefore, it would not be appropriate for this Court to question the wisdom of the same, unless it is
demonstrated by the aggrieved persons that the said policy has been enacted in an arbitrary,
unreasonable or mala fide manner, or that it offends the provisions of the Constitution of India.”

60. It is trite law that an interference with the policy decision would not be warranted unless it is
found that the policy decision is palpably arbitrary, mala fide, irrational or violative of the statutory
provisions. We are therefore of the considered view that the High Court was also not right in
interfering with the policy decision of the State Government, which is in the larger public interest.

61. It will also be apposite to refer to the following observations of this Court in the case of APM
Terminals B.V. vs. Union of India and another9:

“67. It has been the consistent view of this Court that a change in policy by the
Government can have an overriding effect over private treaties between the
Government and a private party, if the same was in the general public interest and
provided such change in policy was guided by reason. Several decisions have been
cited by the parties in this regard in the context of preventing private monopolisation
of port activities to an extent where such private player would assume a dominant
position which would enable them to control not only the berthing of ships but the
tariff for use of the port facilities.”

62. It could thus be seen that it is more than settled that a change in policy by the Government can
have an overriding effect over private treaties between the Government and a 9 (2011) 6 SCC 756
private party, if the same was in the general public interest. The additional requirement is that such
change in policy is required to be guided by reason.

63. Insofar as the reliance placed by the respondents on the judgment of this Court in the case of
ITC Limited (supra) is concerned, in our considered view, the said judgment would not be of any
assistance to the case of the respondents. This Court in the said case in paragraph 107.1 has clearly
observed that in the case of conflict between public interest and personal interest, public interest
should prevail.

64. A number of judgments of this Court have been cited at the Bar by the respondents in support of
the proposition that in view of concluded contracts, it was not permissible for the appellants to
unilaterally increase the premium by framing a policy.

65. We have hereinabove elaborately discussed that when a policy is changed by the State, which is
in the general public interest, such policy would prevail over the individual rights/interests. In that
view of the matter, we do not find it necessary to refer to the said judgments. The policy of the State
Government as reflected in the said G.O. was not only in the larger public interest but also in the
interest of the respondents.

66. We further find that the respondents have indulged into the conduct of approbate and
reprobate. They have changed their stance as per their convenience. When their projects were

22

Yamuna Expressway Industrial ... vs M/S Shakuntla Education And Welfare ... on 19 May, 2022

stalled on account of the farmers’ agitation, it is they who approached the State Authorities for
finding out a solution. When the State Government responded to their representations and came up
with a policy which was equitable and in the interest of both, the farmers and the allottees and when
the said policy paved the way for development, when called upon to pay the additional
compensation, the respondents−allottees somersaulted and challenged the very same policy before
the High Court, which benefitted them. We have already hereinabove made reference to the various
communications made by the allottees of the land for intervention of the State Government.

67. Insofar as the individual plot owners are concerned, it will be worthwhile to mention that the
residential plot owners in Sectors 18 and 20 of Yamuna Expressway city have formed an association,
viz., Yamuna Expressway Residential−Plot−Owners Welfare Association (hereinafter referred to as
“the YERWA”). The communication addressed by the president of the YERWA to the CEO of YEIDA
would reveal that 98.5% of the allottees/owners have voted in favour of paying the additional
premium demanded by the Authority. The only request made by the YERWA is with regard to
making a provision for paying additional premium in installments.

68. It can thus be seen that even insofar as the individual residential plot owners are concerned,
more than 98% of the plot owners do not have any objection to the payment of the additional
compensation.

69. With respect to the contention of the respondent No.19− Supertech with regard to initiation of
CIRP, we are not concerned with the said issue in the present proceedings. The law will take its own
course.

70. In conclusion, we are of the considered view that the policy decision of the State Government as
reflected in the said G.O. dated 29th August, 2014 and the Resolution of the Board of YEIDA dated
15th September, 2014 were in the larger public interest, taking care of the concerns of the allottees
as well as the farmers. As already discussed hereinabove, had the said decision not been taken, there
was a hanging sword of the acquisition being declared unlawful. The development of the entire
project was stalled on account of farmers’ agitation. Before taking the policy decision, the State
Government, through the Chaudhary Committee, had done a wide range of deliberations with all the
stakeholders including the allottees, farmers and YEIDA. The policy decision was taken after taking
into consideration all relevant factors and was guided by reasons. In any case, it is a settled position
of law that in case of a conflict between public interest and personal interest, public interest will
outweigh the personal interest. The High Court was therefore not justified in holding that the policy
decision of the State was unfair, unreasonable and arbitrary. We are of the considered view that the
High Court has erred in allowing the writ petitions. The present appeals, therefore, deserve to be
allowed.

71. In the result, we pass the following order:

(i)     The appeals are allowed;

(ii)    The impugned judgment and order dated 28 th May,

23

Yamuna Expressway Industrial ... vs M/S Shakuntla Education And Welfare ... on 19 May, 2022

2020, passed by the Allahabad High Court in Writ Petition No. 28968 of 2018 and companion
matters is quashed and set aside;

(iii) The writ petitions filed by the respondents covered by the impugned judgment and order dated
28th May, 2020 passed by the Allahabad High Court are dismissed;

72. Applications for Intervention are allowed. Pending applications, including the applications for
directions, shall stand disposed of in the above terms. There shall be no order as to costs.

…..….......................J. [L. NAGESWARA RAO] …….........................J. [B.R. GAVAI] NEW DELHI;

MAY 19, 2022.

24