Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... vs Vincent Daniel on 27 March, 2025

Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... vs Vincent Daniel on 27
March, 2025

Author: Sanjay Kumar

Bench: Sanjay Kumar

 2025 INSC 408                                                         REPORTABLE

                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3998 OF 2024

                         MADHYA PRADESH ROAD DEVELOPMENT
                         CORPORATION                     .....            APPELLANT

                                                 VERSUS

                         VINCENT DANIEL AND OTHERS             .....   RESPONDENTS

                                                     WITH

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3999 OF 2024

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4004 OF 2024

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4005 OF 2024

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4012 OF 2024

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4002 OF 2024

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4013 OF 2024

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4006 OF 2024

Signature Not Verified              CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4001 OF 2024
Digitally signed by
babita pandey
Date: 2025.03.27
18:02:36 IST
Reason:                             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4000 OF 2024

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/133866489/

1

Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... vs Vincent Daniel on 27 March, 2025

          Civil Appeal No. 3998 of 2024 & Ors.                            Page 1 of 45
(cid:12)                             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4014 OF 2024

                                            AND

                             CIVIL APPEAL No.4003 OF 2024

                                     JUDGMENT

SANJIV KHANNA, CJI.

The issue raised in the present batch of appeals filed by the appellant, Madhya Pradesh Road
Development Corporation, relates to the applicability of the “theory of deduction” for determining
the compensation payable under The Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land
Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013.1

2. Before examining the legal position, it would be appropriate to set out the facts in brief:

• By a Gazette Notification dated 12.09.2014, the Central Government declared its
intention of acquiring the stretch of land falling within 3.4 km to 22.8 km of the
Jabalpur-Mandla-Chilpi Hereinafter, “Acquisition Act, 2013”.

section, in the district of Jabalpur, State of Madhya Pradesh. The purpose of the
acquisition was stated to be widening, four-laning, maintenance, management and
operation of National Highway No.12-A. On 30.10.2014, the notification was also
published in two newspapers.

• By a Gazette Notification dated 02.02.2015, the land was declared to have been
acquired.

• On 31.08.2015, the Competent Authority and Land Acquisition Officer, Collectorate,
Jabalpur passed an award determining the compensation payable for the land
acquired. The award relies on the mandate of Section 105(3) of the Acquisition Act,
2013 (as amended).2 It accordingly holds that for the acquisition in question,
provisions relating to the determination of compensation shall apply in accordance
with the First Schedule of the Acquisition Act, 2013. Further, provisions for
rehabilitation and resettlement would apply as per the Second Schedule, and those
relating to Section 105 (3) – The provisions of this Act relating to the determination
of compensation in accordance with the First Schedule, rehabilitation and
resettlement in accordance with the Second Schedule and infrastructure amenities in
accordance with the Third Schedule shall apply to the enactments relating to land
acquisition specified in the Fourth Schedule with effect from 1st January, 2015.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/133866489/

2

Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... vs Vincent Daniel on 27 March, 2025

infrastructural amenities shall apply as per the Third Schedule of the Acquisition Act,
2013.

• The First Schedule of the Acquisition Act, 2013 states that the market value of the
land has to be determined in accordance with Section 26 of the Acquisition Act, 2013.
Clause (a) to Section 26(1) adopts the market value as specified under the Indian
Stamp Act, 18993. Based on the date of the Gazette Notification published as per
Section 11 of the Acquisition Act, 2013, i.e., on 12.09.2014, the Competent Authority
deemed it appropriate to compute the market value according to the Collector’s
Guidelines for the year 2014- 20154. These guidelines have been formulated in the
exercise of the powers conferred under the Stamp Act. The Collector’s Guidelines
have been annexed as ‘Annexure P-1’ to the present appeal.

• Paragraph 4.1 of the Collector’s Guidelines deals with municipal corporation areas
of Jabalpur amongst other districts. It provides for the valuation of two kinds of land
– converted agricultural land and non-converted agricultural land. These are further
divided into Hereinafter, “Stamp Act”.

Hereinafter, “Collector’s Guidelines”. Categories (A) and (B). Category (A) applies
when the area of land is less than or equal to 1000 square meters, while Category (B)
applies when the area of land exceeds 1000 square meters. • The Competent
Authority determined the concerned area to be non-converted land of more than
1000 square meters, which would fall under Category (B). According to the method
prescribed under Category (B), the first 1000 square meters are to be valued in
accordance with Category (A). This corresponds to the rate applicable to residential
plots set out in Form-1 of the Collector’s Guidelines. The remaining area is to be
valued at the rate for agricultural land as specified in Form-3 of the Collector’s
Guidelines. In the present case, the Competent Authority applied the rate for Village
Katiyaghat, which is specified as Rs.1,50,00,000 per hectare under Form-3. The
Competent Authority determined the value of the land to be Rs. 97,50,000. Over this
amount, the Competent Authority also factored in assets attached to the land and the
solatium payable. • By following the aforesaid procedure, the total compensation
payable for the acquisition of the land belonging to Respondent No. 1, Vincent
Daniel, was calculated to be Rs. 2,05,42,164/-. • Dissatisfied with the compensation,
Respondent No. 1, Vincent Daniel, as the other landowners, appealed to the
Commissioner against the decision of the Competent Authority. One of the grounds
raised in the appeal was that the rate at which the compensation was awarded was
significantly lower than the market rate.

• The appellant, Madhya Pradesh Road Development Corporation, filed its reply
raising several contentions. They submitted that for an undeveloped piece of land,
the compensation was disproportionately high. A portion of the land would have to
be foregone to develop roads, drainage, electricity poles, etc., which would come at a
significant expense. Therefore, it was argued that the principles of compensation for

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/133866489/

3

Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... vs Vincent Daniel on 27 March, 2025

developed lands would not apply in the present case.

• The Commissioner in his arbitral award held that the Collector’s Guidelines were
binding. However, the Competent Authority had made an error in applying the same.
For 0.650 hectares of land situated inside the Katiyaghat road, at Khasra No. 53 of
village/mauja Katiyaghat, Jabalpur, the rate of Rs. 12,000 per square meter should
have been applied for the first 1000 square meters, while applying the rate of Rs.
1,50,00,000 per hectare for the balance land. After adding 100% solatium and
interest, an additional amount of Rs. 2,21,11,562/- was found to be payable. • Against
the Commissioner’s award, the appellant, Madhya Pradesh Road Development
Corporation, preferred objections before the District Court under Section 34(3) of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 19965. One of the contentions raised was that the
compensation should not have been awarded by solely relying upon the Collector’s
Guidelines, as the land was undeveloped. • The objections were dismissed by the
District Judge. It was observed that the land in question was situated within the
municipal areas on which the Collector’s Guidelines were applicable. It was noted
that the compensation was enhanced in compliance with the Collector’s Guidelines.
Form-1 of the Collector’s Guidelines prescribes the rate of Rs. 20,000 per square
meter for residential plots and Rs. 40,000 per square meter for commercial ones on
the Katiyaghat road. However, for the residential areas inside the Katiyaghat road,
the rate is Rs. 12,000 per square meter, which was rightly applied by the
Commissioner. Hereinafter, “Arbitration Act”.

It was also observed that the award passed was not in violation of public policy and,
therefore, Clause (b)(ii) to Section 34(2) of the Arbitration Act would not be
applicable.

• Consequently, the appellant, Madhya Pradesh Road Development Corporation,
preferred appeals under Section 37 of the Arbitration Act before the High Court,
which were dismissed by the impugned judgment dated 13.04.2022.

• The impugned judgment dated 13.04.2022 passed by the High Court of Madhya
Pradesh, inter alia, distinguishes between the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act,
18946 and the Acquisition Act, 2013. It holds that according to Section 26(1) of the
Acquisition Act, 2013, if the market value as determined under the Stamp Act is the
highest of the other computed values, it will be binding. The theory of deduction as
applied by the courts in determining the market value under the Acquisition Act,
1894, will not apply when determining compensation under Section 26(1) of the
Acquisition Act, 2013. Thus, the judgments applying the theory of deduction under
the Acquisition Act, 1894 do not have any precedential value under the Acquisition
Act, 2013. The impugned Hereinafter, “Acquisition Act,1894”.

judgment also refers to the Madhya Pradesh Preparation and Revision of Market
Value Guideline Rules, 20187 for the procedure of calculating of the market value of

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/133866489/

4

Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... vs Vincent Daniel on 27 March, 2025

land under the Stamp Act. Lastly, the High Court states that it has limited power and
jurisdiction under Section 37 read with Section 34 of the Arbitration Act to interfere
with the award passed by the Commissioner.

3. In order to answer the issue before us, we would first refer to the theory of deduction and the
reasons for its application by this Court under the Acquisition Act, 1894.

4. To compute compensation under the Acquisition Act, 1894, the general threshold applied by the
courts is to ascertain the market value of the acquired land. This also includes its potential value
with reference to the conditions prevailing at the time of making a declaration under Section 4(1) of
the Acquisition Act, 1894.8 The International Valuation Hereinafter, “2018 Rules”.

4. Publication of preliminary notification and powers of officers thereupon.—(1) Whenever it
appears to the appropriate Government that land in any locality is needed or is likely to be needed
for any public purpose or for a company a notification to that effect shall be published in the Official
Gazette and in two daily newspapers circulating in that locality of which at least one shall be in the
regional language and the Collector shall cause public notice of the substance of such notification to
be given at convenient places in the said locality (the last of the dates of such publication and the
giving of such public notice, being hereinafter referred to as the date of publication of the
notification).

Standards Council states that the market value of the land represents the estimated amount that a
willing buyer would pay prudently to a willing seller in an arm’s length transaction, without
compulsion, on a particular valuation date.9 This estimate includes characteristics unique to the
land that would inflate or deflate its price but excludes special concessions or considerations granted
by anyone associated with the sale. The buyer here refers to one who is motivated but is neither
over- eager nor determined to buy irrespective of the price quoted. Similarly, the seller here is
neither over-eager nor forced. Both parties are assumed to be conducting the transaction in keeping
with market realities, rather than terms that are hypothetical or cannot be anticipated to exist. The
factual circumstances of the parties are not part of this consideration.

5. In Smt. Tribeni Devi and Others v. Collector of Ranchi and Vice Versa,10 this Court acknowledged
several methods for ascertaining the market value of land, such as – (i) the opinion of experts; (ii)
the price paid in bona fide transactions for the purchase of adjacent lands International Valuation
Standards Council, International Valuation Standards 2025, effective 31 January 2025.

(1972) 1 SCC 480.

possessing similar advantages and disadvantages; and (iii) capitalization of the actual and
immediate prospective annual profits from the land. However, this exercise must take into
consideration subjective features and special circumstances. Land values vary based on their
qualitative and quantitative attributes, location, proximity to developed land, potential, etc. The lack
of reliable local sale data, coupled with variable land conditions, undermines accurate assessment.
Nevertheless, framing objective standards can help arrive at an empirical value that most closely

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/133866489/

5

Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... vs Vincent Daniel on 27 March, 2025

reflects the true market price.

6. The theory of deduction, though not statutorily prescribed, has been applied by courts to compute
the compensation payable under the Acquisition Act, 1894 primarily for two reasons. First,
consideration of the potential value of the land can result in arriving at an enhanced or increased
value, especially for undeveloped lands. Secondly, in acquisitions of large underdeveloped lands, a
significant portion of the land would have to be utilised for making minimum amenities like roads,
drains, sewers, water and electrical lines available. Thus, making the land usable would involve a
substantial expense for the buyer in the form of development charges.

7. The theory of deduction was applied in the case of Tribeni Devi (supra), which was decided in
1971. Recently, in a 2017 decision in Jag Mahender and Another v. State of Haryana and Others11 as
well, the theory of deduction was applied to arrive at a fair and reasonable market value. This
judgment also states that the prospective prices of smaller developed plots cannot be adopted to
determine the value of underdeveloped tracts of land. Further, the peculiarities of the land –
whether the same is plain or uneven, the soil is soft or hard, whether the land is situated on a hill or
is low-lying, etc. are all relevant factors. A given parcel of land has multiple dimensions – social,
economic, territorial, and environmental. Accordingly, the market value must be computed through
a valuation model based on attribute pricing rather than fixed prices. In some cases, sale deeds for
adjoining lands can be an ‘exemplar’, i.e., lands that are similarly placed and have comparable
attributes. However, computation of the market value may require calibration, taking into
consideration the advantages and disadvantages of the acquired land relative to the exemplars. The
exemplars must be carefully chosen, especially as (2017) SCC Online SC 2160.

lands are often heuristically grouped in localities at the same rate due to a lack of specific data.

8. On the question of the quantum of deduction, in Jag Mahender (supra), this Court held that the
computed value can be reduced by one-third to account for development charges, though in certain
cases deduction up to 50% has also been allowed while applying the theory of deduction.12 In
Tribeni Devi (supra) this Court had deducted 33.3% towards the cost of development.

9. In Lal Chand v. Union of India and Another,13 this Court stated that ‘fair deduction’ for
development has two components. First, the area required to be utilised for development, and
second, the cost of such development. For instance, the Delhi Development Authority is required to
utilise as much as 40% of the area in the layout for roads, drains, parks, playgrounds, civic
amenities, community facilities, etc. The cost of developing an underdeveloped land into a
developed layout is substantial and, in some cases, can be as much as 75% of Haryana State
Agricultural Market Board v. Krishan Kumar, (2011) 15 SCC 297; Dy. Director, Land Acquisition v.
Malla Atchinaidu and Others, (2006) 12 SCC 87; Mummidi Apparao (DEAD) THROUGH LRS. v.
Nagarjuna Fertilizers and Chemicals Limited and Another, AIR 2009 SC 1506 and Lal Chand v.
Union of India, (2009) 15 SCC 769. (2009) 15 SCC 769.

the cost of the developed plot. At the same time, it was observed that if the acquired land is in a
semi-developed urban area and not in an underdeveloped rural area, the deduction for development

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/133866489/

6

Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... vs Vincent Daniel on 27 March, 2025

would be minimal. Thus, the theory of deduction is fact and situation-specific.

10. This Court has also applied other principles, such as the “principle of belting”, to arrive at an
accurate market value. In Bijender and Others v. State of Haryana and Another,14 this Court
observed that the principle of belting is a judicially accepted method for determining the market
value of the acquired land fairly. It is applied when different parcels of land with different survey
numbers, having different locations, are acquired and put together to form a large chunk of land.
This large chunk cannot be taken as a compact block. The acquired land is usually divided into two
or three belts depending upon the facts of each case. The market value of the front road abutting the
main road is taken to fetch the maximum value whereas the second belt fetches lesser value and the
third belt, if carved out, would command a value lower still.

(2018) 11 SCC 180.

11. The decision in Lal Chand (supra) is relevant for another reason. It analyses whether the circle
rates or guideline values fixed under the Stamp Act can be relied upon for computing the market
value, which forms the basis for determining the compensation payable. It refers to a series of
judgments, including Jawajee Nagnatham v. Revenue Divisional Officer, Adilabad, A.P. and
Others15 and Krishi Utpadan Mandi Samiti. Sahaswan, District Badaun v. Bipin Kumar and
Another16, which, inter alia, hold that the market value under Section 23 of the Land Acquisition
Act, 1894 cannot be fixed solely on the basis of the rates mentioned in the basic valuation registers.
These registers are maintained to curb the under-valuation of land, a practice adopted to evade the
payment of proper stamp duty. Jawajee Nagnatham (supra) observes that the basic valuation
register is maintained to ensure the collection of stamp duty under Section 47A of the Stamp Act, as
amended in Andhra Pradesh. Section 47A confers no express power on the Government to
determine the market value of land.

12. In its ratio, Lal Chand (supra) observes that the circle rate or guideline value rate can only be
considered a prima facie basis for ascertaining (1994) 4 SCC 595.

(2004) 2 SCC 283.

the market value. The purpose of determination of circle rates through the relevant guidelines is to
protect the State’s revenue collection. The judgment in Lal Chand (supra) also refers to R. Sai
Bharathi v. J. Jayalalitha and Others,17 a case pertaining to the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988,
wherein this Court observes that circle or guideline rates fixed by the authorities under the Stamp
Act are merely prima facie rates prevailing in the area and are not final and determinative. Thus, the
guideline or circle rate fixed by the Collector does not take away the right of a person to show that
the property in question is correctly valued. It is open, both to the registering authority as well as the
person seeking registration, to prove the actual market value of the land/property before the
authorities.

13. Lal Chand (supra) also draws a distinction between guideline values prescribed by non-statutory
valuation registers, and circle rates determined by expert committees constituted under the Stamp

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/133866489/

7

Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... vs Vincent Daniel on 27 March, 2025

Act. State legislations can lay down a detailed procedure, assigning the task of valuation to expert
committees. The expert committees comprise valuation specialists and officers from the
Departments of (2004) 2 SCC 9.

Revenue, Survey and Settlement, Public Works, etc. They must follow a scientific process for the
assessment of market values of different types of lands. The valuation framework must prescribe
distinct methods for valuing land, plots, houses, and buildings, accounting for variable factors. For
agricultural land, such variables would include the nature of the soil, location, nature of the crop,
the yield for specified years, proximity to roads, markets, etc. The valuation committees are required
to invite objections and suggestions from the public both before the initial fixation of rates and
during their periodic revision. Circle rates computed through a detailed and scientific exercise would
be a relevant piece of evidence for determining the market value, being equivalent to expert
evidence.

14. As observed above, to account for the unique factors affecting a piece of land, methods such as
the comparative sale/exemplar method, belting method and expert opinion method have been
evolved through judicial pronouncements to arrive at the accurate market value. The computation of
circle rates and market values is a complex exercise that involves detailed research, data collection,
and the use of scientific methods. International standards reflect this complexity, noting that the
concept of market value takes on different colours depending on the subject to which it is applied.18
For example, the valuation of land involves entirely different considerations from the valuation of
financial instruments. These standards also recognise the wide range of variables that influence land
valuation specifically, and the need for distinct approaches to determine accurate market value.
Authorities and institutions must be cognizant of these aspects while forming policies, as well as
when giving meaning to legislation and interpreting the law.

15. We now turn our attention to the statutory provisions of the Acquisition Act, 1894 and the
Acquisition Act, 2013. At the outset, we must observe that the impugned judgment primarily refers
to Section 23 of the Acquisition Act, 1894 and Section 26 of the Acquisition Act, 2013 and draws a
distinction between the language of the two sections. However, to address the issue before us, we
must refer to a few other provisions as well. We would like to refer to Sections 11, 15, 24 and 25 in
addition to Section 23 of the Acquisition Act, 1894. For the Acquisition Act, 2013, we would like to
refer to Sections 23, 27 and 28 in addition to Section 26. However, for clarity, we have juxtaposed
Supra note 10.

Section 28 of the Acquisition Act, 2013 with Section 23 of the Acquisition Act, 1894 as they are
similar, and Section 27 of the Acquisition Act, 2013 with Section 25 of the Acquisition Act, 1894.

                        1894 Act                                   2013 Act

        11. Enquiry and award by                   23. Enquiry and land acquisition
        Collector.— (1) On the day so fixed,       award by Collector.— On the day so
        or on any other day to which the           fixed, or on any other day to which the
        enquiry has been adjourned, the            enquiry has been adjourned, the
        Collector shall proceed to enquire into    Collector shall proceed to enquire into
        the objection (if any) which any           the objections (if any) which any person

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/133866489/

8

Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... vs Vincent Daniel on 27 March, 2025

        person interested has stated pursuant      interested has stated pursuant to a

to a notice given under section 9 to the notice given under Section 21, to the measurements made
under section 8, measurements made under Section 20, and into the value of the land at the and
into the value of the land at the date date of the publication of the of the publication of the
notification, and notification under section 4, sub- into the respective interests of the section (1),
and into the respective persons claiming the compensation interests of the persons claiming the and
rehabilitation and resettlement, compensation and shall make an shall make an award under his
hand award under his hand of- of—

(i) the true area of the land; (a) the true area of the land;

(ii) the compensation which in his (b) the compensation as determined opinion should be allowed
for the under Section 27 along with land; and Rehabilitation and Resettlement award as determined
under Section 31 and

(iii) the apportionment of the said which in his opinion should be allowed compensation among all
the persons for the land; and known or believed to be interested in the land, or whom, or of whose
claims, (c) the apportionment of the said he has information, whether or not compensation among
all the persons they have respectively appeared known or believed to be interested in before him: the
land, or whom, or of whose claims, he has information, whether or not they Provided that no award
shall be made have respectively appeared before him. by the Collector under this sub-

section without the previous approval of the appropriate Government or of such officer as the
appropriate Government may authorize in this behalf:

Provided further that it shall be competent for the appropriate Government to direct
that the Collector may make such award without such approval in such class of cases
as the appropriate Government may specify in this behalf.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if at any stage of the
proceedings, the Collector is satisfied that all the persons interested in the land who
appeared before him have agreed in writing on the matters to be included in the
award of the Collector in the form prescribed by rules made by the appropriate
Government, he may, without making further enquiry, make an award according to
the terms of such agreement.

(3) The determination of compensation for any land under sub-

section (2) shall not in any way affect the determination of compensation in respect
of other lands in the same locality or elsewhere in accordance with the other
provisions of this Act.

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908),

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/133866489/

9

Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... vs Vincent Daniel on 27 March, 2025

no agreement made under subsection (2) shall be liable to registration under that
Act.

15. Matters to be considered and 26. Determination of market value neglected.— In
determining the of land by Collector.— (1) The amount of compensation, the collector
Collector shall adopt the following shall be guided by the provisions criteria in
assessing and determining contained in section 23 and 24. the market value of the
land, namely:—

(a) the market value, if any, specified in the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 (2 of 1899) for
the registration of sale deeds or agreements to sell, as the case may be, in the area,
where the land is situated; or

(b) the average sale price for similar type of land situated in the nearest village or
nearest vicinity area; or

(c) consented amount of compensation as agreed upon under sub-section (2) of
Section 2 in case of acquisition of lands for private companies or for public private
partnership projects, whichever is higher:

Provided that the date for determination of market value shall be the date on which
the notification has been issued under Section 11.

Explanation 1.—The average sale price referred to in clause (b) shall be determined
taking into account the sale deeds or the agreements to sell registered for similar type
of area in the near village or near vicinity area during immediately preceding three
years of the year in which such acquisition of land is proposed to be made.

Explanation 2.—For determining the average sale price referred to in Explanation 1,
one-half of the total number of sale deeds or the agreements to sell in which the
highest sale price has been mentioned shall be taken into account.

Explanation 3.—While determining the market value under this section and the
average sale price referred to in Explanation 1 or Explanation 2, any price paid as
compensation for land acquired under the provisions of this Act on an earlier
occasion in the district shall not be taken into consideration.

Explanation 4.—While determining the market value under this section and the
average sale price referred to in Explanation 1 or Explanation 2, any price paid, which
in the opinion of the Collector is not indicative of actual prevailing market value may
be discounted for the purposes of calculating market value.

(2) The market value calculated as per sub-section (1) shall be multiplied by a factor
to be specified in the First Schedule.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/133866489/

10

Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... vs Vincent Daniel on 27 March, 2025

(3) Where the market value under sub-

section (1) or sub-section (2) cannot be determined for the reason that—

(a) the land is situated in such area where the transactions in land are restricted by or under any
other law for the time being in force in that area; or

(b) the registered sale deeds or agreements to sell as mentioned in clause (a) of sub-section (1) for
similar land are not available for the immediately preceding three years; or

(c) the market value has not been specified under the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 (2 of 1899) by the
appropriate authority, the State Government concerned shall specify the floor price or minimum
price per unit area of the said land based on the price calculated in the manner specified in
sub-section (1) in respect of similar types of land situated in the immediate adjoining areas:

Provided that in a case where the Requiring Body offers its shares to the owners of
the lands (whose lands have been acquired) as a part compensation, for acquisition of
land, such shares in no case shall exceed twenty-five per cent of the value so
calculated under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) as the case may
be:

Provided further that the Requiring Body shall in no case compel any owner of the
land (whose land has been acquired) to take its shares, the value of which is
deductible in the value of the land calculated under sub-section (1):

Provided also that the Collector shall, before initiation of any land acquisition
proceedings in any area, take all necessary steps to revise and update the market
value of the land on the basis of the prevalent market rate in that area:

Provided also that the appropriate Government shall ensure that the market value
determined for acquisition of any land or property of an educational institution
established and administered by a religious or linguistic minority shall be such as
would not restrict or abrogate the right to establish and administer educational
institutions of their choice.

23. Matters to be considered on 28. Parameters to be considered by determining
compensation.— (1) In Collector in determination of determining the amount of
award.— In determining the amount of compensation to be awarded for land
compensation to be awarded for land acquired under this Act, the Court acquired
under this Act, the Collector shall take into consideration shall take into
consideration— first, the market-value of the land at firstly, the market value as
determined the date of the publication of the under Section 26 and the award
[notification under section 4, sub- amount in accordance with the First and section
(1)]; Second Schedules;

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/133866489/

11

Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... vs Vincent Daniel on 27 March, 2025

secondly, the damage sustained by secondly, the damage sustained by the the person interested, by
reason of person interested, by reason of the the taking of any standing crops trees taking of any
standing crops and trees which may be on the land at the time which may be on the land at the time
of of the Collector's taking possession the Collector's taking possession thereof; thereof;

        thirdly, the damage (if any) sustained      thirdly, the damage (if any) sustained by
        by the person interested, at the time       the person interested, at the time of the
        of the Collector's taking possession of     Collector's taking possession of the
        the land, by reason of serving such         land, by reason of severing such land
        land from his other land;                   from his other land;

        fourthly,     the damage (if any)           fourthly, the damage (if any) sustained
        sustained by the person interested, at      by the person interested, at the time of
        the time of the Collector's taking          the Collector's taking possession of the
        possession of the land, by reason of        land, by reason of the acquisition

the acquisition injuriously affecting his injuriously affecting his other property, other property,
movable or movable or immovable, in any other immovable, in any other manner, or manner, or his
earnings; his earnings;

fifthly, in consequence of the fifthly, in consequence of the acquisition of the land by the acquisition
of the land by the Collector, Collector, the person interested is the person interested is compelled to
compelled to change his residence or change his residence or place of place of business, the
reasonable business, the reasonable expenses (if expenses (if any) incidental to such any) incidental
to such change; change, and sixthly, the damage (if any) sixthly, the damage (if any) bona fide bona
fide resulting from diminution of resulting from diminution of the profits the profits of the land
between the of the land between the time of the time of the publication of the publication of the
declaration under declaration under section 6 and the Section 19 and the time of the time of the
Collector's taking Collector's taking possession of the possession of the land. land; and (1A) In
addition to the market value of seventhly, any other ground which may the land, as above provided,
the Court be in the interest of equity, justice and shall in every case award an amount beneficial to
the affected families calculated at the rate of twelve per centum per annum on such market value for
the period commencing on and from the date of the publication of the notification under section 4,
sub-

section (1), in respect of such land to the date of the award of the Collector or the date of taking
possession of the land, whichever is earlier.

Explanation. - In computing the period referred to in this sub-section, any period or periods during
which the proceedings for the acquisition of the land were held up on account of any stay or
injunction by the order of any Court shall be excluded.

(2) In addition to the market value of the land as above provided, the Court shall in every case award
a sum of [thirty per centum] on such market value, in consideration of the compulsory nature of the
acquisition.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/133866489/

12

Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... vs Vincent Daniel on 27 March, 2025

24. Matters to be neglected in determining compensation. - But the Court shall not take into
consideration— first, the degree of urgency which has led to the acquisition;

secondly, any disinclination of the person interested to part with the land acquired;

thirdly, any damage sustained by him which, if caused by a private person, would not render such
person liable to a suit;

fourthly, any damage which is likely to be caused to the land acquired, after the date of the
publication of the declaration under section 6, by or in consequence of the use to which it will be
put;

fifthly, any increase to the value of the land acquired likely to accrue from the use to which it will be
put when acquired;

sixthly, any increase to the value of the other land of the person interested likely to accrue from the
use to which the land acquired will be put;

seventhly, any outlay or improvements on, or disposal of the land acquired, commenced, made or
effected without the sanction of the Collector after the date of the publication of the [notification
under section 4, sub-section (1); or eighthly, any increase to the value of the land on account of its
being put to any use, which is forbidden by law or opposed to public policy.

25. Amount of compensation 27. Determination of amount of awarded by Court not to be lower
compensation.—The Collector having than the amount awarded by the determined the market value
of the land Collector.— The amount of to be acquired shall calculate the total compensation awarded
by the Court amount of compensation to be paid to shall not be less than the amount the land owner
(whose land has been awarded by the Collector under acquired) by including all assets section 11.
attached to the land.

16. Under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, Section 11 deals with enquiry and the award of the
Collector. The award should state (i) the true area of the land; (ii) the compensation which in the
Collector’s opinion should be allowed for the land; and (iii) the apportionment of the compensation
among interested persons. Section 15 states that in determining the amount of compensation, the
Collector shall be guided by the factors stated in Sections 23 and 24. Section 23 sets out the factors
that must be considered while determining the amount of compensation. The first factor specified is
the market value of the land, which must be determined as on the date of publication of the
notification under Section 4(1) of the Acquisition Act, 1894. For the present decision, we need not
refer to the other clauses, except noting that they deal with relevant aspects for determining
compensation, such as the damage sustained by the owner, payment of solatium for compulsory
acquisitions, etc. Section 24 lists the factors to be ignored while calculating the compensation. These
include urgency, unwillingness to part with the land, or any such damage that would not be
actionable if caused by a private person. It also excludes any outlay, improvements, or sale made
without the Collector’s approval after publication of the notification under Section 4(1). Increases in

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/133866489/

13

Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... vs Vincent Daniel on 27 March, 2025

value due to unlawful use of the land are also to be ignored. Section 25 states that the amount of
compensation awarded by the court cannot be less than the compensation awarded by the Collector
under Section 11.

17. Under the Acquisition Act, 2013, Section 23 states that after conducting an enquiry into the
objections raised by interested persons, the Collector shall make an award as to (i) the true area of
the land; (ii) the compensation determined under Section 27, along with the Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Award as per Section 31 of the Acquisition Act, 2013, and which in the Collector’s
opinion should be allowed for the land; and (iii) the apportionment of the said compensation among
interested persons. In particular, the appellant, Madhya Pradesh Road Development Corporation,
relies upon the expression “which in his (Collector’s) opinion should be allowed for the land” under
Section 23(b), referring to the compensation under Section 27 and Section 31 of the Acquisition Act,
2013. We will elaborate on this submission subsequently.

18. Section 26 deals with the determination of the market value of the land by the Collector.
Sub-section (1) to Section 26 consists of three Clauses, (a), (b) and (c), each prescribing a criterion
or standard for assessing the market value. Clause (a) prescribes the consideration of the market
value specified in the Stamp Act for the registration of agreements/sale deeds in the area where the
concerned land is situated.

19. Clause (b) to Section 26(1) requires the Collector to consider the average sale price for similar
types of land situated in the nearest village or the nearest vicinity. This test of average sale price is
similar to the exemplar test which is adopted and applied in cases of acquisition under the Land
Acquisition Act, 1894, but with modifications in terms of Explanations 1 to 4. Computation under
Clause (b) is in relative terms. Therefore, while drawing a comparison with the average price of the
other lands under Clause (b), the Collector must consider all such factors that have been held to be
relevant for accurate valuation by this Court. These include the theory of deduction, the principle of
belting, and accounting for other advantages or disadvantages of the acquired land, in comparison
to the lands existing in the same vicinity.

20. Clause (c) to Section 26(1) of the Acquisition Act, 2013 requires the Collector to take into
consideration the amount of compensation agreed upon by the parties under Section 2(2) of the
Acquisition Act, 2013 in cases involving the acquisition of land for private companies or
public-private partnership projects. These agreements are entered into voluntarily, based upon
consent terms, and reflect the market value as settled inter se the parties.

21. It is important to note that the values computed in terms of Clauses (a),

(b) and (c) of Section 26(1) of the Acquisition Act, 2013 are not to be averaged. The highest of the
values as determined by Clauses (a), (b) and (c), is to be treated as the market value under Section
26(1) of the Acquisition Act, 2013.

22. There are four Explanations to Section 26(1) of the Acquisition Act, 2013. Explanations can form
part of the main provision and, when so, can be as central as the provision itself. This Court in The

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/133866489/

14

Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... vs Vincent Daniel on 27 March, 2025

Bengal Immunity Co. Ltd. v. State of Bihar and Others19 stated that an explanation appended to a
Section or Clause gets incorporated into it, becomes an integral part of it, and has no independent
existence apart from it. There is, in the eye of law, only one enactment, of which both the Section
and the Explanation are two inseparable parts. They move in a body if they move at all. Similarly, in
Coromandel Fertilizers Ltd. v. Union of India and Others,20 this Court, in the context of an AIR
1955 SC 661.

1984 Supp SCC 457.

Explanation attached to a notification, observed that the notification/provision has to be read as a
whole and should not be construed in terms that are contrary to the main provision. Explanations to
Section 26(1) are equally important as the main provision. Apart from clarifying the procedure
under Clauses (a), (b) and (c), the Explanations also confer and refer to the discretion which the
Collector may exercise in determining the market value of the acquired land. Thus, while the
statutory language makes the procedure under Clauses (a), (b) and (c) mandatory, the value as
computed according to the Explanations can be increased, decreased or even discarded.

23. Explanation 1 states that the determination of the average sale price under Clause (b) must be
based on sale deeds or agreements to sell registered for similar type of lands in the same vicinity,
during the immediately preceding three years from the year in which acquisition was proposed.
Thus, transactions older than three years would be excluded. Explanation 2 states that to determine
the average sale price under Explanation 1, one-half of the total sale deeds or agreements to sell in
which the highest sale price is mentioned, shall be taken into account. This also implies that there
should be multiple deeds available for reference. Singular deals may not supply adequate and
reliable data. Explanation 3 states that while determining the market value under Section 26 and the
average sale price referred to in Explanation 1 or 2, the price paid as compensation for land acquired
under the provisions of this Act on an earlier occasion in the district, shall not be taken into
consideration. Thus, referring to compensation paid for an earlier acquisition in the concerned
district is expressly barred.

24. Explanation 4 requires specific attention, as it brings the element of discretion while computing
the market value under Section 26(1) to the forefront. Explanation 4 is divided into two parts. The
first part refers to sub-section (1) to Section 26 – the higher value determined as per Clauses (a), (b)
and (c) of Section 26(1) of the Acquisition Act, 2013. The second part is specific to the average sale
price referred to in Clause (b) to Section 26(1) read with Explanations 1 and 2. In either case, where
the Collector is of the opinion that the value/price computed by applying these provisions is not
indicative of the actual prevailing market value, they may discount or enhance it to arrive at the
accurate market value.

25. Explanation 4 uses the word “and” in conjoining the values referred to in the two parts of the
Explanation. This is done to expand the scope of application of the Collector’s discretion to the
entire provision, as is also evident from the phrase “while determining the market value under this
section”. The discretion should not be interpreted as restricting the discretion to only the average
sale price under Explanations 1 and 2. The two parts must be given a disjunctive reading, attracting

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/133866489/

15

Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... vs Vincent Daniel on 27 March, 2025

the application of Explanation 4 when either of the values does not reflect the actual market value.
Thus, though the word “and” is used to connect the two parts, it should be read as “or” to effectuate
the legislative intent.21

26. This interpretation is also supported by the use of the same phrase in both Explanations 3 and 4.
The first part of Explanation 3, which refers to determining the market value under this Section, will
apply with equal vigour to both Clauses (b) and (c) of Section 26(1) of the Acquisition Act, 2013. The
latter part of Explanation 3 – as in the case Maharishi Mahesh Yogi Vedic Vishwavidyalaya v. State
of Madhya Pradesh and Others, (2013) 15 SCC 677. See also, Justice G. P. Singh, Principles of
Statutory Interpretation, 14th Edition., 530-534.

of Explanation 4, which refers to Explanations 1 and 2 – will specifically apply to Clause (b).

27. Under Explanation 4, the formation of the Collector’s opinion and any discounting or enhancing
of the value must be supported by recorded reasons. At this stage, if the Collector chooses to make
adjustments to the market value under Explanation 4, the theory of deduction, the principle of
belting and other material factors will also be taken into account. The reason for this is two-fold.
First, because the calculation of accurate market value is not an exact science, and therefore the
Collector must be mindful of the unique factors which affect the valuation of a piece of land.
Secondly, apart from Clause (b) to Section 26(1), the mandatory procedure of computation under
the other two Clauses, (a) and (c), does not take into account these theories and factors, which may
result in inaccuracy. Though not determinative in the facts of the present case, a contrary
interpretation may cause injustice to the landowners in many situations.

28. Sub-section (2) to Section 26 provides that the market value computed under sub-section (1),
including any adjustment under Explanation 4, shall be multiplied by the factors set out in the First
Schedule of the Acquisition Act, 2013.

29. Sub-section (3) to Section 26 applies when the market value cannot be determined under
sub-sections (1) and (2) for the three reasons stated in Clauses (a), (b) and (c) to Section 26(3) – (a)
when land transactions in the area are restricted by or under any law for the time being in force; (b)
if registered sale deeds and agreements to sell for similar lands are not available for the preceding
three years as required by Clause (b) to sub-section (1); and (c) when the market value has not been
specified under the Stamp Act by the appropriate authority. In the statutory language of Clause (b)
to Section 26(3), reference to Clause (a) to Section 26(1) appears to be in error. The consideration of
sale deeds or agreements to sell from the preceding three years, as required by Explanation 1 to
Section 26(1) is for calculating the average sale price under Clause (b) to Section 26(1) and not
Clause

(a) to Section 26(1).

30. If any of the three situations stated in Clauses (a) to (c) to Section 26(3) are attracted, the State
Government is required to specify the floor price per unit area for the land. This floor price must be
based on the price of similar types of land situated in the immediately adjoining areas, calculated

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/133866489/

16

Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... vs Vincent Daniel on 27 March, 2025

according to the procedure under Section 26(1). We are not concerned and need not interpret the
first proviso or the second proviso. The third proviso states that the Collector, before initiating a
land acquisition process in any area, shall take all necessary steps to revise and update the market
value on the basis of the prevalent market rate in that area.

31. Section 27 relates to the determination of the amount of compensation.

The Collector having determined the market value of the land under Section 26, has to calculate the
amount of compensation to be paid to the land owner, as mandated in terms of Section 23 of the
Acquisition Act, 2013. While Section 26(1) of the Acquisition Act, 2013 uses the word “criteria” for
computing the highest value under Clauses (a) to (c), and mandates that the exercise is undertaken
applying the four Explanations, the final determination vests with the Collector under Section 27 of
the Acquisition Act, 2013. This is also evident from the language of Section 26(1) as well as Section
23(b), which use the expression “which in his (Collector’s) opinion should be allowed for the land.”

32. Section 28 sets out the parameters to be considered by the Collector in determining the award. It
refers to seven factors for computing the amount payable as compensation. The very first factor is
the market value as determined under Section 26, and the award amount computed in accordance
with the First and the Second Schedules to the Acquisition Act, 2013. Other clauses cover damage
sustained due to factors such as loss of standing crops or trees, severance of land, adverse effects on
other property, loss of income, and costs or losses from change in residence or place of business.
Losses, if any, bona fide resulting from the diminution of the profits are also to be accounted for.
The seventh ground is particularly important. It states that the Collector can take into consideration
any other ground which may be in the interest of equity, justice and beneficial to the affected
families. This clause will not apply to reduce the market value of land determined under Section 26,
but the Collector can apply it to enhance the market value in the interest of equity and justice if it is
beneficial to the affected families.

33. During the course of the hearing before us, our attention was drawn to the process of fixing
circle rates in the State of Madhya Pradesh. The State of Madhya Pradesh formulated the Madhya
Pradesh Preparation and Revision of Market Value Guideline Rules, 2000, in accordance with the
powers conferred by the Stamp Act, which now stand revised as the 2018 Rules. The Collector’s
Guidelines dated 03.03.2014, formed under these rules, have been relied upon by the competent
authority to determine the market value.

34. The impugned judgment refers to the revised 2018 Rules applicable to the State of Madhya
Pradesh and has quoted Rule 6, which reads as under:

“Procedure to prepare Market Value Guideline– While working out the values of
immovable property, the committees shall take into account the following facts:-

               (1)         The case of lands:-

                     (a)      classification of land as unirrigated or irrigated,

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/133866489/

17

Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... vs Vincent Daniel on 27 March, 2025

                              diverted or non-diverted and the like;
                     (b)      classification under various categories in the
                              settlements register;
                     (c)      the rate of revenue assessments for each
                              classification;
                     (d)      other factors which influence the valuation of the
                              land in question;
                     (e)      points, if any, mentioned by the parties to the

instrument or any other person which required special consideration;

(f) value of adjacent land or lands in vicinity;

(g) average yield from the land, proximity to road and market, distance from village
site, level of land transport facilities, facilities available for irrigation in any form;

(cid:12)                     (h)      the nature of Crops raised on the land;
                     (i)      Use of land as residential, commercial or
                              industrial;
                     (j)      the relative position of urban area and investment
                              area or development of the town.

               (2)         In case of house sites:-

                     (a)      The general value of house sites in locality;
                     (b)      Proximity to roads, railway stations, bus routes;
                     (c)      Proximity to market, shop and the like;
                     (d)      Amenities available in the place like, Public

Offices, Hospitals and Educational Institutes;

(e) Development activities, industrial improvements in the vicinity;

(f) Any special feature having a special bearing on the valuation of the site; and

(g) Commercialization of home location and affiliation of these with reserved area by
master plan or town and country planning.

               (3)         In case of buildings:-

                     (a)      type and structure,
                     (b)      locality in which constructed,
                     (c)      plinth area,
                     (d)      year of construction,
                     (e)      kind of material used,
                     (f)      rate of depreciation,
                     (g)      fluctuation in rates,
                     (h)      any special feature having a special bearing on
                              the valuation of the site;
                     (i)      the purpose for which the building is being used,

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/133866489/

18

Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... vs Vincent Daniel on 27 March, 2025

                              and the income, if any, by way of rent per annum
                              secured on the building; and
                     (j)      relative position and reputation of the area where
                              the building is located.

               (4)         Other factors which the Committee considers
                           necessary.”

The factors noted above are relevant for computation and fixing the circle rates.

35. In the last few decades, the Union of India and the State Governments have laid emphasis on
enhancing the ease of living and doing business. Fixing fair and accurate circle rates has a direct
impact on each citizen. An inflated rate results in an unfair financial burden on purchasers.
Conversely, an undervalued rate leads to inadequate stamp duty collection, adversely affecting the
State’s revenue. Circle rates which reflect the market price ensure proper revenue collection for the
State by preventing under-valuation of properties.

36. Sections 43CA, 45, 49, 50C, and 55 of the Income Tax Act, 196122 refer to circle rates,
incorporating the stamp duty value of assets. We need not, for the purpose of the present decision,
interpret the aforesaid sections. However, we have referred to these provisions to point out the
significance and importance of circle rates for the direct tax administration as well. The Central
Government had to amend the Income Tax Act when it was noticed that the circle rates at times in
Hereinafter, “Income Tax Act”.

certain localities were higher than the prevailing market value.

Accordingly, the safe harbour rule under the Income Tax Act was amended and the limit was
enhanced to 10% from 5%.23 Circle rates often become a politically and economically contentious
issue. This is reflected in the frequent litigations across various jurisdictions, which discuss the
circle rates applicable to properties.24

37. Circle rates, when determined while accounting for factors that cause variations in the market
price of land, can facilitate predictability in transactions and curtail litigation. The standardized
circle rates should be fixed at the floor or baseline price, as it would be grossly unfair to ask the
public to pay stamp duty on over-valued circle rates.

38. It would be advisable that the circle rates be fixed by expert committees, which not only have
officers from the government but also other specialists who understand the market conditions.
Methodically and scientifically fixed circle rates can contribute to strengthening the economy and
boosting tax collections. While serving the interests of See Section 43CA of the Income Tax Act.

See also Govt of NCT of Delhi Collectors of Stamps v. CTA Apparels Pvt. Ltd., LPA 278/2019 (High
Court of Delhi); Sameer Vasudev Morajkar and Another v. State of Goa, 2024 SCC OnLine Bom 303
(High Court of Bombay); Narendra Kumar Berlia and Others v. Om Prakash Berlia and Others, 2021
SCC OnLine Cal 2667 (Calcutta High Court); K. Natarajan v. District Collector and Another, 2019

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/133866489/

19

Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... vs Vincent Daniel on 27 March, 2025

SCC OnLine Mad 26166 (Madras High Court). honest taxpayers, accurate circle rates would
simultaneously deter non-compliant taxpayers by preventing under-valuation. Rational and fair
circle rates reflect and are a prerequisite for good governance.25 Given the financial implications of
fixation of circle rates on each member of the society, the data and details for computation of circle
rates should be made public.26 Regrettably, proper fixation of circle rates has not received adequate
attention from public authorities.

39. The 2018 Rules framed by the State of Madhya Pradesh attempt to comprehensively address the
variable factors that influence the price of land, and, therefore, lay the foundation for a more
accurate valuation of land prices. In our opinion, other State Governments would also be well
advised in formulating guidelines that can act as a ready reference for determining and revising
circle rates regularly, in order for them to reflect market realities.

Germany, like India, uses reference values to compute the market value of a property. This task is
undertaken by expert committees in the relevant area, and they are required to update the values
every two years. These expert committees are neutral and independent from the public authorities.
Reference values for various localities are also published online for public access. Regular revisions
and transparency have facilitated the reduction of market volatility in Germany. Public knowledge of
the variables affecting property value has increased predictability and created a more stable land
market.

We wish to clarify that our reasons should not be read as a bar or prohibition on the Central
Government/local authorities from changing the circle rates as fixed by the State Government, when
they are not in accord with the market rate of the acquired land.

40. We now proceed to apply the above analysis to the facts of the present case, which is an
acquisition under the Acquisition Act, 2013. To determine the compensation, the market value of
the land must first be computed under Section 26 of the Acquisition Act, 2013. This requires the
application of Clauses (a), (b), and (c) of Section 26(1). Clause (b) would have no application in the
present case as there are no exemplars in the vicinity to draw a comparison and arrive at the average
sale price in terms of Explanations 1 and 2 to Section 26(1). Further, as this acquisition does not
involve private companies or public-private partnerships, Clause (c) would also not apply.
Therefore, the highest value would be the one determined under Clause (a), i.e., the market value
specified under the Stamp Act. In the present case, this value would be the circle rate fixed for the
year 2014-2015 under the Collector’s Guidelines framed under the Stamp Act. The Commissioner
has applied the Collector’s Guidelines by using the rate provided for non-converted agricultural
land. The Commissioner has further supplemented this amount by accounting for the assets
attached to the land and adding the solatium payable.

41. In view of the above-stated reasons, we hold that the compensation has been calculated in
accordance with the mandate of the Acquisition Act, 2013. Thus, no reduction in the amount can be
granted by applying the theory of deduction. It has been left to the Collector’s discretion to make
adjustments to the market value determined through Section 26(1), if deemed necessary in the
opinion of the Collector. In the facts of the present case, there was no such formation of opinion by

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/133866489/

20

Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... vs Vincent Daniel on 27 March, 2025

the Competent Authority or the Commissioner.

42. In the absence of any material to support the same, we cannot accept the argument advanced by
the appellant, Madhya Pradesh Road Development Corporation, that this circle rate is not the
baseline or floor rate, and is too high. Concerned authorities should fix circle rates scientifically and
in accordance with the law. It is their responsibility to ensure that circle rates are neither inflated
nor disproportionately low. When the citizens are required to pay stamp duty on the notified circle
rate, the public authorities, including state development corporations acquiring land from private
individuals, must adhere to the same. We do not appreciate the appellant, Madhya Pradesh Road
Development Corporation complaining about the circle rate fixed by the State Government. If the
circle rate is inflated or does not reflect the true market value, it is incumbent upon the State
Government to take corrective steps. The State Government or the development corporation under
the State Government cannot complain that they have been compelled to acquire land at the circle
rate fixed by the State.

43. Thus, while we disagree with the ratio and the reasoning of the High Court, albeit for the reasons
and findings recorded above, we uphold the computation in the award passed by the Commissioner
directing payment of compensation on the basis of the circle rate. The appeals filed by the appellant,
Madhya Pradesh Road Development Corporation, are accordingly, dismissed. There will be no order
as to costs.

................................CJI.

(SANJIV KHANNA) ....................................J. (SANJAY KUMAR) NEW DELHI;

MARCH 27, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/133866489/

21

