Mahabir vs The State Of Haryana on 29 January, 2025

Mahabir vs The State Of Haryana on 29 January, 2025

2025 INSC 120                                                                             REPORTABLE
                                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                        CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 5560-5561 OF 2024

                   MAHABIR & ORS.                                                         ….Appellant(s)

                                                                VERSUS

                   STATE OF HARYANA                                                      ….Respondent(s)

                                                        JUDGMENT

J.B. PARDIWALA, J.

1. Since the issues raised in both the captioned appeals are the same and the challenge is also to the
self-same judgement and order passed by the High Court, those were taken up for hearing
analogously and are being disposed of by this common judgement and order.

2. We may clarify that the Criminal Appeal No. 5560 of 2024 arises from the Reason: holding the
appellants herein guilty of the offence of murder. Whereas Criminal Appeal No. 5561 of 2024 arises
from the order of sentence, which ultimately came to be passed by the High Court.

3. These appeals arise from the judgement and order passed by the High Court of Punjab and
Haryana at Chandigarh dated 27.08.2024 in Criminal Revision Application No. 194 of 2006 by
which the criminal revision filed by the original de facto complainant against the judgment and
order of acquittal passed by the trial court came to be allowed and the appellants herein were held
guilty of the offence of murder punishable under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code (for short,
“the IPC”) and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for life and fine of Rs. 50,000/- each
and further, rigorous imprisonment for 3 months in default of payment of fine.

4. "There is no higher principle for the guidance of the court than the one that no act of courts
should harm a litigant and it is the bounden duty of the courts to see that if a person is harmed by a
mistake of the court he should be restored to the position he would have occupied, but for that
mistake."

5. The above is aptly summed up in the maxim "actus curiae neminem gravabit”. It implies that
judicial actions should not unfairly harm any party and that courts should act judiciously to prevent
errors that could lead to injustice. (Jang Sing v. Brij Lal and Others reported in AIR 1966 SC 1631).

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101605278/

1

Mahabir vs The State Of Haryana on 29 January, 2025

6. We need not delve much into the facts of the present case as our order dated 13.12.2024 gives
more than a fair idea as to how these appeals have come up before us. The order reads thus:

“3. The three appellants herein along with three other co-accused were put to trial for
the offence of murder punishable under Section 302 read with Section 148 and 149 of
the Indian Penal Code, 1860. On conclusion of the trial, the Trial Court held two
co-accused guilty of the alleged crime, whereas the other four, including three
appellants herein, came to be acquitted.

4. The State did not deem fit to challenge the acquittal of the three appellants herein.
One of the convicts went in appeal before the High Court and the father of the
deceased in turn invoked the revisional jurisdiction of the High Court under Section
401 read with Section 397 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 seeking to
challenge the acquittal of the three appellants herein. It appears that the appeal filed
by one of the convicts against his order of conviction came to be dismissed despite
the fact that the convict had already passed away.

5. In the revision application, which was filed by the father of the deceased, the High
Court held all the three appellants herein guilty of the alleged offence of murder and
sentenced them to undergo life imprisonment. We are informed that they were taken
into custody on the very same day the judgment was pronounced by the High Court
and now they are serving the sentence as imposed by the High Court.

6. We are not able to understand, on what basis the High Court in exercise of its
revisional jurisdiction under Section 401 read with Section 397 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure could have converted the finding of acquittal into one of
conviction. Sub-

Section (3) of Section 401 reads thus: “(3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorize a
High Court to convert a finding of acquittal into one of conviction.”

7.There is one another feature which has disturbed us. According to the learned counsel the High
Court proceeded ex-parte without issuing notice to the three appellants herein in the revision
petition, who had already been acquitted by the Trial Court.

8. We are also informed that the father of the deceased, who had filed the revision application before
the High Court had also passed away much before the judgment of the High Court.

9. Issue notice to the State of Haryana, returnable on 19th December, 2024.

10. In such circumstances referred to above, all the three appellants are ordered to be released on
bail. The substantive order of sentence passed by the High Court is suspended till further orders.
Accordingly, IA No. 285726/2024 stands disposed of.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101605278/

2

Mahabir vs The State Of Haryana on 29 January, 2025

11. Registry to call for the records and proceedings of the Sessions Case No. 4 of 1988/2005,
disposed of by Additional Sessions Judge, Rewari, from the High Court of Punjab & Haryana at
Chandigarh.” CASE PUT UP BY THE APPELLANTS HEREIN

7. The case pertains to an incident dated 13.03.1998. It was a day of Holi festival. The incident was
first reported by one Dharampal to the police at 2:55 p.m. on 13.03.1998 itself within two hours of
the incident, stating that one Om Parkash s/o Shiv Lal (Complainant) and Om Parkash S/o Chandgi
Ram (deceased) had assaulted him, Murti w/o Ram swarup and Usha, W/o Dayanand respectively.
Dharampal alleged that the two assailants climbed on to the roof of his house and caught hold of
him and in the scuffle, both of them fell down from the roof and both of them also suffered injuries.

8. However, the complaint lodged by Dharampal referred to above was neither investigated nor any
FIR was registered, for the reasons best known to the Police.

9. Instead, an FIR came to be registered on the statement of the above-mentioned Om Parkash S/o
Shiv Lal (the Complainant) on 14.03.1998 i.e. one day later, implicating inter alia, the appellants
herein. This was followed by a further statement dated 15.03.1998, naming Dharampal and Sri
Chand, a senior citizen who walked with the aid of a walking stick (baint) as accused.

10. Upon appreciation of oral as well as documentary evidence adduced in the trial, the Sessions
Court held that the prosecution had failed to prove its case against the appellants/accused viz.
Mahabir, Raj Kumar, Dayanand and Krishan Kumar beyond reasonable doubt, and accordingly,
acquitted them vide its judgment and order dated 05.10.2005 passed in Sessions Case No. 4 of
1998/2005. The Sessions Court, however, convicted Dharampal of the offence under Section 302
read with Section 34 IPC. Since co-accused Sri Chand passed away during the trial, the proceedings
against him stood abated.

11. No appeal was preferred by the State of Haryana against the said judgment dated 05.10.2005
acquitting the appellants herein.

12. On 19.01.2006, Chandgi Ram, father of deceased Om Parkash, preferred Criminal Revision being
CRR-194-2006 (O&M), seeking to challenge the acquittal of the appellants viz. Mahabir, Raj Kumar,
Dayanand and Krishan Kumar.

13. The convict Dharampal filed Criminal Appeal being CRA-752-DB-2005 (O&M) against the
judgment of conviction dated 05.10.2005 and order on sentence dated 08.10.2005.

14. Accused Raj Kumar s/o Raghbir Singh passed away on 24.02.2015. The order dated 07.11.2019
indicates that service could not be effected upon the appellants (respondents in the said Revision
Petition, CRR-194-2006), due to non-payment of process fee. As on 12.07.2022 too, the appellants
who were respondents in the revision petition were not served with the copy of the revision petition.
The counsel for the revisionist also informed the High Court that he had no instructions in the
matter. In December 2023, the revisionist Chandgi Ram passed away; thus, there was no revisionist
before the High Court from the date of demise onwards, as well as, on the date of final hearing. In

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101605278/

3

Mahabir vs The State Of Haryana on 29 January, 2025

February 2024, the convicted-accused, Dharam Pal, also passed away. Hence, his conviction appeal
also stood abated, however, the same was not brought to the notice of the High Court by the State.

15. On 21.08.2024, the High Court passed an order that since the revisionist was not being
represented by any counsel, the Court was appointing legal aid counsel to assist the Court on behalf
of the revisionist in the revision petition. The Court further directed that the legal aid counsel be
supplied with the Paper book. On behalf of the accused (appellants), a counsel was appointed to
assist the Court (without any corresponding order to supply the paper book to him). Arguments
were heard on the same day. The revision petition and the conviction appeal were decided by the
High Court and by a common judgment and order dated 27.08.2024, the CRA-752-DB-2005 filed by
Dharampal was dismissed (O&M) and CRR-194-2006 (O&M) was allowed.

16. After coming to know about the judgment reversing the acquittal, the appellants
surrendered/were taken into custody.

17. In such circumstances referred to above, the appellants are here before this Court with the
present two appeals.

SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANTS

18. Ms. Indira Unninayar, the learned counsel submitted that despite an express statutory bar on
reversing a finding of acquittal the High Court in violation of this statutory bar, reversed the
acquittal into a conviction.

19. She submitted that the High Court in exercise of its revisional jurisdiction has undoubtedly the
power to set aside the acquittal, but such interference is called for only in exceptional cases and that
too only for the purpose of re-trial. However, it is not permissible to convert such acquittal to
conviction. The only course left to it in such exceptional cases, is to order retrial, which, was not
done.

20. She submitted that no right of appeal was available to the victim in law at the time the revision
was filed and therefore, there was no scope for the court to even treat the revision as an appeal that
‘lay under the Code of Criminal Procedure (for short, “the CrPC” or “Code”)’ at the time as provided
for under Section 401(5) above.

21. Despite an express statutory bar on any order being passed to the prejudice of the accused unless
he has had an opportunity of being heard either personally or by pleader in his own defence, the
High Court proceeded to hear and pronounce its judgment without adhering to the above. The
above was also in violation of the principles of natural justice, the right to access the criminal justice
system, and the constitutional right of the accused to be represented by a counsel of their choice
under Articles 21 & 22(1) read with 20(3) respectively of the Constitution of India. Yet the matter
proceeded without service upon the accused.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101605278/

4

Mahabir vs The State Of Haryana on 29 January, 2025

22. The revision petition was filed on 19.01.2006. However, the High Court’s order dated
07.11.2019, indicates that - Service could not be effected upon the appellants who were respondents
in the said revision petition, CRR-194-2006, due to non-payment of process fee.

23. The order dated 12.07.2022 reflects that the appellants who were respondents in the revision
petition were not served with the copy of the revision petition, as of 12.07.2022. The counsel for the
revisionist had also informed the High Court that he had no instructions.

24. The order dated 21.08.2024 reflects that - since the revisionist was not represented by a validly
engaged counsel, the High Court appointed a legal aid counsel to assist the Court on behalf of the
deceased revisionist. The said counsel was supplied with the paper book. Arguments were heard on
the same day and judgment was reserved.

25. By way of abundant caution, the appellants had approached the Registry of the High Court to
obtain a ‘Copy of Service Report in CRR-194-2006’ on 3.10.2024 and the Registry replied on
14.10.2024 that ‘Required doc not available on DMS’ and ‘No Service Report is available in
CRR-194-2006 in this file’.

26. Neither the Counsel appointed by the Court had a chance to peruse the record and prepare for
a n y   a r g u m e n t s   t o   a s s i s t   t h e   C o u r t ,   n o r   d i d   h e   h a d   a n y   o c c a s i o n   o r   o p p o r t u n i t y   t o
confer/contact/consult with the appellants herein to seek instructions for defending their acquittal
and contesting the revision petition, as he was appointed and asked to represent the
accused/respondents there and then, on the very same day, that the arguments were heard and
judgement reserved.

27. The above was in gross violation of the principles of natural justice as well as the appellants’
constitutional right to be represented by a counsel of their own choice under Articles 21 & 22(1)
respectively of the Constitution of India. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE STATE OF
HARYANA

28. The learned counsel appearing for the State submitted that the High Court in exercise of its
revisional jurisdiction under Section 401 read with Section 397 of the CrPC could not have reversed
the acquittal and passed an order of conviction. However he submitted that as sub section (5) to
Section 401 provides that if an appeal lies under the CrPC, but an application for revision had been
made to the High Court by any person and if the High Court is convinced that such application had
been filed under the erroneous belief that no appeal lies thereto, then in the interest of justice the
High Court can treat the application for revision as an appeal and deal with the same accordingly.

29. According to the learned counsel appearing for the State, the High Court in the case on hand,
could have invoked sub section (5) of Section 401 and with the aid of the proviso to Section 372 of
the CrPC could have treated the revision filed by the de facto complainant as an appeal. However,
even for the purpose of invoking sub section (5) to Section 401 CrPC, the High Court has to pass an
appropriate order in that regard.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101605278/

5

Mahabir vs The State Of Haryana on 29 January, 2025

30. The learned counsel appearing for the State went to the extent of submitting that although the
proviso to Section 372 CrPC was introduced sometime in 2009, i.e., after the judgment of acquittal
yet the High Court could have given retrospective effect to the proviso to Section 372 and should
have treated the revision application filed by the de facto complainant as an appeal under Section
372 of the CrPC.

ANALYSIS

31. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having gone through the
materials on record, the only question that falls for our consideration is whether the High Court
committed any error in passing the impugned judgment and order of conviction in exercise of its
revisional jurisdiction under Section 401 read with Section 397 of the CrPC. RELEVANT
PROVISIONS OF LAW

32. Section 397 CrPC reads thus:-

“397. Calling for records to exercise powers of revision.—(1) The High Court or any
Sessions Judge may call for and examine the record of any proceeding before any
inferior Criminal Court situate within its or his local jurisdiction for the purpose of
satisfying itself or himself; to the correctness, legality or propriety of any finding,
sentence or order, recorded or passed, and as to the regularity of any proceedings of
such inferior Court, and may, when calling, for such record, direct that the execution
of any sentence or order be suspended, and if the accused is in confinement that he
be released on bail or on his own bond pending the examination of the record.

Explanation.—All Magistrates, whether Executive or Judicial, and whether exercising
original or appellate jurisdiction, shall be deemed to be inferior to the Sessions Judge
for the purposes of this sub-section and of section 398.

(2) The powers of revision conferred by sub-section (1) shall not be exercised in
relation to any interlocutory order passed in any appeal, inquiry, trial or other
proceeding.

(3) If an application under this section has been made by any person either to the
High Court or to the Sessions Judge, no further application by the same person shall
be entertained by the other of them.”

33. Section 401 CrPC reads thus:-

“401. High Court's powers of revision.—(1) In the case of any proceeding the record of
which has been called for by itself or which otherwise comes to its knowledge, the
High Court may, in its discretion, exercise any of the powers conferred on a Court of
Appeal by sections 386, 389, 390 and 391 or on a Court of Session by section 307,
and, when the Judges composing the Court of Revision are equally divided in

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101605278/

6

opinion, the case shall be disposed of in the manner provided by section 392.

Mahabir vs The State Of Haryana on 29 January, 2025

(2) No order under this section shall be made to the prejudice of the accused or other
person unless he has had an opportunity of being heard either personally or by
pleader in his own defence.

(3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorise a High Court to convert a
finding of acquittal into one conviction.

(4) Where under this Code an appeal lies and no appeal is brought, no proceeding by
way of revision shall be entertained at the instance of the party who could have
appealed.

(5) Where under this Code an appeal lies but an application for revision has been
made to the High Court by any person and the High Court is satisfied that such
application was made under the erroneous belief that no appeal lies thereto and that
it is necessary in the interests of Justice so to do, the High Court may treat the
application for revision as a petition of appeal and deal with the same accordingly.”

34. Section 401(3) says – “Nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorize a High Court to
convert a finding of appeal into one of conviction.” i. Thus, the bar is categorical and express.

35. Section 401(5) says – “Where under this Code an appeal lies but an application for revision has
been made to the High Court by any person and the High Court is satisfied that such application was
made under the erroneous belief that no appeal lies thereto and that it is necessary in the interests
of justice so to do so, the High Court may treat the application for revision as a petition of appeal
and deal with the same accordingly.” i. For the High Court to treat the revision as an appeal, all of
the above conditions were required to be fulfilled.

ii. And a reasoned, speaking order was required to be passed recording that they were fulfilled.

iii. However, no such procedure was adopted.

36. The general provision on appeals is Section 372 Cr PC which says – No appeal to lie unless
otherwise provided. – No appeal shall lie from any judgment or order of a Criminal Court except as
provided for by this Code or by any other law for the time being in force.

i. Thus, no appeal was permissible other than provided for, in law.

37. The Proviso to the above had not yet come into effect as on 19.01.2006 when the revision
petition was filed, for it was added only w.e.f. 31.12.2009. The Proviso says – [Provided that the
victim shall have a right to prefer an appeal against any order passed by the Court acquitting the
accused or convicting for a lesser offence or imposing inadequate compensation, and such appeal
shall lie to the Court to which an appeal ordinarily lies against the order of conviction of such Court.]

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101605278/

7

Mahabir vs The State Of Haryana on 29 January, 2025

i. Thus, the statutory right of appeal by a victim against such acquittal arose only from the date of
the amendment w.e.f. 31.12.2009. As the said revision was filed by the father of the deceased on
19.01.2006 well before the above amendment, such right was not available at the relevant point of
time.

ii. Therefore, the very first condition under Section 401(5) itself would not have been possible to be
fulfilled, i.e. the right of the victim to appeal did not lie under the Code at the time of filing the
revision petition.

38. As regards appeals against acquittals, the relevant provision for appeals, and specifically for
appeal to the High Court, are detailed out below:

a. Section 378. Appeal in case of acquittal – Section 378 (1) says – Save as otherwise
provided in sub-section (2), and subject to the provisions of sub-sections (3) and (5),
-

b. The relevant section pertaining to an appeal to the High Court is Section 378(1)(b)
which says – The State Government may, in any case, direct the Public Prosecutor to
present an appeal to the High Court from an original or appellate order of an
acquittal passed by any Court other than a High Court [not being an order under
clause

(a)] or an order of acquittal passed by the Court of Session in revision.].

i. Thus, only the State had the statutory right to appeal against the order of acquittal in 2006, and ii.
Indisputably, the State did not file appeal challenging the said order of acquittal.

PRECEDENTS EXPLAINING THE POSITION OF LAW

39. This Court in Bindeshwari Prasad Singh v. State of Bihar (now Jharkhand) & Anr. reported in
(2002) 6 SCC 650, laid down that there is a limit on the powers of the High Court as a Revisional
Court, prohibiting it from converting a finding of acquittal into one of conviction. Para 12 reads
thus: -

“12. We have carefully considered the material on record and we are satisfied that the
High Court was not justified in reappreciating the evidence on record and coming to
a different conclusion in a revision preferred by the informant under Section 401 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure. Sub-section (3) of Section 401 in terms provides that
nothing in Section 401 shall be deemed to authorize a High Court to convert a finding
of acquittal into one of conviction. The aforesaid sub-section, which places a
limitation on the powers of the revisional court, prohibiting it from converting a
finding of acquittal into one of conviction, is itself indicative of the nature and extent
of the revisional power conferred by Section 401 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. If
the High Court could not convert a finding of acquittal into one of conviction directly,

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101605278/

8

Mahabir vs The State Of Haryana on 29 January, 2025

it could not do so indirectly by the method of ordering a retrial. It is well settled by a
catena of decisions of this Court that the High Court will ordinarily not interfere in
revision with an order of acquittal except in exceptional cases where the interest of
public justice requires interference for the correction of a manifest illegality or the
prevention of gross miscarriage of justice. The High Court will not be justified in
interfering with an order of acquittal merely because the trial court has taken a wrong
view of the law or has erred in appreciation of evidence. It is neither possible nor
advisable to make an exhaustive list of circumstances in which exercise of revisional
jurisdiction may be justified, but decisions of this Court have laid down the
parameters of exercise of revisional jurisdiction by the High Court under Section 401
of the Code of Criminal Procedure in an appeal against acquittal by a private party.
(See D. Stephens v. Nosibolla [1951 SCC 184 : AIR 1951 SC 196 : 1951 Cri LJ 510] , K.
Chinnaswamy Reddy v. State of A.P. [AIR 1962 SC 1788 : (1963) 1 Cri LJ 8] , Akalu
Ahir v. Ramdeo Ram [(1973) 2 SCC 583 : 1973 SCC (Cri) 903], Pakalapati Narayana
Gajapathi Raju v. Bonapalli Peda Appadu [(1975) 4 SCC 477 :

1975 SCC (Cri) 543 : AIR 1975 SC 1854] and Mahendra Pratap Singh v. Sarju Singh
[AIR 1968 SC 707 : 1968 Cri LJ 665] .)”

40. This Court in Joseph Stephen & Ors. v. Santhanasamy & Ors. reported in (2022) 13 SCC 115, laid
down that on a plain reading of sub-section (3) of Section 401 CrPC, it has to be held that
sub-section (3) of Section 401 CrPC prohibits/bars the High Court to convert a finding of acquittal
into one of conviction. Para 10 reads thus:-

“10. Applying the law laid down by this Court in the aforesaid decisions and on a
plain reading of sub-section (3) of Section 401CrPC, it has to be held that sub-section
(3) of Section 401CrPC prohibits/bars the High Court to convert a finding of acquittal
into one of conviction. Though and as observed hereinabove, the High Court has
revisional power to examine whether there is manifest error of law or procedure, etc.
however, after giving its own findings on the findings recorded by the court
acquitting the accused and after setting aside the order of acquittal, the High Court
has to remit the matter to the trial court and/or the first appellate court, as the case
may be.”

41. This Court in Joseph Stephen (supra), holds that first, the High Court has to pass a judicial order
to treat an application for revision as petition of appeal. The High Court has to pass a judicial order
because sub-section (5) of Section 401 CrPC provides that if the High Court is satisfied that such
revision application was made under the erroneous belief that no appeal lies thereto and that it is
necessary in the interests of justice so to do. While treating the application for revision and to deal
with the same as a petition of appeal, the High Court has to record the satisfaction as provided
under sub-section (5) of Section 401 CrPC. Para 14 reads thus:-

“14. Now so far as the power to be exercised by the High Court under sub-section (5)
of Section 401 CrPC, namely, the High Court may treat the application for revision as

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101605278/

9

Mahabir vs The State Of Haryana on 29 January, 2025

petition of appeal and deal with the same accordingly is concerned, firstly the High
Court has to pass a judicial order to treat the application for revision as petition of
appeal. The High Court has to pass a judicial order because sub-section (5) of Section
401 CrPC provides that if the High Court is satisfied that such revision application
was made under the erroneous belief that no appeal lies thereto and that it is
necessary in the interests of justice so to do. While treating with the application for
revision as petition of appeal and deal with the same accordingly, the High Court has
to record the satisfaction as provided under sub-section (5) of Section 401 CrPC.
Therefore, where under the CrPC an appeal lies, but an application for revision has
been made to the High Court by any person, the High Court has jurisdiction to treat
the application for revision as a petition of appeal and deal with the same accordingly
as per sub-section (5) of Section 401 CrPC, however, subject to the High Court being
satisfied that such an application was made under the erroneous belief that no appeal
lies thereto and that it is necessary in the interests of justice so to do and for that
purpose the High Court has to pass a judicial order, may be a formal order, to treat
the application for revision as a petition of appeal and deal with the same
accordingly.”

42. This Court in Ganesha v. Sharanappa & Anr. reported in (2014) 1 SCC 87, in para
11, clarifies that :

“… Interference with the order of acquittal is called for only in exceptional cases –
where there is manifest error of law of procedure resulting into miscarriage of justice,
and, where the acquittal has been caused by shutting out evidence which otherwise
ought to have been considered or where material evidence which clinches the issue
has been overlooked. In such exceptional cases, the High Court can set aside an order
of acquittal, but it cannot covert it into one of conviction. The only course left to the
High Court in such exception cases, is to order retrial”.

43. This Court in Santhakumari & Ors. v. State of Tamil Nadu & Ors. reported in
(2023) 15 SCC 440, laid down that the order passed by the High Court is in the teeth
of the provisions of sub-section (2) of Section 401 of the CrPC as interpreted by this
Court in Manharibhai Muljibhai Kakadia & Anr.

v. Shaileshbhai Mohanbhai Patel & Ors. reported in (2012) 10 SCC 517. Paras 5 and 6 respectively
read thus:-

“5. Having considered the submissions, since it is not in dispute that the proposed
accused were not served notice of the revision proceedings, the order passed by the
High Court is in the teeth of the provisions of sub-section (2) of Section 401 of the
Code as interpreted by this Court in Manharibhai Muljibhai Kakadia [Manharibhai
Muljibhai Kakadia v. Shaileshbhai Mohanbhai Patel, (2012) 10 SCC 517 : (2013) 1
SCC (Cri) 218] .

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101605278/

10

Mahabir vs The State Of Haryana on 29 January, 2025

6. The decision in Manharibhai Muljibhai Kakadia [Manharibhai Muljibhai Kakadia
v. Shaileshbhai Mohanbhai Patel, (2012) 10 SCC 517 : (2013) 1 SCC (Cri) 218] has also
been followed in Bal Manohar Jalan v. Sunil Paswan [Bal Manohar Jalan v. Sunil
Paswan, (2014) 9 SCC 640 : (2014) 5 SCC (Cri) 256] , wherein it was held : (Bal
Manohar Jalan case [Bal Manohar Jalan v. Sunil Paswan, (2014) 9 SCC 640 : (2014)
5 SCC (Cri) 256] , SCC p.

644, para 9) “9. In the present case challenge is laid to the order dated 4-3- 2009 at the instance of
the complainant in the revision petition before the High Court and by virtue of Section 401(2) of the
Code, the accused mentioned in the first information report get the right of hearing before the
Revisional Court although the impugned order [Sunil Paswan v. State of Bihar, 2011 SCC OnLine Pat
600] therein was passed without their participation. The appellant who is an accused person cannot
be deprived of hearing on the face of the express provision contained in Section 401(2) of the Code
and on this ground, the impugned order [Sunil Paswan v. State of Bihar, 2011 SCC OnLine Pat 600]
of the High Court is liable to be set aside and the matter has to be remitted.””

44. The decision in Manharibhai Muljibhai (supra) was referred to and relied upon in Bal Manohar
Jalan v. Sunil Paswan & Anr. reported in (2014) 9 SCC 640, wherein it was inter alia, held that “The
appellant who is an accused person cannot be deprived of hearing on the face of the express
provision contained in Section 401(2) of the Code and on this ground, the impugned order of the
High Court is liable to be set aside…”.

45. This Court in Nandini Satpathy v. P.L. Dani & Anr. reported in (1978) 2 SCC 424 held that the
right to consult an advocate of choice shall not be denied to any person who is arrested. This does
not mean that persons who are not under arrest or custody can be denied such right. The spirit and
ethos of Article 22(1) is that it is fundamental to the rule of law that the service of a lawyer shall be
available for consultation to the accused person under circumstances of near custodial
interrogation. Moreover, the right against self-incrimination is best practiced & best promoted by
conceding to the accused, the right to consult a legal practitioner of his choice. Lawyers’ presence is
a constitutional claim in some circumstances of our country, and in the context of Article 20(3), is
an assurance of awareness and observance of the right to silence.

46. Thus, it is as clear as a noonday that the High Court committed an egregious error in reversing
the acquittal and passing an order of conviction in exercise of its revisional jurisdiction and that too
without affording any opportunity of hearing to the appellants herein.

47. We could have closed this matter at this stage; however, we would like to explain the position of
law in so far as the applicability of sub section (5) to Section 401 of the CrPC read with the provision
to sub section 372 of the CrPC is concerned.

IS THE PROVISO TO SECTION 372 CRPC RETROSPECTIVE IN OPERATION?

48. A very fabulous argument was canvassed on behalf of the State that the proviso to Section 372 of
the CrPC is retrospective in operation. Therefore, although the revision was filed in 2006, yet as it

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101605278/

11

Mahabir vs The State Of Haryana on 29 January, 2025

came to be decided in 2014, the proviso to Section 372 CrPC was applicable. The High Court could
have treated the revision application as an appeal under Section 372 at the instance of the
complainant. If the High Court would have treated it as an appeal, then it would have been within its
jurisdiction to reverse the acquittal and passed an order of conviction.

49. It seems one and all are under a serious misconception of law.

50. Insofar as the statutes regulating appeal are concerned, the law is well settled that the right to
file an appeal is a statutory right and it can be circumscribed by the conditions of the statute
granting it. As was observed by this Court in Government of Andhra Pradesh & Ors. v. P. Laxmi Devi
reported in (2008) 4 SCC 720 and Super Cassettes Industries Ltd. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
reported in (2009) 10 SCC 531, it is not a natural or inherent right and cannot be assumed to exist,
unless provided by a statute.

51. Therefore, the scheme of right of appeal under Chapter XXXIX of the CrPC, which provides the
right to file appeals including abatement of appeals, should be understood on the basis of the above
golden rules of statutory interpretation.

52. Comparing Section 404 of CrPC 1898 with Section 372 of CrPC, would indicate that the main
provision is intact, insofar it provides that no appeal shall lie from any judgment or order of a
criminal court, except as provided by this Code or by any other law for the time being in force. The
significant development that has taken place in this provision is that a ‘proviso’ was added by the
Amending Act No. 5 of 2009, which provides that ‘the victim shall have a right to prefer an appeal
against any order passed by the Court acquitting the accused or convicting for a lesser offence or
imposing inadequate compensation, and such appeal shall lie to the Court to which an appeal
ordinarily lies against the order of conviction passed by such Court’.

53. Therefore, by the aforesaid provision a right has been created in favour of the victim, which was
not existing earlier in the Code, i.e., that a victim shall have a right to prefer an appeal against any
order passed by the court acquitting the accused or convicting for a lesser offence or imposing
inadequate compensation .The plain reading of the statement of objects and reasons for introducing
the proviso to Section 372 CrPC makes it clear that it wanted to confer certain rights on the victims.
It has been noted therein that the victims are the worst sufferers in a crime, and they don't have
much role in the court proceedings. They need to be given certain “rights” and compensation, so
that there is no distortion of the criminal justice system. This, by itself, is clear that the object of
adding this proviso is to create a right in favour of the victim to prefer an appeal as a matter of right.
It not only extends to challenge the order of acquittal, but such appeal can also be filed by the victim
if the accused is convicted for a lessor offence or if the inadequate compensation has been imposed.

54. Thus, it is clear as per the golden rule of interpretation, that the ‘proviso’ is a substantive
enactment, and is not merely excepting something out of or qualifying what was excepting or goes
before. Therefore, by adding the ‘proviso’ in Section 372 of CrPC by this amendment, a right has
been created in favour of the victim.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101605278/

12

Mahabir vs The State Of Haryana on 29 January, 2025

55. The relevant statutory provisions are excerpted for convenience. First, Section 2(wa) of the CrPC
defines “victim” as:

“victim” means a person who has suffered any loss or injury caused by reason of the
act or omission for which the accused person has been charged and the expression
“victim” includes his or her guardian or legal heir.”

56. The second provision is Section 372 of the CrPC, which stipulates that:

“No appeal shall lie from any judgment or order of a Criminal Court except as
provided for by this Code or any other law for the time being in force.”

57. The third statutory provision is the proviso to Section 372 CrPC, which was introduced in 2008,
conferring upon victims, the right of appeal in these terms:

“Provided that the victim shall have a right to prefer an appeal against any order
passed by the Court acquitting the accused or convicting for a lesser offence or
imposing inadequate compensation, and such appeal shall lie to the Court to which
an appeal ordinarily lies against the order of conviction of such Court.”
LEGISLATIVE HISTORY

58. A victim-oriented approach to certain aspects of criminal procedure was advocated in the Law
Commission of India's 154th Report, 1996, which noted that “increasingly, the attention of
criminologists, penologists and reformers of criminal justice system has been directed to
victimology, control of victimization and protection of the victims of crimes.” (Chapter XV,
Paragraph

1) While focused on issues of compensation, the Law Commission Report cited the 1985 United
Nations Declaration of Basic Principles of Justice for Victims of Crime and Abuse of Power for its
definition of “victim”:

“persons who, individually or collectively, have suffered harm, including physical or
mental injury, emotional suffering, economic loss or substantial impairment of their
fundamental rights, through acts or omissions that are in violation of criminal laws.”
(Chapter XV, Paragraph 6.2).

59. The said report prompted the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill of 2006. Its
Statement of Objects and Reasons noted that:

“… The Law Commission has undertaken a comprehensive review of the Code of
Criminal Procedure in its 154th report and its recommendations have been found
very appropriate, particularly those relating to provisions concerning arrest, custody
and remand, procedure for summons and warrant-cases, compounding of offences,
victimology, special protection in respect of women and inquiry and trial of persons

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101605278/

13

Mahabir vs The State Of Haryana on 29 January, 2025

of unsound mind. ..”

60. It also noted that:

“At present, the victims are the worst sufferers in a crime and they don't have much
role in the court proceedings. They need to be given certain rights and compensation,
so that there is no distortion of the criminal justice system.”

61. The definition of “victim”, as well as the proviso to Section 372 was eventually inserted into the
Code of Criminal Procedure through the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2008 (Act
No. 5 of 2009). The Amendment inserts victim-oriented provisions at a number of places in the
CrPC. For instance, a proviso to Section 157(1) is added, stipulating that:

“Provided further that in relation to an offence of rape, the recording of statement of
the victim shall be conducted at the residence of the victim or in the place of her
choice and as far as practicable by a woman police officer in the presence of her
parents or guardian or near relatives or social worker of the locality.”

62. Through a new Section, 357A(1), it is provided that “Every State Government in co-ordination
with the Central Government shall prepare a scheme for providing funds for the purpose of
compensation to the victim or his dependents who have suffered loss or injury as a result of the
crime and who, require rehabilitation.” IS PROVISO TO SECTION 372 AN EXCEPTION?

63. The victims' right to appeal has been framed in the language of a proviso to Section 372 of the
CrPC. As held in A.N. Sehgal & Ors. v. Raje Ram Sheoran & Ors. reported in AIR 1991 SC 1406, it is
well-accepted that normally, a proviso “carves out an exception to the main provision to which it has
been enacted as a proviso and to no other.” This, however, is subject to context. This Court, in S.
Sundaram Pillai & Ors. v. V.R. Pattabiraman & Ors. reported in AIR 1985 SC 582, held that a
proviso may be of four different types : in one set of circumstances, “it may be so embedded in the
Act itself as to become an integral part of the enactment and thus acquire the tenor and colour of the
substantive enactment itself;”

64. Emphasizing that undue importance should not be given on the appellation (explanation,
proviso, saving clause, etc) and rather, the intent of the law maker should be given effect, this Court,
in State of Bombay & Anr. v. United Motors (India) Limited & Ors. reported in (1953) 1 SCC 514
ruled that:

“… It may be that the description of a provision cannot be decisive of its true meaning
or interpretation which must depend on the words used therein but, when two
interpretations are sought to be put upon a provision, that which fits the description
which the Legislature has chosen to apply to it, is, according to sound canons of
constructions, to be adopted, provided of course, it is consistent with the language
employed in preference to the one which attributes to the provision a different effect
from what it should have according to its description by the Legislature.”

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101605278/

14

Mahabir vs The State Of Haryana on 29 January, 2025

65. The aforesaid thought was brought home in State of Kerala & Anr. v. B. Six Holiday Resorts
Private Ltd. & Ors. reported in (2010) 5 SCC 186, where this Court held as follows:

“32.A proviso may either qualify or except certain provisions from the main
provision; or it can change the very concept of the intendment of the main provision
by incorporating certain mandatory conditions to be fulfilled; or it can temporarily
suspend the operation of the main provision. Ultimately the proviso has to be
construed upon its terms”.

66. It is the intention of the legislature, therefore, which is paramount.

67. In the present context, given the text of Section 372 and the scheme of the Act, it is clear that the
proviso establishes an independent right, and must be interpreted within that framework. Section
372 forbids appeals unless otherwise authorized by the Code, or by another law. The proviso,
however, states that the victim shall have the right to appeal under certain circumstances. Given the
rule enacted in Section 372, it cannot be said that the proviso to that provision carves out an
exception to the rule. According to the rule in Section 372, appeals must be in accordance with the
Code; according to the proviso

- which is itself part of the Code - victims have the right to appeal under certain circumstances. At
various other places in the CrPC, appeal procedures are specified. For instance, Section 378
stipulates the procedure in case of appeals from acquittal, and Section 378(3) specifies that “no
appeal under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall be entertained except with leave of the High
Court.” The proviso to Section 372 dispenses with the requirement of leave in case it is the victim
who is appealing. From the scheme of the Act, therefore, it seems clear that the proviso is better
understood to be one of the many provisions governing appeals under Chapter 29 of the CrPC.
While Section 372 enacts that no appeal shall lie except as provided for by the Code, it refers to the
various provisions of Chapter 29, including the proviso, each of which prescribe the requirements
and procedures for appeals under different circumstances. The proviso, therefore, is not an
exception to Section 372, but a stand-alone legal provision.

68. This Court in the case of Mallikarjun Kodagali (Dead) represented through Legal
Representatives v. State of Karnataka & Ors. reported in (2019) 2 SCC 752, after discussing various
judgments of different High Courts, observed in para 72, as under:

“72. What is significant is that several High Courts have taken a consistent view to the
effect that the victim of an offence has a right of appeal under the proviso to Section
372 CrPC. This view is in consonance with the plain language of the proviso. But what
is more important is that several High Courts have also taken the view that the date
of the alleged offence has no relevance to the right of appeal. It has been held, and we
have referred to those decisions above, that the significant date is the date of the
order of acquittal passed by the trial Court. In a sense, the cause of action arises in
favour of the victim of an offence only when an order of acquittal is passed and if that
happens after 31.12.2009 the victim has a right to challenge the acquittal, through an

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101605278/

15

Mahabir vs The State Of Haryana on 29 January, 2025

appeal. Indeed, the right not only extends to challenging the order of acquittal but
also challenging the conviction of the accused for a lesser offence or imposing
inadequate compensation. The language of the proviso is quite explicit, and we
should not read nuances that do not exist in the proviso.” (Emphasis supplied)

69. In Hitendra Vishnu Thakur & Ors. v. State of Maharashtra & Ors. reported in (1994) 4 SCC 602,
one of the questions which this Court was examining was whether clause (bb) of Section 20(4) of the
Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987 introduced by an Amendment Act
governing Section 167(2) CrPC in relation to TADA matters was in the realm of procedural law and if
so, whether the same would be applicable to pending cases. Answering the question in the
affirmative this Court speaking through A.S. Anand, J. (as His Lordship then was), held that
Amendment Act 43 of 1993 was retrospective in operation and that clauses (b) and (bb) of sub
section (4) of Section 20 of TADA apply to the cases which were pending investigation on the date
when the amendment came into force. The Court summed up the legal position with regard to the
procedural law being retrospective in its operation and the right of a litigant to claim that he be tried
by a particular Court, in the following words:

“(i) A statute which affects substantive rights is presumed to be prospective in
operation unless made retrospective, either expressly or by necessary intendment,
whereas a statute which merely affects procedure, unless such a construction is
textually impossible, is presumed to be retrospective in its application, should not be
given an extended meaning and should be strictly confined to its clearly defined
limits.

(ii) Law relating to forum and limitation is procedural in nature, whereas law relating
to right of action and right of appeal even though remedial is substantive in nature.

(iii) Every litigant has a vested right in substantive law but no such right exists in
procedural law.

(iv) A procedural statute should not generally speaking be applied retrospectively
where the result would be to create new disabilities or obligations or to impose new
duties in respect of transactions already accomplished.

(v) A statute which not only changes the procedure but also creates new rights and
liabilities shall be construed to be prospective in operation, unless otherwise
provided, either expressly or by necessary implication.” (Emphasis supplied)

70. We may also refer to the decision of this Court in Sudhir G. Angur & Ors. v. M. Sanjeev & Ors.
reported in (2006) 1 SCC 141, where a three-Judge Bench of this Court approved the decision of the
Bombay High Court in Shiv Bhagwan Moti Ram Saraoji v. Onkarmal Ishar Dass reported in AIR
1952 Bom 365 and observed:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101605278/

16

Mahabir vs The State Of Haryana on 29 January, 2025

“11. … It has been held that a court is bound to take notice of the change in the law
and is bound to administer the law as it was when the suit came up for hearing. It has
been held that if a court has jurisdiction to try the suit, when it comes on for disposal,
it then cannot refuse to assume jurisdiction by reason of the fact that it had no
jurisdiction to entertain it at the date when it was instituted. We are in complete
agreement with these observations. …” (Emphasis supplied)

71. In Ramesh Kumar Soni v. State of Madhya Pradesh reported in (2013) 14 SCC 696, this Court
reiterated the aforesaid principle with approval.

72. In view of the aforesaid, it is very much clear that the amendment so made in Section 372 CrPC
by adding a proviso in the year 2009 creating a substantive right of appeal is not retrospective in
nature. A statute which creates new rights shall be construed to be prospective in operation unless
otherwise provided, either expressly or by necessary implication. It is, therefore, clear that in the
year 2006 when the judgement of acquittal was passed, the de facto complainant had no right to
challenge the impugned order passed in 2006 by way of filing the appeal. In such circumstances sub
section (5) of Section 401 CrPC has no application in the present case.

73. There is yet one another shocking aspect of the matter, we need to take cognizance of.

74. It appears that the High Court relied upon the police statement of PW-7 recorded under Section
161 of the CrPC instead of his oral testimony before the trial court.

75. The PW-7 Om Parkash s/o Durga Ram, turned hostile and was cross examined by the Public
Prosecutor under Section 145 of the Evidence Act. While discussing the evidence of PW-7 as
recorded by the trial court, the High Court observed thus:-

i. “Resultantly, the answer meted to question No. 1 (supra), qua his only intimating
the police, that both the parties were throwing brickbats from the top of the houses, is
to be construed to be a pretextual or prevaricated version qua the crime event.” ii.
“Cumulatively hence, since the deposition embodied in the examination-in-chief of
PW-7, becomes contradicted from his previously made statement in writing to the
police. Resultantly when during the course of his cross-examination, he omitted to
make any speakings, that his previously made statement, thus was concocted or
manufactured by the investigating officer concerned, nor when he stated that he had
never made any previous statement in respect of the crime incident to the police
officer concerned. Therefore, the consequential effect thereof is that, the previously
made statement by the witness (supra) to the police officer concerned, was both
genuine and a true reflection of the crime incident. Contrarily, the statement made by
the witness (supra) before the learned trial Judge concerned, was an engineered and
concocted version vis-à-vis the crime incident. In sequel, since the previously made
statement by the witness (supra) to the police officer concerned, for the reasons
(supra) is a truthful reflection of the crime event, thereby immense credence is to be
assigned thereto, rather than to the ill resilings therefrom by the witness (supra).

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101605278/

17

Mahabir vs The State Of Haryana on 29 January, 2025

Resultantly thereby the prosecution has been able to prove the genesis of the prosecution case. The
said reason becomes founded upon the principle of law that even if the prosecution witness turns
hostile yet when during the course of his being cross-examined by the Public Prosecutor concerned,
he is proven to be ill- resiling from his previously made untutored statement to the police officer
concerned, thereupon the resilings as made by the prosecution witness in his examination-in-chief,
vis-à-vis, his previously made statement to the police officer concerned, are ill-resilings therefrom,
thus thereto no credence is to be assigned, rather credence is to be assigned to the evidently
untutored and undoctored version comprised in his previously made statement in writing to the
police officer concerned.” (Emphasis supplied)

76. Whereas Section 162 of the CrPC expressly provides that the statements recorded under Section
161 of the CrPC shall not be used for any purpose save as provided in Section 162, and the Proviso to
Section 162 clearly says that, any part of the statement, if duly proved, may be used by the accused,
to contradict such witness in the manner provide in Section 145 of the Evidence Act. And when any
part of such statement is so used, any part thereof may also be used in the re-examination of such
witness, but only for the purpose of explaining any matter referred to in the cross-examination.

77. We may remind the High Court of the observations made by this Court (a 3- Judge Bench
speaking through one of us, J. B. Pardiwala, J.) in Anees v. State Government of NCT reported in
2024 SCC OnLine SC 757. We quote some of the observations made in paras 62 and thereafter from
63 onwards till 69:

“62. … There could be innumerable reasons for a witness to resile from his/her police
statement and turn hostile. Here is a case in which a five-year-old daughter might
have resiled thinking that having lost her mother, the father was the only person who
may take care of her and bring her up. However, why she turned hostile is not
important. What is important is the role of the public prosecutor after a prime
witness, more particularly a child witness of tender age, turns hostile in a murder
trial. When any prosecution witness turns hostile and the public prosecutor seeks
permission of the trial court to cross-examine such witness then that witness is like
any other witness. The witness no longer remains the prosecution witness.

xxx xxx xxx

63. Section 162 Cr.P.C. bars the use of statement of witnesses recorded by the police
except for the limited purpose of contradiction of such witnesses as indicated therein.
The statement made by a witness before the police under Section 161(1) Cr.

P.C. can be used only for the purpose of contradicting such witness on what he has stated at the trial
as laid down in the proviso to Section 162(1) Cr.P.C. The statements under Section 161 Cr. P.C.
recorded during the investigation are not substantive pieces of evidence but can be used primarily
for the limited purpose : (i) of contradicting such witness by an accused under Section 145 of the
Evidence Act; (ii) the contradiction of such witness also by the prosecution but with the leave of the
Court; and (iii) the re- examination of the witness if necessary.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101605278/

18

Mahabir vs The State Of Haryana on 29 January, 2025

64. The court cannot suo motu make use of statements to police not proved and ask questions with
reference to them which are inconsistent with the testimony of the witness in the court. The words
‘if duly proved’ used in Section 162 Cr. P.C. clearly show that the record of the statement of
witnesses cannot be admitted in evidence straightaway, nor can be looked into, but they must be
duly proved for the purpose of contradiction by eliciting admission from the witness during
cross-examination and also during the cross-examination of the Investigating Officer. The statement
before the Investigating Officer can be used for contradiction but only after strict compliance with
Section 145 of the Evidence Act, that is, by drawing attention to the parts intended for contradiction.

65. Section 145 of the Evidence Act reads as under:

“145. Cross-examination as to previous statements in writing.— A witness may be
cross-examined as to previous statements made by him in writing or reduced into
writing, and relevant to matters in question, without such writing being shown to
him, or being proved; but, if it is intended to contradict him by the writing, his
attention must, before the writing can be proved, be called to those parts of it which
are to be used for the purpose of contradicting him.”

66. Under Section 145 of the Evidence Act when it is intended to contradict the witness by his
previous statement reduced into writing, the attention of such witness must be called to those parts
of it which are to be used for the purpose of contradicting him, before the writing can be used. While
recording the deposition of a witness, it becomes the duty of the trial court to ensure that the part of
the police statement with which it is intended to contradict the witness is brought to the notice of
the witness in his cross- examination. The attention of witness is drawn to that part and this must
reflect in his cross-examination by reproducing it. If the witness admits the part intended to
contradict him, it stands proved and there is no need of further proof of contradiction and it will be
read while appreciating the evidence. If he denies having made that part of the statement, his
attention must be drawn to that statement and must be mentioned in the deposition. By this process
the contradiction is merely brought on record, but it is yet to be proved. Thereafter, when the
Investigating Officer is examined in the court, his attention should be drawn to the passage marked
for the purpose of contradiction, it will then be proved in the deposition of the Investigating Officer
who, again, by referring to the police statement will depose about the witness having made that
statement. The process again involves referring to the police statement and culling out that part with
which the maker of the statement was intended to be contradicted. If the witness was not confronted
with that part of the statement with which the defence wanted to contradict him, then the court
cannot suo motu make use of statements to police not proved in compliance with Section 145 of the
Evidence Act, that is, by drawing attention to the parts intended for contradiction.” [See : V.K.
Mishra v. State of Uttarakhand : ((2015) 9 SCC 588]

67. In the case at hand, not only proper contradictions were not brought on record in the oral
evidence of the hostile witnesses, but even those few that were brought on record, were not proved
through the evidence of the Investigating Officer. Does the State expect Section 106 of the Evidence
Act to come to its aid in every criminal prosecution. At times, such procedural lapses may lead to a
very serious crime going unpunished. Any crime committed against an individual is a crime against

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101605278/

19

Mahabir vs The State Of Haryana on 29 January, 2025

the entire society. In such circumstances, neither the public prosecutor nor the presiding officer of
the trial court can afford to remain remiss or lackadaisical in any manner. Time and again, this
Court has, through its judgments, said that there should not be any element of political
consideration in the matters like appointment to the post of public prosecutor, etc. The only
consideration for the Government should be the merit of the person. The person should be not only
competent, but he should also be a man of impeccable character and integrity. He should be a
person who should be able to work independently without any reservations, dictates or other
constraints. The relations between the Public Prosecution Service and the judiciary are the very
cornerstone of the criminal justice system. The public prosecutors who are responsible for
conducting prosecutions and may appeal against the court decisions, are one of judges' natural
counterparts in the trial proceedings and also in the broader context of management of the system
of criminal law.

68. A criminal case is built upon the edifice of evidence (whether it is direct evidence or
circumstantial evidence) that is admissible in law. Free and fair trial is the very foundation of the
criminal jurisprudence. There is a reasonable apprehension in the mind of the public at large that
the criminal trial is neither free nor fair with the Prosecutor appointed by the State Government
conducting the trial in a manner where frequently the prosecution witnesses turn hostile.

69. Over a period of time, we have noticed, while hearing criminal appeals, that there is practically
no effective and meaningful cross-examination by the Public Prosecutor of a hostile witness. All that
the Public Prosecutor would do is to confront the hostile witness with his/her police statement
recorded under Section 161 of the Cr. P.C. and contradict him/her with the same.

The only thing that the Public Prosecutor would do is to bring the contradictions on record and
thereafter prove such contradictions through the evidence of the Investigating Officer. This is not
sufficient. The object of the cross-examination is to impeach the accuracy, credibility and general
value of the evidence given in- chief; to sift the facts already stated by the witness; to detect and
expose the discrepancy or to elicit the suppressed facts which will support the case of the
cross-examining party. What we are trying to convey is that it is the duty of the Public Prosecutor to
cross- examine a hostile witness in detail and try to elucidate the truth & also establish that the
witness is speaking lie and has deliberately resiled from his police statement recorded under Section
161 of the Cr. P.C. A good, seasoned and experienced Public Prosecutor will not only bring the
contradictions on record, but will also cross-examine the hostile witness at length to establish that
he or she had actually witnessed the incident as narrated in his/her police statement.” (Emphasis
supplied)

78. Thus, this Court took a serious notice of lack of thorough cross-examination by Public
Prosecutors in criminal appeals, specifically with hostile witnesses. The prosecutors often only
confront them with their police statement, aiming to highlight contradictions but not fully explore
the witness's testimony. The Court emphasized that the purpose of cross-examination is to challenge
the accuracy and credibility of the witness's statement, uncover hidden facts, and establish if the
witness is lying. Public Prosecutors should conduct detailed cross- examinations to reveal the truth
and establish the witness's first hand knowledge of the incident described in their police statement.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101605278/

20

Mahabir vs The State Of Haryana on 29 January, 2025

79. In the decision referred to above the Court noted that after the witness was declared hostile, all
that the Public Prosecutor had done was to put few suggestions to her for the purposes of
cross-examination. Even proper contradictions were not brought on record.

80. This Court explained that the trial courts cannot independently use statements made to the
police that have not been proven, nor can it base its questions on such statements if they conflict
with the witness's testimony in court. The phrase 'if duly proved' in Section 162 of the CrPC indicates
that the statements of witnesses recorded by the police cannot be immediately admitted as evidence
or examined. They must first be proven through eliciting admissions from the witness during
cross-examination and also during the cross-examination of the Investigating Officer. While
statements made to the Investigating Officer can be used for contradiction, this can only be done
after strict compliance with Section 145 of the Evidence Act. This requires drawing attention to the
specific parts of the statement intended for contradiction. This is what is required under Section 145
of the Evidence Act but even where a witness is confronted by his previous statement and given an
opportunity to explain that part of the statement that is put to him does not constitute substantive
evidence.

81. There is a catena of decisions laying down the principle in law that the material elicited as
contradiction by use of Section 145 of the Indian Evidence Act is not substantive evidence. Even in
regard to the statement recorded under Section 164 of the CrPC by authorised Magistrate, it has
been held accordingly. Therefore, the fact that the contradictions are proved through the
investigating officers though the witnesses have denied having made such statements, does not
translate the contradictions into substantive evidence. Unless there is substantive evidence, it
cannot be acted upon legally particularly to base a conviction.

UNLAWFUL DETENTION OF THE APPELLANTS FOR A PERIOD OF THREE MONTHS

82. This Court in D.K. Basu v. State of West Bengal reported in (1997) 1 SCC 416 observed as
under:— “44. The claim in public law for compensation for unconstitutional deprivation of
fundamental right to life and liberty, the protection of which is guaranteed under the Constitution, is
a claim based on strict liability and is in addition to the claim available in private law for damages
for tortious acts of the public servants. Public law proceedings serve a different purpose than the
private law proceedings. Award of compensation for established infringement of the indefeasible
rights guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution is a remedy available in public law since the
purpose of public law is not only to civilise public power but also to assure the citizens that they live
under a legal system wherein their rights and interests shall be protected and preserved. Grant of
compensation in proceedings under Article 32 or Article 226 of the Constitution of India for the
established violation of the fundamental rights guaranteed under Article 21, is an exercise of the
courts under the public law jurisdiction for penalising the wrongdoer and fixing the liability for the
public wrong on the State which failed in the discharge of its public duty to protect the fundamental
rights of the citizen.” (Emphasis supplied)

83. In Nilabati Behera v. State of Orisa & Ors. reported in (1993) 2 SCC 746, while dealing with the
power of a constitutional court to award compensation rather than relegating such person to file a

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101605278/

21

Mahabir vs The State Of Haryana on 29 January, 2025

suit for recovery of damages, this Court observed as under:— “22. The above discussion indicates the
principle on which the court's power under Articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution is exercised to
award monetary compensation for contravention of a fundamental right. This was indicated in
Rudul Sah [(1983) 4 SCC 141 : 1983 SCC (Cri) 798 : (1983) 3 SCR 508] and certain further
observations therein adverted to earlier, which may tend to minimise the effect of the principle
indicated therein, do not really detract from that principle. This is how the decisions of this Court in
Rudul Sah [(1983) 4 SCC 141 : 1983 SCC (Cri) 798 : (1983) 3 SCR 508] in that line have to be
understood and Kasturilal [(1965) 1 SCR 375 : AIR 1965 SC 1039 : (1965) 2 Cri LJ 144] distinguished
therefrom. We have considered this question at some length in view of the doubt raised, at times,
about the propriety of awarding compensation in such proceedings, instead of directing the claimant
to resort to the ordinary process of recovery of damages by recourse to an action in tort. In the
present case, on the finding reached, it is a clear case for award of compensation to the petitioner for
the custodial death of her son.” (Emphasis supplied)

84. The principle as aforesaid is now well established that in cases where there can be no dispute of
facts, the constitutional courts have the power to award compensation in case a person has been
deprived of his life and liberty without following the procedure established by law.

85. The learned counsel appearing for the appellants vehemently submitted that the appellants are
in their 60s and 70s. 26 years after the incident, and nearly 20 years after their acquittal, the
appellants were unjustly subjected to rigorous imprisonment for over 3 months, due to the
impugned judgment and order, before they came to be released by this Court on bail vide order
dated 13.12.2024. She highlighted the following for the purpose of making good her case for
awarding appropriate compensation to each of the three appellants.

a. The appellants and their respective families suffered shock, trauma and despair, upon they being
taken in sudden custody after being acquitted twenty years ago, for a crime that they had not
committed. b. The appellants have had to suffer the ignominy of incarceration, with its concomitant
physical, mental and emotional hardship. c. The appellants were wrongly denied their liberty,
dignity and reputation as they were branded as criminals for this period. d. The appellants live
within a small community in their village, and today, they face social stigma as well, for the above
reasons. e. It is, therefore, only just and proper that their positions be duly vindicated, their names
be cleared, and that they be properly compensated as well, for their unjust denial of liberty, dignity
and reputation.

f. This step by the Court would enable a sense of restoration of justice and dignity within themselves
and among their community.

86. This Court in D.K. Basu (supra), while dealing with the aspect of ‘torture’, held:

“10. ‘Torture’ has not been defined in the Constitution or in other penal laws.
‘Torture’ of a human being by another human being is essentially an instrument to
impose the will of the ‘strong’ over the ‘weak’ by suffering. The word torture today has
become synonymous with the darker side of human civilisation.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101605278/

22

Mahabir vs The State Of Haryana on 29 January, 2025

‘Torture is a wound in the soul so painful that sometimes you can almost touch it, but
it is also so intangible that there is no way to heal it. Torture is anguish squeezing in
your chest, cold as ice and heavy as a stone, paralysing as sleep and dark as the abyss.
Torture is despair and fear and rage and hate. It is a desire to kill and destroy
including yourself.’ — Adriana P. Bartow

11. No violation of any one of the human rights has been the subject of so many
conventions and declarations as ‘torture’ — all aiming at total banning of it in all
forms, but in spite of the commitments made to eliminate torture, the fact remains
that torture is more widespread now than ever before. ‘Custodial torture’ is a naked
violation of human dignity and degradation which destroys, to a very large extent, the
individual personality.

It is a calculated assault on human dignity and whenever human dignity is wounded, civilisation
takes a step backward — flag of humanity must on each such occasion fly half-mast.

12. In all custodial crimes what is of real concern is not only infliction of body pain but the mental
agony which a person undergoes within the four walls of police station or lock-up. Whether it is
physical assault or rape in police custody, the extent of trauma, a person experiences is beyond the
purview of law.”

87. From the above, it is quite vivid that emphasis has been laid on mental agony when a person is
confined within the four walls of the police station or lock up.

88. In Kiran Bedi v. Committee of Inquiry & Anr. reported in (1989) 1 SCC 494, this Court reiterated
the following observation from the decision in D.F. Marion v. Davis reported in 55 ALR 171 : 217 Ala
176 (1927):

“25. … ‘The right to the enjoyment of a private reputation, unassailed by malicious
slander is of ancient origin, and is necessary to human society. A good reputation is
an element of personal security, and is protected by the Constitution equally with the
right to the enjoyment of life, liberty, and property.’”

89. Reputation of an individual is an insegregable facet of his right to life with dignity. In a different
context, a two-Judge Bench of this Court in Vishwanath Agrawal v. Sarla Vishwanath Agrawal
reported in (2012) 7 SCC 288, has observed:

“55. … reputation which is not only the salt of life, but also the purest treasure and
the most precious perfume of life. It is extremely delicate and a cherished value this
side of the grave. It is a revenue generator for the present as well as for the posterity.”

90. The most disturbing feature of this litigation is the order passed by the High Court on quantum
of sentence. In para 2, the High Court has observed thus:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101605278/

23

Mahabir vs The State Of Haryana on 29 January, 2025

“Learned State counsel submits that the instant case is the rarest of rare case,
whereby, capital punishment is required to be imposed upon the present
convicts/accused. However, in the facts and circumstances of the present case, the
above submission is liable to be rejected.”

91. The Public Prosecutor instead of assisting the learned Judges in the right direction by pointing
out the correct position of law went to the extent of praying before the Court that the appellants
herein deserved capital punishment. It is a different thing that the High Court rejected the prayer of
the Public Prosecutor.

92. Such is the standard of the Public Prosecutors in the High Courts of the country. This is bound to
happen when the State Governments across the country appoint AGPs and APPs in their respective
High Courts solely on political considerations. Favouritism and nepotism is one additional factor for
compromising merit. This judgement is a message to all the State Governments that the AGPs and
APPs in respective High Courts should be appointed solely on the merit of the person. The State
Government owes a duty to ascertain the ability of the person; how proficient the person is in law,
his overall background, his integrity etc.

93. Time and again this Court has observed in so many of its decisions that such appointments be it
in the High Court or in the district judiciary should be only taking into consideration the merit of the
candidate and no other consideration should weigh in such appointments.

94. Public Prosecutor holds a "Public Office". The primacy given to him under the Scheme of CrPC
has a "special purpose". Certain professional, official obligations and privileges are attached to his
office. His office may also be termed as an office of profit as he remains disqualified to contest the
election so long he holds the office though permanency is attached to the office and not to the term
of his office. His duties are of public nature. He has an "independent and responsible character". He
holds the public office within the scope of a "quo warranto proceedings". Prosecutor is not a part of
investigating agency but is an "independent statutory authority". He performs statutory duties and
functions. He holds an office of responsibility as he has been enclothed with the power to withdraw
the prosecution of a case on the directions of the State Government.

95. The Criminal law enforcement system investigates crimes and prosecutes offenders. It must also
protect valued rights and freedoms, and convict only the guilty. The prosecutor must recognize these
different and competing interests. He should strike a fair balance between the competing interests of
convicting the guilty, protecting citizens' rights and freedoms and protecting the public from
criminals. Prosecutors should ensure that prosecutions are conducted in a diligent, competent and
fair manner. The importance of the office of the Public Prosecutor cannot be overemphasized. The
Public Prosecutor must be a person of high merit, fair and objective, because upon him depends to a
large extent the administration of criminal justice. The office of the Public Prosecutor is a public
office and the incumbent has to discharge statutory duties. The person appointed as Public
Prosecutor must, therefore, be one who is not only able and efficient, but also enjoys a reputation
and prestige which satisfy his appointment as a Public Prosecutor. The duty of the prosecutor is to
assist the Court in reaching a proper conclusion in regard to the case which is brought before it for

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101605278/

24

Mahabir vs The State Of Haryana on 29 January, 2025

trial. The prosecutor has to be fair in the presentation of the prosecution case. He must not suppress
or keep back from the court evidence relevant to the determination of the guilt or innocence of the
accused. He must present the complete picture, and not a one sided picture. He must not be partial
to the prosecution or to the accused. He has to be fair to both sides in the presentation of the case.

96. A Public Prosecutor is not expected to show a thirst to reach the case in the conviction of the
accused somehow or the other irrespective of the true facts of the case. The expected attitude of the
Public Prosecutor while conducting prosecution must be couched in fairness not only to the Court to
the investigation agencies but to the accused as well. If an accused is entitled to any legitimate
benefit during trial, the Public Prosecutor should not scuttle/conceal it. On the contrary, it is the
duty of the Public Prosecutor to winch it to the fore and make it available to the accused. Even if the
court or defence counsel overlooked it, the Public Prosecutor has the added responsibility to bring it
to the notice of the Court, if it comes to his knowledge.

97. Law Officers are one of the important wheels of the chariot, driven by the Judges to attain the
cherished goal of human being to secure justice against the wrong doers. The main object of the
State is to curb the crime, investigate and prosecute the offenders and punish them, with a view to
maintain law and order, amity and harmony, tranquillity and peace. The various provisions of the
CrPC and the Rules provide the manner and procedure by which the Public Prosecutor should be
appointed and provide assistance to the Courts. The object of the CrPC and the Rules is to appoint
the best among the lawyers as the Public Prosecutor to provide assistance to the Court. The people
have the vital interest in the matter.

98. Judges are human beings and at times they do commit mistakes. The sheer pressure of work at
times may lead to such errors. At the same time, the defence counsel as well as the Public Prosecutor
owes a duty to correct the Court if the Court is falling in some error and for all this, we hold the State
Government responsible. It is the State Government who appointed the concerned Public
Prosecutor. The State Government should be asked to pay compensation to the three appellants
herein.

99. For all the foregoing reasons, the appeals succeed and are hereby allowed. The impugned
judgment and order passed by the High Court is hereby set aside. The State Government shall pay
Rs. 5,00,000/- each to the three appellants towards compensation within a period of four weeks
from today failing which we shall take appropriate action against the responsible officer.

100. The bail bonds furnished by the appellants herein stand discharged.

101. Registry shall notify this matter once again before this Bench after four weeks to report
compliance of payment of compensation as awarded.

…………………………..J. (J.B. PARDIWALA) ….……………………….J. (R. MAHADEVAN) New Delhi;

January 29, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101605278/

25

