Manish Yadav vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 22 January, 2025

Manish Yadav vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 22 January, 2025

Author: Vikram Nath

Bench: Vikram Nath

 2025 INSC 151                                                        REPORTABLE
                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S).       OF 2025
                          (ARISING OUT OF SLP(CRL.) NO(S). 15882 OF 2024)

         MANISH YADAV                                             .…APPELLANT(S)

                                          VERSUS

         STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH & ANR.                          ….RESPONDENT(S)

                                                      ORDER

Mehta, J.

1. Heard.

2. Leave granted.

3. The appellant through this appeal by special leave seeks to assail the order dated 30th August,
2024 passed by the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad,1 whereby, it partially allowed the
Criminal Appeal No. 227/2024 preferred by the appellant, who had sought to question the legality
and validity of the order dated 24th 1 Hereinafter referred to as ‘High Court’.

August, 2023 passed by learned Special Judge, SC/ST Act, Gazipur2 in Special Sessions Trial No.
760 of 2023, summoning the appellant and his father, Rajnath Yadav, to face trial for the offences
punishable under Sections 376, 323, 504 and 506 of the Indian Penal Code, 18603 and Sections
3(1)(r), 3(1)(s), 3(2)(5a) and 3(2)(v) of the Scheduled Castes and the Schedules Tribes (Prevention of
Atrocities) Act, 19894.

4. The High Court vide Impugned Order dated 30th August, 2024, had partly allowed the criminal
appeal, by quashing the summoning order issued by the trial Court against the father of the
appellant, namely, Rajnath Yadav and upholding the summoning order issued against the appellant.
Hence, the present appeal by special leave.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/79064781/

1

Manish Yadav vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 22 January, 2025

5. Notice of the present special leave petition was served on respondent No. 2 i.e., the
complainant/victim5, but no one has appeared on her behalf.

6. The case of the prosecution, in brief, is that the appellant befriended the complainant over a social
media website, namely 2 Hereinafter, referred to as ‘trial Court’. 3 Hereinafter, referred to as, ‘IPC’.

4 Hereinafter referred to as ‘SC/ST Act.’ 5 Hereinafter, referred to as ‘Complainant’. Instagram,
which quickly bloomed into a romantic relationship. The appellant allegedly promised the
complainant that he would marry her and they would live together as husband and wife. Under the
pretence of the said promise of marriage, the appellant established physical relations with the
complainant frequently at different places viz. Gazipur, Banaras, etc. On account of the repeated
physical relations, the complainant conceived in December, 2022 and the appellant forced her to
undergo an abortion by taking medication. Subsequently, the appellant began assaulting her and
used derogatory caste-based slurs, imputing that he would not marry her since he was a Yadav, but
she belonged to a lower caste. Following a complaint from the complainant with these allegations,
an FIR6 dated 5th August, 2023, came to be registered against the appellant under Sections 376,
313, 323, 504, 506, IPC and Sections 3(1)(d), 3(2)(va) of the SC/ST Act at the P.S. Kotwali, District
Gazipur. After investigation, a charge sheet for the aforementioned offences was filed against the
appellant, while leaving out the offence under Section 313 IPC.

7. The trial Court, vide order dated 24th August, 2023, summoned the appellant and his father for
the aforesaid offences, which stands partially affirmed by the High Court(supra).

8. We have heard and considered the submissions advanced by learned counsel for the appellant
and the learned counsel representing the State of Uttar Pradesh and have gone through the material
placed on record.

9. At the outset, we may note that the complainant is a major girl and was working at a Diagnostic
Centre in Varanasi when she came in contact with the appellant on the social media website,
namely, Instagram.

10. It will be germane to reproduce the statement of the complainant recorded during the course of
investigation under Section 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 19737 which provides the
substratum of allegations set out against the appellant in the case at hand, and the same reads as
follows: -

“Date: 09.08.2023 Victim’s Name: X.X.X. X.X.X. stated under oath that she met
Manish Yadav, son of Rajnath Singh, on Instagram in January 2022. Their friendship
7 For short, ‘CrPC’.

started with a message from Manish, which eventually led to mutual liking and in-person meetings.
In May 2022, Manish called her to meet at his friend's place, where he behaved inappropriately with
her. Despite her reservations about engaging in a physical relationship, she trusted him and had
feelings for him. Manish later forced himself on her multiple times. In September 2022, X. X. X...

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/79064781/

2

Manish Yadav vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 22 January, 2025

moved to Varanasi for work, while Manish relocated to Prayagraj. He would visit her in Varanasi
and engage in physical relations without her consent. By December 2022, she discovered she was
pregnant. Manish made her take medication to terminate the pregnancy. When visiting, he would
suggest eloping to get married, but she insisted on waiting until he secured a job. During this period,
X. X. X. cousin, Vatika, came to live with her. Manish occasionally became abusive, verbally and
physically, during his visits. In February 2023, X. X. X. witnessed Manish and Vatika in an
inappropriate situation. Although Manish apologized after a confrontation, he continued his
relationship with Vatika. To retaliate, Χ.Χ.Χ.. mentioned a friend named Ajay to make Manish
jealous. Manish then questioned her character and refused to marry her, saying he wouldn't marry
someone with whom he had been intimate.

X. X. X. visited Manish's home and informed his father, who initially appeared understanding.
However, when she tried to follow up, his father dismissed her rudely. Manish continued to exploit
her under the pretence of marriage, eventually abandoning her. When she confronted him about his
past relationships with other girls, Manish demanded Rs. 50 lakh as a condition for marriage.

X.X.X. concluded that she had nothing further to add.” (emphasis supplied)

11. As per the case set out by the prosecution, the appellant allegedly forced himself upon the
complainant on multiple occasions, however on going through the aforesaid statement rendered by
the complainant on oath, we find that she had herself admitted that despite her reservations about
engaging in a physical relationship with the appellant, she trusted him and had feelings for him.

12. Furthermore, as per the prosecution case, in September, 2022, the complainant moved to
Varanasi for work, whereas the appellant relocated to Prayagraj. Despite that, the appellant
continued to visit her in Varanasi and engaged in physical relations with the complainant, allegedly
without her consent. In December, 2022, the complainant discovered that she had become pregnant
and thereupon, the appellant forced her to take medications in order to terminate the pregnancy.
However, the theory put forth by the complainant regarding the appellant forcing her to terminate
the pregnancy has not been established, and thus, the offence under Section 313 IPC, stands
dropped from the chargesheet.

13. The complainant further stated that later on, her cousin Vatika had also come to reside with her.
She alleged that in February, 2022, she saw the appellant and Vatika engaged in an inappropriate
position. In retaliation, she befriended a person, namely, Ajay to make Manish jealous. Thereafter,
Manish cast aspersions on her character and refused to marry her stating that he was not willing to
marry someone with whom he had been intimate once.

14. In our opinion, it is clearly discernible that both the appellant and the complainant were major
and thus, both were competent enough to make rational decisions. As per the statement of the
complainant(supra), their initial physical relations were consensual in nature, and without there
being any promise of marriage being offered by the appellant. While it can be said that initially the
relationship between the complainant and appellant had developed on the basis of mutual attraction
and affection, the same cannot by any stretch of imagination fall within the ambit of a relationship

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/79064781/

3

flowing from a promise to marry.

Manish Yadav vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 22 January, 2025

15. The criminal jurisprudence on the scope of 'consent' in cases where sexual intercourse took place
on the promise of marriage has been well established through a catena of judgments by this Court.
In Uday v. State of Karnataka8, this Court acquitted the accused based on the reasoning that the
prosecutrix, a mature college student, consented to sexual intercourse with the accused of her own
free will. The Court found that she was fully aware of the consequences of her actions and held that
her consent was not 8 (2003) 4 SCC 46.

based on any misconception of fact. In Uday(supra), the Court noted that:

“21. It therefore appears that the consensus of judicial opinion is in favour of the view
that the consent given by the prosecutrix to sexual intercourse with a person with
whom she is deeply in love on a promise that he would marry her on a later date,
cannot be said to be given under a misconception of fact. A false promise is not a fact
within the meaning of the Code. We are inclined to agree with this view, but we must
add that there is no straitjacket formula for determining whether consent given by
the prosecutrix to sexual intercourse is voluntary, or whether it is given under a
misconception of fact. In the ultimate analysis, the tests laid down by the courts
provide at best guidance to the judicial mind while considering a question of consent,
but the court must, in each case, consider the evidence before it and the surrounding
circumstances, before reaching a conclusion, because each case has its own peculiar
facts which may have a bearing on the question whether the consent was voluntary,
or was given under a misconception of fact. It must also weigh the evidence keeping
in view the fact that the burden is on the prosecution to prove each and every
ingredient of the offence, absence of consent being one of them.” (emphasis supplied)

16. This Court, in the case of Deepak Gulati v. State of Haryana9, while discussing the
nature of the ‘consent’ in cases where sexual intercourse occurs on the promise of
marriage, distinguished between a mere ‘breach of promise’ and ‘not fulfilling a false
promise’. The Court held as follows:

“21. Consent may be express or implied, coerced or misguided, obtained willingly or
through deceit. Consent is

9 (2013) 7 SCC 675 an act of reason, accompanied by deliberation, the mind weighing, as in a
balance, the good and evil on each side. There is a clear distinction between rape and consensual sex
and in a case like this, the court must very carefully examine whether the accused had actually
wanted to marry the victim, or had mala fide motives, and had made a false promise to this effect
only to satisfy his lust, as the latter falls within the ambit of cheating or deception. There is a
distinction between the mere breach of a promise, and not fulfilling a false promise. Thus, the court
must examine whether there was made, at an early stage a false promise of marriage by the accused;
and whether the consent involved was given after wholly understanding the nature and
consequences of sexual indulgence. There may be a case where the prosecutrix agrees to have sexual

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/79064781/

4

Manish Yadav vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 22 January, 2025

intercourse on account of her love and passion for the accused, and not solely on account of
misrepresentation made to her by the accused, or where an accused on account of circumstances
which he could not have foreseen, or which were beyond his control, was unable to marry her,
despite having every intention to do so. Such cases must be treated differently. An accused can be
convicted for rape only if the court reaches a conclusion that the intention of the accused was mala
fide, and that he had clandestine motives.

24. Hence, it is evident that there must be adequate evidence to show that at the relevant time i.e. at
the initial stage itself, the accused had no intention whatsoever, of keeping his promise to marry the
victim. There may, of course, be circumstances, when a person having the best of intentions is
unable to marry the victim owing to various unavoidable circumstances. The “failure to keep a
promise made with respect to a future uncertain date, due to reasons that are not very clear from the
evidence available, does not always amount to misconception of fact. In order to come within the
meaning of the term “misconception of fact”, the fact must have an immediate relevance”. Section
90 IPC cannot be called into aid in such a situation, to pardon the act of a girl in entirety, and fasten
criminal liability on the other, unless the court is assured of the fact that from the very beginning,
the accused had never really intended to marry her.” (emphasis supplied)

17. Moreover, in Deelip Singh v. State of Bihar,10 the Court acquitted and set aside the conviction of
the accused while holding that while there was a breach of promise to marry, it was not a case of
false promise to marry. The relevant extract is produced hereinunder:

“35. The remaining question is whether on the basis of the evidence on record, it is
reasonably possible to hold that the accused with the fraudulent intention of inducing
her to sexual intercourse, made a false promise to marry. We have no doubt that the
accused did hold out the promise to marry her and that was the predominant reason
for the victim girl to agree to the sexual intimacy with him. PW 12 was also too keen
to marry him as she said so specifically. But we find no evidence which gives rise to
an inference beyond reasonable doubt that the accused had no intention to marry her
at all from the inception and that the promise he made was false to his knowledge. No
circumstances emerging from the prosecution evidence establish this fact. On the
other hand, the statement of PW 12 that “later on”, the accused became ready to
marry her but his father and others took him away from the village would indicate
that the accused might have been prompted by a genuine intention to marry which
did not materialise on account of the pressure exerted by his family elders. It seems
to be a case of breach of promise to marry rather than a case of false promise to
marry. On this aspect also, the observations of this Court in Uday case[(2003) 4 SCC
46 : 2003 SCC (Cri) 775 : (2003) 2 Scale 329] at para 24 come to the aid of the
appellant.” (emphasis supplied)

18. Applying the above principle to the case at hand, it is clearly discernible that in the present case,
the complainant had agreed to 10 (2005) 1 SCC 88.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/79064781/

5

Manish Yadav vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 22 January, 2025

indulge in intimate relations with the appellant on the accord of her own desires and not on the
basis of any false promise of marriage made by the appellant. Therefore, while the present case may
involve a breach of promise, it does not constitute a case of an inherently false promise to marry.
Based on the circumstances, it cannot be concluded that the appellant obtained the complainant’s
consent to engage in a physical relationship under the pretext of a false promise of marriage.

19. Admittedly, during his visit to Varanasi, the appellant himself had asked the complainant to
elope with him and get married, but it was the complainant who insisted on waiting till he secured a
job. Therefore, while the prosecution story primarily rests on the fact that the appellant had lured
the complainant to develop physical relations with him on the promise to marry her in future, this
very statement of the complainant suggests the contrary. The complainant’s act of declining the
appellant’s proposal of marriage shows that it was not the appellant who failed to stand firm upon
his promise if any such promise was made by the appellant at any point in time.

20. Thus, the theory put forth by the prosecution in the chargesheet that the appellant induced the
complainant to indulge in physical relations under a false promise of marriage is neither
corroborated nor established by the best evidence available on record, which is in the form of the
statement of the complainant recorded under Section 164 CrPC.

21. Moreover, in her statement, the complainant has not uttered a single word which shows that she
was maligned or abused by the appellant for belonging to a particular caste. Therefore, we are of the
firm view that the ingredients of the offences alleged under the SC/ST Act, against the appellant are
ex-facie not made out from the highest allegations as set out in the charge sheet.

22. In view of the above discussion, we are of the opinion that the present case appears to be one
where a consensual physical relationship between two adults has turned sour due to certain
intervening events. Hence, allowing the prosecution of the appellant for the offences mentioned
above would tantamount to sheer abuse of the process of law and nothing else.

23. Resultantly, the summoning order dated 24th August, 2023 passed by learned Special Judge,
SC/ST Act Gazipur, and all the proceedings sought to be taken thereunder against the appellant for
the offences punishable under Sections 376, 323, 504 and 506, IPC and Sections 3(1)(r), 3(1)(s),
3(2)(5a) and 3(2)(v) of the SC/ST Act deserve to be, and are hereby quashed. Thus, the impugned
order is set aside.

24. The appeal is allowed, accordingly.

25. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.

………………….……….J. (VIKRAM NATH) .………………………….J. (SANDEEP MEHTA) New Delhi;

January 22, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/79064781/

6

