Murugan vs The State Rep. By The Inspector Of Police on 4 April, 2025

Murugan vs The State Rep. By The Inspector Of Police on 4
April, 2025

Author: B.R. Gavai

Bench: Abhay S. Oka, B.R. Gavai

2025 INSC 446

                                                                               NON-REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 3318 OF 2023

                             MURUGAN                                                … Appellant

                                                                 Versus

                             THE STATE
                             REP. BY THE INSPECTOR OF POLICE                       …Respondent

                                                            JUDGMENT

AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH, J.

1. This appeal has been preferred by assailing the judgment passed by the Madras High Court, partly
allowing the appeal of the appellant acquitting him of the offence under Section 148 of the Indian
Penal Code (IPC) while sustaining the conviction and sentence of life imprisonment and fine of
Rs.10,000/-, in default, to undergo rigorous imprisonment for two years, imposed by the Trial Court
under Section 302 IPC.

2. Briefly, the facts are that on 06.05.2018 at about 10:15 p.m., the deceased (Jagadeesh Durai) – a
Special Branch Grade-I Constable found the appellant - Murugan (A1) and two others [Krishnan
(A2) and Murugaperumal (A3)], carrying illegal sand in a tractor-trailer and with an intention to
stop them from doing so chased them on a Motorcycle. He informed Inspector Virgin Sophia -
PW24 over a cell phone regarding the transportation of the stolen river sand, detailing therein the
names of the accused as also the registration number of the tractor. PW24 contacted Dhiraviam,
Constable Grade II - PW21 and another constable – Muthaiah, instructing them to follow the sand
smugglers. PW21 along with Muthaiah went on the motorcycle from Kakan Nagar to Pondicherry
Road, to the site which was brought to their notice by the deceased constable (Jagadeesh Durai).

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22366353/

1

Murugan vs The State Rep. By The Inspector Of Police on 4 April, 2025

However, they could not find him and tried to contact him over his cell phone, which initially was
ringing for some time but thereafter was switched off. All this happened during the course of night.
They also visited the residence of the accused A1 to A3, but they were not found there.

3. The next morning at 5:30 a.m., PW1 found the dead body of the deceased with injuries on the
head, in the land owned by Duraipandian (Retired Village Administrative Officer) - PW7. Three
pairs of slippers and other articles were also found near the dead body along with the tractor and the
trailer with one tyre out of the axle. Complaint was lodged (Exhibit P-1) and the articles found there
were seized and marked.

4. On the basis of the statements recorded of the witnesses, the postmortem report and other
evidence apart from the confessional statements of A2 and A3 before Maha Harichandran - PW13,
A4 to A6 were also arrayed as accused. Upon completion of the investigation, the chargesheet was
filed on 30.07.2018, leading to the framing of charges and subsequent trial, where A1 and A2 were
convicted under Sections 148 and 302 of the IPC. They were sentenced to undergo rigorous
imprisonment of three years under Section 148 and life imprisonment with Rs.10,000/- each as fine
and, in default, to undergo imprisonment for two years under Section 302. Whereas A4 to A6 were
convicted and sentenced to undergo two years rigorous imprisonment under Section 147 IPC and
life imprisonment with fine of Rs.1,000/- each, in default whereof to undergo imprisonment for one
year under Section 302 read with Section 149 IPC.

The Trial Court acquitted A3.

5. In appeal preferred before the High Court, A4 to A6 were acquitted. However, the conviction and
sentence of A1 and A2 under Section 302 IPC were sustained while acquitting them of the charge
under Section 148 of IPC. Appeal has been preferred by A1 only.

6. The counsel for the appellant has contended that the last seen evidence is that of Joseph - PW12,
who claimed to have witnessed the incident while he was returning on the motorcycle from Valliyur
along with Michael. The tractor-trailer was being driven at high speed by the appellant accompanied
by two others being followed by the deceased constable shouting at them to stop. This was at night
after 11:00 p.m. when, in the absence of any street light, chances of identification are very less. That
apart, he recognized the deceased on the basis of his voice. Counsel asserts that this witness admits
that he was present at the time of postmortem but this aspect of he having seen the appellant and
two other accused i.e., A2 and A3, was not disclosed to the Police, rather the statement of this
witness (PW12) was recorded only on 23.05.2018 after a period of 17 days. Prior thereto, he did not
disclose anything to anyone. Inference under Section 114 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 warrants
to be drawn and his evidence is not to be believed.

7. The involvement of all the accused, discovery and their specific roles have been brought about on
the basis of extra judicial confession of A2 and A3 before PW-13, on 10.05.2018, which has been
found to be not reliable by the High Court on the ground that A2 and A3 had been arrested on
08.05.2018 as per the admission of PW24. The alleged confessions, if any, made on 10.05.2018
would be inadmissible being firstly in police custody and secondly, there was no occasion for these

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22366353/

2

two to make such confessions.

Murugan vs The State Rep. By The Inspector Of Police on 4 April, 2025

8. The delay in reaching followed by presentation of the FIR to the Magistrate at 3:30 p.m. has also
been highlighted by the counsel for the appellant. He has referred to the evidence of PW-15, the
Head Clerk in the Magistrate’s Court, who deposed that he received the FIR at 3:30 p.m. on
07.05.2018. Nothing has been stated by him with regard to the transfer of the Magistrate, before
whom the said FIR had to be presented, which is the ground taken by the prosecution as an
explanation for the delay in presentation of the FIR to the Magistrate.

9. Reference has also been made to the evidence of PW-20, the constable who was sent with the FIR
to the Court, where he had stated that the Magistrate has been transferred. However, this witness
admits that ordinarily the FIRs have to be handed over to the Clerk of the Court, which was not done
in the present case and he had reached the Court at 3.30 p.m. when the FIR was presented to the
Magistrate. Both these witnesses have admitted that as per practice, FIRs under Section 302 IPC
cases were being sent immediately and the entries were also made forthwith.

10. Counsel for the appellant submits that as per the prosecution, PW-24 was informed about the
sand theft on the basis of the information received by the deceased constable from Manoharan and
Maharajan. None of these two witnesses have been examined, which is the relevant information on
the basis of which the deceased had proceeded to follow the accused and chased them. It has also
been highlighted by the counsel that no case has been registered against the accused person under
the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 for the theft /smuggling of river
sand.

11. Another aspect which has been highlighted is that no sand was found in the tractor-trailer and
this aspect has been admitted by PW-1 in his cross- examination. He has also stated that there was
no river sand on the ground as well where the tractor- trailer were parked.

12. Counsel for the appellant contends that the very basis of the prosecution story leading to chase of
the accused by the deceased constable Jagadeesh Durai is the theft of the river sand clashes with
there being no evidence with regard to the sand being available in the trailer or nearby. It has been
argued that the evidence of the alleged eye witness Tr. Arokiya Sesuraja - PW2 has been disbelieved
by the High Court, which finding has not been challenged and has attained finality. Similarly, the
extra judicial confessions of the co-accused (A2 and A3) before Maha Harichandran - PW13 having
found to be made during the police custody thus not admissible, leaves no evidence against the
appellant rendering the conviction under Section 302 IPC illegal and unsustainable. The
prosecution case having been shattered, the appeal deserves to be allowed.

13. On the other hand, learned counsel for the State has pointed out that there is ample evidence
which connects the appellant with the commission of the offence. The call records clearly indicate
that the deceased informed PW24 and PW1 about the theft of the river sand by all three accused.
The intention was apparent, as during the run, the tyre of the trailer to the tractor having been
damaged, the tractor had come to a halt and to avoid arrest at the hands of the deceased, the
appellant and the co- accused proceeded to attack him, resulting in his death. Recovery, as has been

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22366353/

3

Murugan vs The State Rep. By The Inspector Of Police on 4 April, 2025

effected from the spot, specifically the three pairs of slippers, establishes the presence, apart from
the fingerprints taken from the tractor-trailer as also the weapon of offence i.e., “wheel spanner”,
which matches with that of the fingerprints of the appellant.

14. He, however, could not dispute the factum that the evidence as has been led by the prosecution
to a great extent, relatable to the eye witness - Tr. Arokiya Sesuraja – PW2, and the extra judicial
confession before Maha Harichandran PW-13 has been disbelieved by the High Court. Those were
the two star witnesses, who, alongwith the evidence of Joseph (PW 12), the last seen witness, formed
the basis for connecting the appellant with the crime.

15. With evidence of these three crucial witnesses having been disbelieved by the Court, the only
evidence which has been pressed into service is the electronic evidence and the fingerprints which
have been found at the site, apart from the slippers.

16. The counsel for the respondent has, however, vehemently supported the judgment passed by the
High Court and has thus prayed for dismissal of the appeal.

17. Having considered the submissions made by the counsel for the parties and having gone through
the above referred to statements of the witnesses, what is apparent is that the High Court has
ignored the factum that the evidence of the witnesses which were the basis of the prosecution case
and the backbone having crumbled, with the Court itself not relying thereon while giving benefit to
the co- accused, the same benefit could not have been denied to the appellant being similarly placed
in the given facts and circumstances of the present case.

18. The aspect with regard to the presentation of the FIR before the Magistrate at a belated stage
also carries weight. As per the evidence, the body of the deceased was found at 5:30 a.m. on
07.05.2018 and the FIR is alleged to have been registered soon thereafter. The report and the FIR
were presented to the Magistrate at 3:30 p.m. Explanation which has been put forth is that the delay
occurred because of the transfer of the Magistrate as per the constable - PW20, who had brought the
FIR to the Court. No evidence has been produced with regard to the transfer of the Magistrate nor
has the Head Clerk – PW15, in the Magistrate’s Court stated anything about the Magistrate’s
transfer. The justification, therefore, does not appear to be reasonable for the delay in presentation
of the FIR before the Magistrate. Another aspect which has come to light is that, the inquest report
was prepared after 1:00 p.m. as Tr. Arokiya Sesuraja - PW2 has stated that he had signed the same
at that time. It thus appears that the prosecution has failed to explain the inordinate delay in the
presentation of the report to the Magistrate casting doubt on the prosecution case.

19. That apart, prosecution has rested its case, in its entirety, upon the evidence of PW-2, who is
alleged to be the eye witness. He claims to have seen the commission of the offence, but his entire
evidence has been disbelieved by the High Court on the ground that the presence of the said witness
at the spot is wholly impractical, the conduct inconsistent and against the normal human behaviour.
According to this witness, he had gone to the field at 10:00 p.m. to assess the value of maize crop
grown therein and during that period he witnessed the occurrence leading to the death of the police
constable - Jagadeesh Durai. He failed to inform the incident to the Police immediately, rather the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22366353/

4

Murugan vs The State Rep. By The Inspector Of Police on 4 April, 2025

said information was given by him after 36 days i.e., on 12.06.2018, especially when he had
participated in the agitation on 07.05.2018, the very next day and even signed the inquest report at
1:00 p.m.

20. With the evidence of eye witness having been discarded, the last seen witness is PW-12 who
stated in his evidence that while he was coming at about 11:00 p.m., a tractor-trailer driven by A1
had crossed him with two other persons with him, one sitting on the tractor-trailer and the other in
the trailer. The deceased was following the tractor, shouting at the accused to stop the same. He
even saw the tractor-trailer taking a diversion and going into the maize field. This witness also
admits to having been present at the time of the postmortem being conducted on the deceased on
07.05.2018. He has admitted that he had known the deceased earlier and was a resident of an
adjacent village situated at a distance of 3 kms. Despite knowing the deceased, witnessing the
incident and accompanying the dead body for the postmortem, he still chose not to inform the
Police about the same. 20.1 What has come to light in his evidence is that he had given his statement
to the Police under Section 161 on 23.05.2018, after 17 days of the incident. This, again casts doubt
upon the veracity of the evidence of the witness. A person who recognizes not only the appellant but
also the deceased and is also present at the time of postmortem would not have, in natural course,
hesitated to approach the Police officials to give information with regard to the involvement of the
accused in the alleged offence. The evidence, thus of PW-12 does not command any credence which
could be made the sole basis for holding the appellant guilty of an offence under Section 302. The
last seen evidence, therefore, also having been found to be not trustworthy.

21. In Karakkattu Muhammed Basheer vs. State of Kerala1, this Court after referring to various
judgments passed by this Court summarized the basic established principles which need to be taken
as a guide for the Courts in cases of circumstantial evidence. In Paras 16 to 18 thereof, it was held as
follows:-

“16. Thus, these basic established principles can be summarized in the following
terms that the chain of events needs to be so established that the court has no option
but to come to one and only one conclusion i.e. the guilt of the accused person. If an
iota of doubt creeps in at any stage in the sequence of events, the benefit thereof
should flow to the accused. Mere suspicion alone, irrespective of the fact that it is
very strong, cannot be a substitute for a proof. The chain of circumstances must be so
complete that they lead to only one conclusion that is the guilt of the accused.

17. Even in the case of a conviction where in an appeal the chain of evidence is found
to be not complete or the courts could reach to any another hypothesis other than the
guilt of the accused, the accused person must be given the benefit of doubt which
obviously would lead to 2024 (10) SCC 813 his acquittal. Meaning thereby, when
there is a missing link, a finding of guilt cannot be recorded.

18. In other words, the onus on the prosecution is to produce such evidence which
conclusively establishes the truth and the only truth with regard to guilt of an accused
for the charges framed against him or her, and such evidence should establish a chain

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22366353/

5

Murugan vs The State Rep. By The Inspector Of Police on 4 April, 2025

of events so complete as to not leave any reasonable ground for the conclusion
consistent with the innocence of accused.”

22. In the case of circumstantial evidence, which ultimately turns out is that, with other evidence
having been discarded, the sequence of events must be of such a nature which leads to only one
conclusion that it is the accused and the accused alone who would be the person to have committed
the offence, thus, leaving no scope for coming to any other conclusion.

23. In these circumstances, merely the recovery at the site of the incident of a wheel spanner, which
according to the prosecution has fingerprints of the accused on it and three pairs of slippers would
not be enough for holding the appellant guilty of having caused the death of the deceased.

24. In the light of the above, the judgment and order of conviction and sentence as passed by the
Courts below are set aside. The appeal is accordingly allowed.

25. The appellant be released forthwith, if in custody and not required in any other case.

26. Pending application(s), if any, also stand disposed of.

…..……………………………….J. [ ABHAY S. OKA ] ……………………………………..J. [ AHSANUDDIN
AMANULLAH ] ……………………………………..J. [ AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH ] NEW DELHI;

APRIL 04, 2025

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22366353/

6

