Naganna (Dead) By Lrs. / Smt Devamma vs Siddaramegowda (Since Deceased) By Lrs on 19 March, 2025

Naganna (Dead) By Lrs. / Smt Devamma vs Siddaramegowda
(Since Deceased) By Lrs on 19 March, 2025

Author: Sudhanshu Dhulia

Bench: Sudhanshu Dhulia

2025 INSC 369

                                                                    NON-REPORTABLE

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                        CIVIL APPEAL NO (s). 3688/2024

           NAGANNA (DEAD) BY LRS./
           SMT. DEVAMMA & ORS.                                    Appellant(s)……
                                                     VERSUS

           SIDDARAMEGOWDA (SINCE DECEASED)
           BY LRS. & Ors.                                         Respondent(s)…….

                                                JUDGMENT

PRASANNA B. VARALE, J:-

1. The present appeal arises from the judgment and order dated 13.03.2014 passed by
the High Court of Karnataka at Bangalore in RSA No. 856 of 2011, wherein the High
Court allowed the Regular Second Appeal and reversed the judgment and decree
passed by the Civil Judge (Senior Division), J.M.F.C. and M.A.C.T in Regular Appeal
No. 10 of 2009 on10.02.2011, which had affirmed the judgment and NEETU
SACHDEVA Date: 2025.03.20 13:41:15 IST Reason:

decree passed by the Civil Judge (Junior Division) and J.M.F.C. in OS No. 606 of
1999 on 12.04.2007.

2. For convenience and continuity, parties would be referred to with reference to their rank in the
original suit.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187451124/

1

Naganna (Dead) By Lrs. / Smt Devamma vs Siddaramegowda (Since Deceased) By Lrs on 19 March, 2025

BRIEF FACTS

3. The brief facts are as follows:

3 . 1   T h e   s u i t   s c h e d u l e   v a c a n t   s i t e   a n d   A   h o u s e   b e a r i n g   K h a t a   N o .   7 1   o f
Chaluvearasinakoppalu village, Pandavapura taluk was in possession and enjoyment
of plaintiff’s father Late Siddegowda till his lifetime, which was allotted to him in a
oral partition which took place between Siddegowda and his brothers Kalegowda.
However, the khata in respect of the above continued in the name of Kalegowda,
brother of plaintiff’s father Siddegowda, who was managing the properties. After the
demise of the Siddegowda, the plaintiff allegedly continued with the possession of the
scheduled suit property. 3.2 At the instigation of the second defendant, the first
defendant began to interfere with the peaceful possession and enjoyment of the suit
schedule site and tried to pluck tender coconuts from the coconut tree raised and
reared by the plaintiff on the suit site and tried to disfigure the suit schedule property
for which the plaintiff filed a suit OS No. 259/1994 seeking permanent injunction
against the defendants.

3.3 It was stated by the plaintiff that the first defendant with the support of the
second defendant got the khata of the suit schedule property transferred to his name
and the khata was changed as 111 instead of 71. From the written statement filed by
the first defendant, the plaintiff became aware about a sale deed dated 03.03.1993
vide which the first defendant purchased the suit property from second defendant.

3.4 The plaintiff averred that the alleged sale in favour of defendant no. 1 is illegal,
void, fraud, and conferred no title either on the first defendant or to the second
defendant. It was stated that the defendants were never in possession of the suit
property and had fraudulently entered their names in the khata extract. The plaintiff
submitted that he was the true owner of the property and that the defendant had
forcefully taken over possession of the suit property. 3.5 The OS No. 259/1994 filed
by the late Original Plaintiff was later withdrawn by him on the basis of a
compromise reached between the parties.

3.6 On 15.09.1995, a Panchayat Pallu Patti was executed between the Lakshmamma,
wife of Kalegowda and the plaintiff on the basis of which the plaintiff perfected his
title over the subject property. Since the defendant tried to interfere with the
possession yet again, the plaintiff was constrained to file another suit OS No.
606/1999 before the Ld. Civil Judge (Junior Division) & J.M.F.C, Pandapura seeking
permanent injunction, cancellation of the sale deed dated 03.03.1993 and recovery of
possession. The original Plaintiff, Naganna died subsequent to the institution of the
OS No. 606/1999 and thus, his LRs were brought on record.

3.7 The Ld. Civil Judge (Junior Division) and J.M.F.C. vide judgment dated
12.04.2007 decreed the suit by inter alia cancelling the alleged sale deed dated

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187451124/

2

Naganna (Dead) By Lrs. / Smt Devamma vs Siddaramegowda (Since Deceased) By Lrs on 19 March, 2025

03.03.1993 as it was void, invalid and not binding on the plaintiff. The defendant was
thus restrained from interfering with the peaceful possession and enjoyment of the
suit schedule property by way of permanent injunction. The defendants were directed
to handover the possession of the suit property within the period of three months.

3.8 Aggrieved by the same, Defendant No. 1 preferred Regular Appeal No. 10/2009
before Ld. Civil Judge (Sr. Division) & J.F.M.C., Pandavpura. The First Appellate
Court vide judgment dated 10.02.2011 confirmed the judgement and decree passed
by the Trial Court and dismissed the appeal.

3.9 Aggrieved by the judgment and order of the First Appellate Court, the Defendant
No. 1 filed second appeal RSA No. 856/2011 before High Court of Karnataka. While
hearing the second appeal, the High Court had framed the following substantial
question of law:

“Whether in the absence of the title deeds over the immovable property bearing
Khata No. 71 and 111, the Trial Court was justified in decreeing the suit in favour of
the plaintiffs and cancelling the sale deed and directing delivery of possession?” 3.10
The High Court, vide judgment dated 13.02.2014, allowed the second appeal and set
aside the concurrent findings of the Trial Court and the First Appellate Court. It was
observed that the documents relied upon by the plaintiff were not title deeds and
were only assessment extracts which do not suggest that they were the owners of the
scheduled property. There was no record to corroborate the claim that there was an
oral partition between the father Siddegowda and Kalegowda . The High Court also
observed that the palli pattu dated 15.09.1995 does not mention Khata No. 71 or 111.
Hence, there is no conclusive proof about the ownership of the property. 3.11
Aggrieved by the said judgment of the High Court, the plaintiffs are before us by way
of filing a Special Leave Petition.

SUBMISSIONS 4.1 It was submitted by the Ld. Counsel for the Appellants that Respondent No. 2 i.e
the seller was not connected with the property owned by the Appellants and the sale deed executed
in favour of the Respondent No. 1 was without any lawful title. The material on record reveals that
there is an admission from Respondent No. 1 that the property was looked after by Siddegowda and
his brother Kalegowda and that Respondent No. 2 was nowhere connected to the suit schedule
property. There is no record to indicate the change of khata in favor of the second defendant. On the
other hand, five witnesses had deposed in favour of the Appellant. 4.2 The learned counsel further
submitted that it is not necessary for a person claiming injunction to prove his title to the suit
property and it is sufficient that he proves that he was in lawful possession of the same and that he
was dispossessed by a person who was not having any title over the property. The law is clear that a
suit for injunction was maintainable, and the issue of title was not directly and substantially
involved in the suit. It is further stated that the High Court exceeded its jurisdiction under Section
100 of Civil Procedure Code, 1908 by entering into the question of facts and travelled beyond the
pleadings which was not subject matter of any issue and has upset a well-reasoned judgement which
was upheld by the first appellate court.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187451124/

3

Naganna (Dead) By Lrs. / Smt Devamma vs Siddaramegowda (Since Deceased) By Lrs on 19 March, 2025

4.3 Per contra, Ld. Senior counsel for the Respondent submitted that the Appellant was never in
possession of the property which was owned by the Respondents. The burden of proof in a suit for
title and possession lies on the plaintiff and he/she is supposed to prove his title to the suit property
by clear evidence. Further, it is well settled that revenue records do not confer any title. To buttress
this submission, the learned senior counsel had relied upon the judgement of this court in the case
of Union of India and Ors. vs. Vasavi Cooperative Housing Society Limited and Ors1. 2014 (2) SCC
269.

4.4 Ld. Senior counsel further submitted that the suit property is in possession of Respondent No. 1
and therefore, it raises a strong and clear presumption in favour of the Respondent No. 1. The
counsel also submitted that the Appellant had filed a suit against the owner of the northern half of
the property bearing No. 111 against one Vedavathi which was dismissed by the Court of Civil Judge
observing that the plaintiff had failed to prove his title to the said property.

ANALYSIS

5. We have heard the learned counsel representing the parties and have gone through the material
placed before this Court. While admitting the regular second appeal, the High Court of Karnataka
formulated two substantial questions of law for consideration, namely:

“(1) In the absence of title deeds over immovable property bearing khata No.71 and
khata No.111 whether the Trial Court was justified in decreeing the suit recording a
finding that khata No.71 and khata No.111 were one and the same and cancelling the
sale deed Ex.P6 conveying property in khata No.111 in favour of the defendant and
directing delivery of possession of the said immovable property to the plaintiff as well
as permanent injunction?

(2) Whether the Lower Appellate Court was justified in confirming the aforesaid
finding of the Trial Court?”

6. It was vehemently submitted by learned senior counsel for the respondents that the plaintiff
miserably failed to produce any material before the Trial Court to establish the factum of his
possession over the suit property. It was submitted that the documents which were relied upon by
the plaintiff were only the extracts of the revenue record. The plaintiff before the Trial Court had
examined five witnesses apart from the revenue records.

7. While dealing with the documents, it was observed by the High Court that Ex.P-2 is the demand
register extract. It relates to assessment No.71, the name of the owner is shown as Kalegowda, S/o.
Muddegowda. Except this, there are no details about the property. Similarly, Ex.P-3 is also the
demand register extract which relates to assessment No. 62/1. The owner is shown as Naganna S/o.
Siddegowda and the measurements or boundaries of the property are not mentioned. Ex.P-4 is the
demand register extract for the year 1984-85. It relates to assessment Nos. 62/1 and 62/2. 62/1
stands in the name of Naganna, S/o. Siddegowda. Measurements of the property are not mentioned.
However, the boundaries are given. Ex.P-6 is the sale deed executed in favour of the first defendant

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187451124/

4

Naganna (Dead) By Lrs. / Smt Devamma vs Siddaramegowda (Since Deceased) By Lrs on 19 March, 2025

which shows that the 2nd defendant had sold site No.111 of Cheluvarasinakoppalu Village measuring
East-West 45 ft. North- South 35 ½ ft bounded on the East by Galli and house of Andanigowda,
West by house of Ningegowda, North by road and South by Maduve and road. Ex. P-7 is the palu
patti between Lakshmamma, her children, Naganna and Andanigowda. It relates to assessment
No.62/1 and khatha No. 59/73. There is no mention of khatha No.71 or 111 in Ex. P-7. Ex. P-8 is the
mahazar. It shows that the appellant had applied for grant of licence and it was resisted by the
plaintiff. It is mentioned in Ex. P8 that the plaintiff is in possession of the suit schedule property.
Exhibits P-9 to P 11 are the endorsements stating that the documents asked by Smt. C. S.
Padmamma are not available.

8. On the critical assessment of these documents, the High Court has placed on record its
observation in following terms:

“The evidence on record does not prove that the plaintiff is the owner of the suit
schedule property. The Courts below have failed to consider this. The Trial Court
should have considered all issues separately, but has failed to do it. It is relevant to
note, there is serious dispute with regard to title of the suit schedule property. The
plaintiff has not sought for declaration. The Courts below were not justified in
holding that the plaintiff is owner of the suit schedule property and he is entitled to
recovery possession. Admittedly, the 1st defendant is in possession of the suit
schedule property. The plaintiff cannot depend upon the weakness of the 1st
defendant's case. The plaintiff must stand or fall on the strength of his own case. In
the present case, the plaintiff has failed to prove that he is the owner of the suit
schedule property. Therefore, the Trial Court as well as the Appellate Court have
erred while holding that the plaintiff is the owner of the suit schedule property and he
is entitled to recover possession and the sale deed executed in favour of the 1st
defendant i.e., the appellant herein is invalid and void.”

9. At the cost of repetition, it can be stated that there was no certainty of the scheduled property.
Respondent No.1 in his written submission had said that the plaintiff failed to produce any
documents of title. The plaintiff also failed to disclose the date or year of the alleged “oral partition”
in the family. It was also submitted by the learned counsel for the respondent that the so-called
partition deed placed on record at Ex.7 relates to entirely different property and it is in no way
related to the suit property. Another interesting feature which is revealed after perusal of the written
submission is that the plaintiffs have filed another suit against the purchaser of northern half the
property bearing no.111, namely Vedavathi. The said suit was numbered as OS No. 108 of 2003 in
the Court of Civil Judge at Pandavapura. The learned Civil Judge, Pandavapura by his judgment and
decree dated 2.3.2024 dismissed the suit filed by the appellant - plaintiff against the said Vedavathi
holding that the appellant - plaintiff failed to prove his title to the said property. Thus, in the cognate
suit also it is held that the appellant-plaintiff has no title to the northern half of the very same
property. The copy of the judgment and decree dated 02.03.2024 is also placed on record along with
the written submissions.

10. In the said suit, the learned judge framed the issue namely:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187451124/

5

Naganna (Dead) By Lrs. / Smt Devamma vs Siddaramegowda (Since Deceased) By Lrs on 19 March, 2025

(i) Whether the plaintiff proves that, he is an absolute property?

(ii) Whether the plaintiff deed. Dated owner of the suit schedule proves that, the sale
deed. dated 03.03.1993 executed by 20th defendant in favour of the 1s defendant in
respect of the suit schedule property is void and not binding upon him ?

(iii) Whether the plaintiff entitled the relief sought in the suit ?

(iv) What order or decree ?

11. The learned Trial Court on evaluation of the material placed on record answered the issue in
negative. In the said suit also the documents in support of the submission of plaintiff were the
extracts of the assessment register. There was also no certainty of the suit property. The Trial Court
was pleased to observe that the plaintiff is the owner of khatha No.71, later it was amended as
khatha No.73 and it was stated that new khatha No. 111 has been assigned to said khatha No.73. One
who comes before the court with a declaration that, he is the absolute owner of the schedule
property, he must plead the correct property number, extent and also boundaries before the court
with cogent and acceptable evidence. On critical assessment of the material placed on record, the
Trial Court arrived at the conclusion that the plaintiffs had failed to prove their ownership over the
scheduled property by adducing acceptable oral and documentary evidence.

12. As stated above, the High Court in the present case found that the documents relied upon by the
plaintiff to showcase that he was in possession of the property i.e. the revenue record extracts fall
short to establish the case of the plaintiff. There was also no certainty about the suit of the property.
On the contrary, there were ambiguity on the suit property. The High Court, thus considering these
aspects has addressed the issue correctly and we are unable to find any error in the reasoning as well
as the conclusion drawn by the High Court.

13. Accordingly, the present appeal fails and is dismissed.

14. Pending application(s), if any, stand(s) disposed of accordingly.

15. No order as to costs.

........................................J. [SUDHANSHU DHULIA] .........................................J. [PRASANNA B.
VARALE] NEW DELHI;

MARCH 19, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187451124/

6

