Naushey Ali vs State Of U.P on 11 February, 2025

Naushey Ali vs State Of U.P on 11 February, 2025

 2025 INSC 182                                                       REPORTABLE

                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 660 OF 2025
                                    (@ SLP Criminal No. 3432 of 2023)

                          Naushey Ali & Ors.                          …Appellant (s)

                                                  Versus

                          State of U.P. & Anr.                       ...Respondent(s)

                                                 JUDGMENT

K.V. Viswanathan, J.

1. Leave granted.

2. The present appeal calls in question the correctness of the order dated 19.01.2023 in Application
under Section 482 Cr.P.C. No. 1315 of 2023 on the file of the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad.
By the said order, the High Court, by holding that a case involving allegation of Commission of
offence under Section 307 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short ‘IPC’) cannot be compounded,
dismissed the application under Section 482 Cr.P.C., seeking quashment of proceedings. Five of the
eight appellants before the High Court – Naushey Ali, Khushboo Ali, Khursheed, Raza Ali and
Nanhe – are before this Court in Appeal. The other three have passed away.

3. The facts of the case lie in a very narrow compass.

i) The appellants and respondent No.2 Mahmood S/o late Abdul Lateef are residents
of the same village - Barwara Khas, District Moradabad, U.P.

ii) With respect to an occurrence on 11.08.1991, it was the appellants’ party which
first lodged Case Crime No. 248/91 on the said day itself against the respondent
No.2, his father and others for offences punishable under Sections 147, 148, 149, 307,
325, 506, 323 and 504 of IPC.

iii) On 27.08.1991, Case Crime No. 248-A/91 was registered by Abdul Lateef, on
behalf of respondent No.2, in FIR No. 141 of 1991. The sections, violations of which
were alleged were, 147, 148, 149, 307, 325, 506, 323 and 504 IPC.

This FIR was registered against all eight persons, including the appellants.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/84065051/

1

Naushey Ali vs State Of U.P on 11 February, 2025

iv) The gravamen of the allegation was that the appellants’ party wanted to pass the irrigation water
through the field of the complainant by forcibly digging the land. When it was resisted by the
complainant party, the appellants’ party abused them in filthy language and assaulted Mahmood
S/o Abdul Lateef with lathi and iron bars. When Mahmood ran to save his life, Abdul Waris (since
deceased) opened fire from his rifle.

v) According to the complainant, on hearing the sound, Munnan S/o Mangu and Vilayat S/o Inayat
came and saved them. Thereafter, they reached the Police Station to lodge a report, when they found
that the appellants’ party was already present at the Police Station. A complaint was lodged by
Mahmood but the thumb impression on his behalf was put by his father Abdul Lateef.

vi) On 07.09.1991, after investigation, the police filed a final report No. 50/91 stating that the
complaint was a false complaint. It was recorded that during the course of investigation, from the
statements of witnesses, it was found that the case has been falsely registered by the complainant as
a counter blast to FIR No. 248/91 lodged by the appellants’ party.

vii) However, on 05.09.1992, the police report was rejected by the VIth Additional Chief Judicial
Magistrate, Moradabad, who summoned the appellants and the three others - Abdul Waris, Rasheed
and Maseeta (all since deceased), for trial, for offences punishable under Sections 147, 148, 149, 307,
324, 325 and 323 of IPC and issued warrants.

viii) Aggrieved, the appellants challenged the order dated 05.09.1992 of the trial Court before the
High Court in Criminal Revision No. 1318 of 1992, wherein an interim order was passed staying the
order of 05.09.1992.

ix) The criminal revision was ultimately dismissed on 03.04.2015 after it remained pending for
nearly twenty-three years. It is the case of the appellants’ party that the dismissal of the criminal
revision was not known to them till October, 2022, when they received summons from the trial
Court.

x) It appears that, in the meantime, due to the intervention of the elderly persons in the village, on
19.12.2022, a compromise was entered into between the injured Mahmood and the appellants.

xi) Based on the compromise and affidavit of the injured Mahmood, the appellant and three others
filed application under Section 482 CrPC numbered as Criminal Misc. Application No. 1315 of 2023
before the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad praying for quashment of the entire proceedings in
view of the compromise entered into between the parties on 19.12.2022.

xii) It has also come on record that Case No. 248 of 1991 lodged on 11.08.1991 by the appellants’
party was settled during the lifetime of Abdul Waris. There is no dispute that the said case is not
pending.

xiii) However, vide the impugned order, on the ground that the matter related to an offence under
Section 307 IPC in which there are injuries and a fracture of the head of distal phalanx of left ring

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/84065051/

2

Naushey Ali vs State Of U.P on 11 February, 2025

finger received by R-2 Mahmood, the High Court held that the matter cannot be compounded. The
relevant part of the judgment of the High Court is set out herein below:-

“Although it is a common ground between both the learned counsels that parties have
entered into compromise and have settled their dispute outside the Court. The said
compromise has been filed by separate affidavits and has also been filed by the
injured. Copy of which is Annexure-8 to the affidavit but since the matter relates to
offence under Section 307 IPC in which there are injuries and even fracture of head of
distal phalanx of left ring finger received by Mehboob Ali and looking to the settled
law with regard to compounding of offence, the matter cannot be compounded”
(Emphasis supplied)

xiv) Aggrieved, five of the eight petitioners before the High Court are in appeal before
us. Three others have passed away.

4. We have heard Mr. Anupam Mishra, learned counsel for the appellants, Ms. Garima Prashad,
learned Senior Advocate and AAG for the respondent No.1-State of U.P. and Mr. Harikumar V.,
learned counsel for respondent No.2- Mahmood. We have also perused the records of the case as
well as the written submissions filed by the appellants.

5. The only question that arises for consideration is: Is the present case a fit case where proceeding
could be quashed, particularly when Section 307 IPC has inter alia been invoked in the summons?

6. At the outset, we want to set right the error that occurs in the short order of the High Court. The
High Court has not appreciated the difference between compounding of an offence and quashment
of proceedings. As explained in Gian Singh vs. State of Punjab and Another, (2012) 10 SCC 303,
quashing of offence or criminal proceedings on the ground of settlement between an offender and
victim is not the same thing as compounding of offence. This Court, highlighting the difference, had
the following to say:-

“57. Quashing of offence or criminal proceedings on the ground of settlement
between an offender and victim is not the same thing as compounding of offence.
They are different and not interchangeable. Strictly speaking, the power of
compounding of offences given to a court under Section 320 is materially different
from the quashing of criminal proceedings by the High Court in exercise of its
inherent jurisdiction. In compounding of offences, power of a criminal court is
circumscribed by the provisions contained in Section 320 and the court is guided
solely and squarely thereby while, on the other hand, the formation of opinion by the
High Court for quashing a criminal offence or criminal proceeding or criminal
complaint is guided by the material on record as to whether the ends of justice would
justify such exercise of power although the ultimate consequence may be acquittal or
dismissal of indictment.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/84065051/

3

Naushey Ali vs State Of U.P on 11 February, 2025

58. Where the High Court quashes a criminal proceeding having regard to the fact
that the dispute between the offender and the victim has been settled although the
offences are not compoundable, it does so as in its opinion, continuation of criminal
proceedings will be an exercise in futility and justice in the case demands that the
dispute between the parties is put to an end and peace is restored;

securing the ends of justice being the ultimate guiding factor. No doubt, crimes are acts which have
harmful effect on the public and consist in wrongdoing that seriously endangers and threatens the
well-being of the society and it is not safe to leave the crime-doer only because he and the victim
have settled the dispute amicably or that the victim has been paid compensation, yet certain crimes
have been made compoundable in law, with or without the permission of the court. In respect of
serious offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc., or other offences of mental depravity under IPC or
offences of moral turpitude under special statutes, like the Prevention of Corruption Act or the
offences committed by public servants while working in that capacity, the settlement between the
offender and the victim can have no legal sanction at all. However, certain offences which
overwhelmingly and predominantly bear civil flavour having arisen out of civil, mercantile,
commercial, financial, partnership or such like transactions or the offences arising out of
matrimony, particularly relating to dowry, etc. or the family dispute, where the wrong is basically to
the victim and the offender and the victim have settled all disputes between them amicably,
irrespective of the fact that such offences have not been made compoundable, the High Court may
within the framework of its inherent power, quash the criminal proceeding or criminal complaint or
FIR if it is satisfied that on the face of such settlement, there is hardly any likelihood of the offender
being convicted and by not quashing the criminal proceedings, justice shall be casualty and ends of
justice shall be defeated. The above list is illustrative and not exhaustive. Each case will depend on
its own facts and no hard-and-fast category can be prescribed.” (Emphasis supplied)

7. As would be additionally clear from a close reading of the above two paragraphs, even though
compounding and quashing are conceptually different, this Court was careful in pointing out that
merely because there is a settlement, for certain categories of offences proceedings will not be
quashed. This is on the premise that crimes that have harmful effects on the public and consist of
wrongdoing that seriously endangers and threatens the well-being of the society cannot be quashed,
only because the accused and the victim have amicably settled the matter.

8. Coming to the facts, notwithstanding the fact that the High Court has mixed up the concepts of
compounding and powers of quashment, still the case needs to be considered from the point of view
of Section 482.

9. Will the mere mention of Section 307 IPC in the criminal proceedings force the court to adopt a
hands-off approach, when parties come forward with a settlement? In that event, what should be the
duty of the court and what are the tests to be applied to decide in which cases settlements would be
accepted and in which cases it would not be?

10. In State of Madhya Pradesh vs. Laxmi Narayan and Others, (2019) 5 SCC 688, after discussing
the ratio in Narinder Singh and Others vs. State of Punjab and Another, (2014) 6 SCC 466 and other

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/84065051/

4

judgments, this Court held:-

Naushey Ali vs State Of U.P on 11 February, 2025

“15. Considering the law on the point and the other decisions of this Court on the
point, referred to hereinabove, it is observed and held as under:

15.1. That the power conferred under Section 482 of the Code to quash the criminal
proceedings for the non-compoundable offences under Section 320 of the Code can
be exercised having overwhelmingly and predominantly the civil character,
particularly those arising out of commercial transactions or arising out of
matrimonial relationship or family disputes and when the parties have resolved the
entire dispute amongst themselves;

15.2. Such power is not to be exercised in those prosecutions which involved heinous
and serious offences of mental depravity or offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc.
Such offences are not private in nature and have a serious impact on society;

15.3. Similarly, such power is not to be exercised for the offences under the special
statutes like the Prevention of Corruption Act or the offences committed by public
servants while working in that capacity are not to be quashed merely on the basis of
compromise between the victim and the offender;

15.4. Offences under Section 307 IPC and the Arms Act, etc. would fall in the category
of heinous and serious offences and therefore are to be treated as crime against the
society and not against the individual alone, and therefore, the criminal proceedings
for the offence under Section 307 IPC and/or the Arms Act, etc. which have a serious
impact on the society cannot be quashed in exercise of powers under Section 482 of
the Code, on the ground that the parties have resolved their entire dispute amongst
themselves. However, the High Court would not rest its decision merely because
there is a mention of Section 307 IPC in the FIR or the charge is framed under this
provision. It would be open to the High Court to examine as to whether incorporation
of Section 307 IPC is there for the sake of it or the prosecution has collected sufficient
evidence, which if proved, would lead to framing the charge under Section 307 IPC.
For this purpose, it would be open to the High Court to go by the nature of injury
sustained, whether such injury is inflicted on the vital/delicate parts of the body,
nature of weapons used, etc. However, such an exercise by the High Court would be
permissible only after the evidence is collected after investigation and the
charge-sheet is filed/charge is framed and/or during the trial. Such exercise is not
permissible when the matter is still under investigation. Therefore, the ultimate
conclusion in paras 29.6 and 29.7 of the decision of this Court in Narinder Singh
should be read harmoniously and to be read as a whole and in the circumstances
stated hereinabove;

15.5. While exercising the power under Section 482 of the Code to quash the criminal
proceedings in respect of non-compoundable offences, which are private in nature

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/84065051/

5

Naushey Ali vs State Of U.P on 11 February, 2025

and do not have a serious impact on society, on the ground that there is a
settlement/compromise between the victim and the offender, the High Court is
required to consider the antecedents of the accused; the conduct of the accused,
namely, whether the accused was absconding and why he was absconding, how he
had managed with the complainant to enter into a compromise, etc.” (Emphasis
supplied)

11. Before we apply this judgment to the facts, it will be worthwhile to recall the observations of
Sikri, J. in Narinder Singh (supra):-

“26. Having said so, we would hasten to add that though it is a serious offence as the
accused person(s) attempted to take the life of another person/victim, at the same
time the court cannot be oblivious to hard realities that many times whenever there is
a quarrel between the parties leading to physical commotion and sustaining of injury
by either or both the parties, there is a tendency to give it a slant of an offence under
Section 307 IPC as well. …” (Emphasis supplied)

12. Coming back to Laxmi Narayan (supra), this Court has held that mere mention of Section 307
IPC in the FIR or the charge-sheet should not be the basis for adopting a hands-off approach. It has
further held that it would be open for the court to examine as to whether incorporation of Section
307 IPC is there for the sake of it or whether there is evidence to back it. It has been held that the
courts may go by the nature of injuries sustained; as to whether the injuries are inflicted on the
vital/ delicate parts of the body and the nature of weapon used. It has also been clarified that such
an exercise would be permissible after investigation and filing of chargesheet/framing of charges or
during the trial. [See 15.4 of Laxmi Narayan (supra)].

13. Coming to the facts of the case, admittedly, there is a settlement between the parties. The case
filed by the appellants’ party which was prior in point of time and that too on the same day of
occurrence, has been settled.

14. It should be recalled that, at the outset, after investigation, the police actually closed the case in
its final report of 07.09.1991. It was the trial Court, which by its order of 05.09.1992, refused to
accept the same and summoned the appellants. The incident is of 11.08.1991, i.e. about 33½ years
back. No doubt, there is a reference to the firing in the FIR but admittedly there was no injury. The
allegation is that firing was done by Abdul Waris. He is since deceased. The facts, assuming to be
true, also do not make out a case of common object for the appellants under Section 149 IPC insofar
as the offence of Section 307 is concerned.

15. The role attributed to the seven members, including the five appellants is not specific. General
allegation was that they abused in filthy language and assaulted Mahmood with lathi and iron bars.
The specific individual role was only attributed to Adbul Waris, who is since deceased.

16. In any event, the police who investigated disbelieved the entire story. No recoveries have been
made of any pellets. What engaged the attention of the High Court was only the fracture of the head

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/84065051/

6

of the distal phalanx of left finger of respondent No.2.

Naushey Ali vs State Of U.P on 11 February, 2025

17. We have seen the injuries sustained by Mahmood (R-2) from the medical evidence collected.
From the injury report, it is clear that while the first four injuries were contusions and abrasions,
injury Nos. 5, 6 and 7 pertained to incised lacerated wound and swelling on the middle finger of the
left hand. We have also seen the x-ray report which shows that in the left hand there was a fracture
of the head of distal phalanx of left ring finger. Assuming that this was the result of injury with lathis
or iron bar, applying the test in Laxmi Narayan (supra), considering the injury and the nature of the
weapon used, certainly no offence under Section 307 IPC is made out.

18. Section 307 of IPC reads as under:-

“307. Attempt to murder.— Whoever does any act with such intention or knowledge,
and under such circumstances that, if he by that act caused death, he would be guilty
of murder, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine; and if hurt is caused to
any person by such act, the offender shall be liable either to imprisonment for life, or
to such punishment as is hereinbefore mentioned. Attempts by life convicts.— When
any person offending under this section is under sentence of imprisonment for life,
he may, if hurt is caused, be punished with death.”

19. Keeping in mind the surrounding circumstances, the nature of the weapon and the nature of the
injury, on facts, we are inclined to conclude that the overt act attributed to the appellants does not
bring the case within the four corners of the Section 307 of IPC, either on a stand-alone basis or as
held above with the aid of Section 149 of IPC.

20. We are also inclined to conclude that considering the overall circumstances, the nature of the
weapon and the nature of the injury (fracture of the head of distal phalanx of left ring finger), the
offence alleged, on facts, does not fall in that category of cases where the court should deny relief in
the event of a settlement. At the highest, the offence alleged could be one under Section 326 of IPC.
It could not be said, on facts, considering all the circumstances that this is a crime which has such an
harmful effect on the public and that it has the effect of seriously threatening the well-being of the
society. We make it clear that we are saying so on the facts of the present case. We are also firmly of
the opinion that proceeding with the trial, when parties have amicably resolved the dispute in the
present case, would be futile and the ends of justice require that the settlement be given effect to by
quashing the proceedings. It would be a grave abuse of process to let this trial remain pending under
the above circumstances, particularly when the dispute is settled and resolved.

21. It should also be borne in mind that this was a case which resulted in a closure report from the
side of the police. The State has also before us, after placing the law, fairly left it to the court to take
a decision.

22. In Ramgopal v. State of M.P, (2022) 14 SCC 531, Surya Kant, J. speaking for this court, in a case
involving a charge under Section 326 IPC, while annulling the proceedings, felicitously set out the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/84065051/

7

statement of law and applied it to the facts of the said case as under:

Naushey Ali vs State Of U.P on 11 February, 2025

“19. We thus sum up and hold that as opposed to Section 320 CrPC where the Court
is squarely guided by the compromise between the parties in respect of offences
“compoundable” within the statutory framework, the extraordinary power enjoined
upon a High Court under Section 482 CrPC or vested in this Court under Article 142
of the Constitution, can be invoked beyond the metes and bounds of Section 320
CrPC. Nonetheless, we reiterate that such powers of wide amplitude ought to be
exercised carefully in the context of quashing criminal proceedings, bearing in mind:

19.1. Nature and effect of the offence on the conscience of the society;

19.2. Seriousness of the injury, if any;

19.3 Voluntary nature of compromise between the accused and the victim; and 19.4
Conduct of the accused persons, prior to and after the occurrence of the purported
offence and/or other relevant considerations.

20. Having appraised the aforestated parameters and weighing upon the peculiar
facts and circumstances of the two appeals before us, we are inclined to invoke
powers under Article 142 and quash the criminal proceedings and consequently set
aside the conviction in both the appeals. We say so for the reasons that:

20.1. Firstly, the occurrence(s) involved in these appeals can be categorised as purely
personal or having overtones of criminal proceedings of private nature.

20.2. Secondly, the nature of injuries incurred, for which the appellants have been
convicted, do not appear to exhibit their mental depravity or commission of an
offence of such a serious nature that quashing of which would override public
interest.

20.3. Thirdly, given the nature of the offence and injuries, it is immaterial that the
trial against the appellants had been concluded or their appeal(s) against conviction
stand dismissed.

20.4. Fourthly, the parties on their own volition, without any coercion or compulsion,
willingly and voluntarily have buried their differences and wish to accord a quietus to
their dispute(s).

20.5. Fifthly, the occurrence(s) in both the cases took place way back in the years
2000 and 1995, respectively. There is nothing on record to evince that either before
or after the purported compromise, any untoward incident transpired between the
parties.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/84065051/

8

Naushey Ali vs State Of U.P on 11 February, 2025

20.6. Sixthly, since the appellants and the complainant(s) are residents of the same
village(s) and/or work in close vicinity, the quashing of criminal proceedings will
advance peace, harmony, and fellowship amongst the parties who have decided to
forget and forgive any ill will and have no vengeance against each other.

20.7. Seventhly, the cause of administration of criminal justice system would remain
un-effected on acceptance of the amicable settlement between the parties and/or
resultant acquittal of the appellants;

more so looking at their present age.”

23. Considering the special features of the case and taking the settlement on record and applying the
law, we find that this is a fit case where proceedings in complaint case No. 8023 of 2015 arising out
of Case Crime No. 248 of 1991 pending in the Court of Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, Court
No.5, Moradabad should be quashed.

24. In view of the above, we allow the Appeal. The order of the High Court in application under
Section 482 Cr.P.C. No. 1315 of 2023 dated 19.01.2023 shall stand set aside and proceeding in
Complaint Case No. 8023 of 2015 arising out of Case Crime No. 248 of 1991 pending in the Court of
Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, Court No. 5, Moradabad shall stand quashed.

…....…………………J. (K.V. Viswanathan) .…...…………………J. (S.V. N. Bhatti) New Delhi;

11th February, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/84065051/

9

