Nirmiti Developers Through Its ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 25 February, 2025

Nirmiti Developers Through Its ... vs The State Of Maharashtra
on 25 February, 2025

                                                            1

                                                                                       REPORTABLE
2025 INSC 265                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                             CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                         CIVIL APPEAL NOS.3238-3239 OF 2025
        (@Petition for Special Leave to Appeal (C) Nos.23308-23309/2017)

        NIRMITI DEVELOPERS THROUGH ITS PARTNERS & ANR.                           APPELLANT(S)

                                                           VERSUS

        THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA & ORS.                                          RESPONDENT(S)

                                                    J U D G M E N T

J.B.PARDIWALA, J.

1. Leave granted.

2. These captioned appeals arise from an order passed by the High Court of Judicature at Bombay,
Nagpur Bench, dated 09-02-2017 in Writ Petition No.1935/2016 by which the Writ Petition filed by
the appellants – herein came to be disposed of reserving liberty for the appellants to take necessary
steps as open to them in law.

3. The facts giving rise to these petitions may be summarized as under.

4. The subject-matter of this litigation is a vacant plot of land admeasuring 50,138 sq.ft (46.5 R) in
Survey No. 81/3 (New) 3 (old) in Mouza Rajapeth, Amravati, Maharashtra. This plot originally was
jointly owned by Smt Akhtar Bano Rashid, Abdul Majid A. Samad & 16:04:38 IST Reason:

Mohammad Sajid A. Samad (previous owners) respectively, and formed part of the
larger plot admeasuring 2.47 Hectare. The property in question is situated within the
municipal limits of Respondent No.3 – herein.

5. The erstwhile owners had submitted a lay-out plan for development of 2.47 hectare to
Respondent No.3. The Respondent No.3 sanctioned the development plan for the residential area

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2337946/

1

Nirmiti Developers Through Its ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 25 February, 2025

and the remaining area admeasuring 50,138 Sq.ft. was reserved for Government school.

6. On 25-02-1993, a revised development plan for Amravati under the Maharashtra Regional and
Town Planning Act, 1966 (for short “the MRTP Act”) came into effect in which the property was
shown as reserved for a private school in favour of the Respondent No.5 vide Reservation No.195.
Till 2006, i.e., almost for a period of 13 years, no steps were taken to acquire the property.

7. On 04-07-2006, the original owners served the purchase notice under Section 149 of the MRTP
Act on the Respondent No.1 calling upon the said respondent either to acquire the property or to
release it from reservation.

8. On 02-01-2007 the Respondent No.1 acknowledged the purchase notice. The Respondent No.1
directed the Respondent No.5 to complete the acquisition proceedings within a period of one year,
failing which the reservation in its favour would lapse.

9. On 29-12-2007, the Respondent No.5 requested the Respondent No.7 to initiate proceedings for
acquiring the land under Section 126 of the MRTP Act.

10. Till 02-01-2008, no action was taken by the Respondent No.5 to commence the acquisition
proceedings within one year of confirmation of the purchase notice.

11. On 13-08-2014, the previous owners issued a purchase notice under Section 127 of the MRTP Act
to the Respondent Nos.1,3,4 and 6 respectively requesting them to acquire the land.

12. On 12-06-2015, the Respondent No.6 received the proposal from Respondent No.5 to acquire the
land.

13. On 30-12-2015, the petitioner – herein purchased the property from the erstwhile owners for
Rs.1.26 Crore.

14. On 16-03-2016, the appellants filed a Writ Petition praying that (a) the Respondent No.5 be
directed to deposit the amount of compensation to be paid to the appellants for acquisition under
the new Land Acquisition Act, 2017 and complete the acquisition & (b) declare that the reservation
had lapsed under Section 49(7) of the Act.

15. On 01-10-2016, reply was filed by the Respondent Nos. 6 and 7 respectively stating that on
12-6-2015, proposal from the Respondent No.5 was received and LAC was registered but till that
date the Respondent No.5 had not deposited a single penny with the LAO and the Respondent Nos.6
and 7 had reasons to believe that the Respondent No.5 was not interested in developing the said
land.

16. On 13-10-2016, the Respondent No.3 filed an additional claim not disclosed by the appellants in
their notice dated 13-8-2014.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2337946/

2

Nirmiti Developers Through Its ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 25 February, 2025

17. In such circumstances, referred to above, the petitions filed by the appellants came to be
disposed of by the High Court which reads thus:-

Order dated 09-02-2017 reads thus:-

“Heard Shri G.K Mundhada, learned Counsel for the petitioners, Shri N. Rao, learned
A.G.P. for respondent nos.1,2,4,6 and 7, Shri R. Darda, learned Counsel for
respondent nos. 3 and 4 and Shri S. Ghodeswar, learned Counsel for respondent
no.5.

2. Petitioner is a purchaser who has bought property from original owners. Original
owners issued a notice under Section 49[1] of the Maharashtra Regional and Town
Planning Act, that notice is dated 04-07-2006. It was confirmed on 02-01-2007,
within a period of one year, thereafter no steps for acquisition were taken. Original
owners thereafter did not take any steps for development.

They have sold the property on 31-12-2015 to the present developer.

3. Effort of learned counsel for the petitioners is to urge that before that in 2015, original owners
had sought permission to raise compound wall and the same was declined. Thus, after confirmation
of purchase notice, expiry of period of one year therefrom, at least for a period of 6 years no steps to
develop the same were taken by the original owners.

4. Two separate procedures are deliberately made available under the Act. A person who wants to
immediately develop his property can take recourse to section 49, otherwise he has to wait for a
period of 10 years as envisaged under Section 127[1] thereof. Section 49 is not meant for getting the
property de-reserved and then to wait for appropriate time to sell out it in open market.

5. Here petitioner is a developer, it has not taken any steps after purchase to issue notice either
under Section 49 or under Section 127 of the Act.

6. Notice given by the previous land owners was under

Section 49 only and as no advantage of de-reservation was taken for more than 6
years, we find that, that notice or then the benefits flowing therefrom cannot accrue
to the benefits of present petitioners. Hence, with liberty to petitioner to take such
other steps as are open to him in law, we dispose of the present petition. No costs.”
Order dated 07-04-2017:(IN REVIEW PETITION) “Heard Shri S.K. Mishra, learned
Senior Counsel with Shri G.K. Mundhada, learned Counsel for applicants and learned
A.G.P. for non-applicant nos. 1,2,6 and 7.

2. Learned Senior Counsel submits that literal meaning of Section 49 of the
Maharashtra Regional and Town Planning Act, 1966 should be adhered to and as the
reservation had already lapsed, purchaser is not required to go through· the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2337946/

3

Nirmiti Developers Through Its ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 25 February, 2025

rigmarole of serving notice either under Section 49 or under Section 127 again. He
contends that the finding of this Court in paragraph no.4 are, therefore, contrary to
Scheme of Section 49.

3. This Court has already in judgment in case of Kishor Maganlal Vyas vs. State of
Maharashtra and others (Writ Petition No. 506/2011. Dated 11-06-2012), held that
normally procedure for de-reservation is Section 127, wherein the local authority gets
time of 10 years to acquire the property. However, to mitigate the hardship caused to
a genuine needy owner, a provision has been made in Section 49 and hence, a
specified class of owners emerging therein can only take recourse to it.

4. Here we have found that after lapsing of reservation for a period of 6 years the
earlier owner had not either developed the property or sold it out. Thus, the property
was lying as it is, and hence, recourse to Section 49 itself is found not proper.
De-reservation here was used to get the best desired price after waiting for long time.

Section 127 of the Act gives reasonable time to acquiring body to act and acquire. De-reservation
thereunder may therefore enure to the benefit of purchaser also. Same cannot be said in respect of
Section 49 de-reservation.

Section 49 operates on personal need of the owner and it cannot enure to the benefit of purchaser
like petitioner.

It is in this background, that we have held that the purchaser from that owner [present applicant]
has not taken necessary steps either under Section 49 or under Section 127 of the Act.

5. We, therefore, find no case made out warranting review. Misc. Civil Application is thus rejected.
No costs.”

18. The High Court took the view that the person intending to develop his property at the earliest
can take recourse of Section 49 otherwise he has to wait for a period of 10 years as envisaged under
Section 127(1) thereof.

19. The High Court took notice of the fact that although the original owners had completed the
procedure to get the land de-

reserved by issuing notice under Section 49 yet as they sold the plot to the present appellants
Section 49 would not apply to the purchasers. In other words, Section 49 according to the High
Court is not meant for getting the property de-reserved and then to wait for appropriate time to sell
it in the open market.

20. According to the High Court, the petitioner being a developer had not taken any steps after
purchase, i.e., to issue notice either under Section 49 or under Section 127 of the Act.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2337946/

4

Nirmiti Developers Through Its ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 25 February, 2025

21. The High Court, taking the view, as aforesaid, disposed of the petition granting liberty to the
appellants – herein to take appropriate steps in accordance with law.

22. We heard Mr. Gagan Sanghi, the learned counsel appearing for the appellants and Mr.
Suhaskumar Kadam, the learned counsel appearing for Respondent No.3 – Corporation.

23. Section 49 of the MRTP Act reads thus:-

“49. Obligation to acquire land on refusal of permission or on grant of permission in
certain cases.—(1) Where—

(a) any land is designated by a plan as subject to compulsory acquisition, or

(b) any land is allotted by a plan for the purpose of any functions of a Government or
local authority or statutory body, or is land designated in such plan as a site proposed
to be developed for the purposes of any functions of any such Government, authority
or body, or

(c) any land is indicated in any plan as land on which a highway is proposed to be
constructed or included, or

(d) any land for the development of which permission is refused or is granted subject
to conditions, and any owner of land referred to in Clause (a), (b), (c) or (d) claims—

(i) that the land has become incapable of reasonably beneficial use in its existing
state, or

(ii) (where planning permission is given subject to conditions) that the land cannot
be rendered capable of reasonably beneficial use by the carrying out of the permitted
development in accordance with the conditions;

or

(e) the owner of the land because of its designation or allocation in any plan claims that he is unable
to sell it except at a lower price than that at which he might reasonably have been excepted to sell if
it were not so designated or allocated, the owner or person affected may serve on the State
Government within such time and in such manner, as is prescribed by regulations, a notice
(hereinafter referred to as “the purchase notice”) requiring the Appropriate Authority to purchase
the interest in the land in accordance with the provisions of this Act.

(2) The purchase notice shall be accompanied by a copy of any application made by the applicant to
the Planning Authority, and of any order or decision of that Authority and of the State Government,
if any, in respect of which the notice is given.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2337946/

5

Nirmiti Developers Through Its ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 25 February, 2025

(3) On receipt of a purchase notice, the State Government shall forthwith call from the Planning
Authority and the Appropriate Authority such report or records or both, as may be necessary, which
those authorities shall forward to the State Government as soon as possible but not later than thirty
days from the date of their requisition.

(4) On receiving such records or reports, if the State Government is satisfied that the conditions
specified in sub-section (1) are fulfilled, and that the order or decision for permission was not duly
made on the ground that the applicant did not comply with any of the provisions of this Act or rules
or regulations, it may confirm the purchase notice, or direct that planning permission be granted
without condition or subject to such conditions as will make the land capable of reasonably
beneficial use. In any other case, it may refuse to confirm the purchase notice, but in that case, it
shall give the applicant a reasonable opportunity of being heard.

(5) If within a period of six months from the date on which a purchase notice is served the State
Government does not pass any final order thereon, the notice shall be deemed to have been
confirmed at the expiration of that period.

(6) [* * *] (7) If within one year from the date of confirmation of the notice, the Appropriate
Authority fails to make an application to acquire the land in respect of which the purchase notice has
been confirmed as required under Section 126, the reservation, designation, allotment, indication or
restriction on development of the land shall be deemed to have lapsed; and thereupon, the land shall
be deemed to be released from the reservation, designation, or, as the case may be, allotment,
indication or restriction and shall become available to the owner for the purpose of development
otherwise permissible in the case of adjacent land, under the relevant plan.

24. Section 126 of the MRTP Act reads thus:

“126. Acquisition of land required for public purposes specified in plans (1) When
after the publication of a draft Regional plan, a Development or any other plan or
town planning scheme, any land is required or reserved for any of the public
purposes specified in any plan or scheme under this Act at any time, the Planning
Authority, Development Authority, or as the case may be, [any Appropriate Authority
may, except as otherwise provided in section 113A] [acquire the land,— "(a) by
agreement by paying an amount agreed to, or

(b) in lieu of any such amount, by granting the land-owner or the lessee, subject,
however, to the lessee paying the lessor or depositing with the Planning Authority,
Development Authority or Appropriate Authority, as the case may be, for payment to
the lessor, an amount equivalent to the value of the lessor’s interest to be determined
by any of the said Authorities concerned [on the basis of the principles laid down in
the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition,
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013], Floor Space Index (FSI) or Transferable
Development Rights (TDR) against the area of land surrendered free of cost and free
from all encumbrances, and also further additional Floor Space Index or Transferable

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2337946/

6

Nirmiti Developers Through Its ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 25 February, 2025

Development Rights against the development or construction of the amenity on the
surrendered land at his cost, as the Final Development Control Regulations prepared
in this behalf provide, or

(c) by making an application to the State Government for acquiring such land [under
the provisions of the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land
Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013] , and the land (together with
the amenity, if any so developed or constructed) so acquired by agreement or by
grant of Floor Space Index or additional Floor Space Index or Transferable
Development Rights under this section [or under the provisions of the Right to Fair
Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Act, 2013], as the case may be, shall vest absolutely free from all
encumbrances in the Planning Authority, Development Authority, or as the case may
be, any Appropriate Authority.

(2) On receipt of such application, if the State Government is satisfied that the land
specified in the application is needed for the public purpose therein specified, or 4[if
the State Government (except in cases falling under section 49 5[and except as
provided in section 113A)] itself is of opinion] that any land included in any such plan
is needed for any public purpose, it may make a declaration to that effect in the
Official Gazette, [in the manner provided in section 19 of the Right to Fair
Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Act, 2013], in respect of the said land. The declaration so published
shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the said Act, be deemed to be a
declaration duly made under the said section:

[Provided that, subject to the provisions of sub-section (4), no such declaration shall
be made after the expiry of one year from the date of publication of the draft Regional
Plan, Development Plan or any other Plan, or Scheme, as the case may be.] [(3) On
publication of a declaration under the said 3[section 19], the Collector shall proceed
to take order for the acquisition of the land under the said Act; and the provisions of
that Act shall apply to the acquisition of the said land with the modification that the
market value of the land shall be,—

(i) where the land is to be acquired for the purposes of a new town, the market value
prevailing on the date of publication of the notification constituting or declaring the
Development Authority for such town;

(ii) where the land is acquired for the purposes of a Special Planning Authority, the
market value prevailing on the date of publication of the notification of the area as
undeveloped area; and

(iii) in any other case, the market value on the date of publication of the interim
development plan, the draft development plan or the plan for the area or areas for

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2337946/

7

Nirmiti Developers Through Its ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 25 February, 2025

comprehensive development, whichever is earlier, or as the case may be, the date of
publication of the draft Town Planning Scheme:

Provided that, nothing in this sub-section shall affect the date for the purpose of
determining the market value of land in respect of which proceedings for acquisition
commenced before the commencement of the Maharashtra Regional and Town
Planning (Second Amendment) Act, 1972:

Provided further that, for the purpose of clause (ii) of this sub-section, the market
value in respect of land included in any undeveloped area notified under sub-section
(1) of section 40 prior to the commencement of the Maharashtra Regional and Town
Planning (Second Amendment) Act, 1972, shall be the market value prevailing on the
date of such commencement.] [(4) 5[Notwithstanding anything contained in the
proviso to sub-section (2) and subsection (3), if a declaration,] is not made, within
the period referred to in sub-section (2) (or having been made, the aforesaid period
expired on the commencement of the Maharashtra Regional and Town Planning
6[(Amendment) Act, 1993),] the State Government may make a fresh declaration for
acquiring the land [under the provisions of the Right to Fair Compensation and
Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013], in the
manner provided by sub-sections (2) and (3) of this section, subject to the
modification that the market value of the land shall be the market value at the date of
declaration in the Official Gazette, made for acquiring the land afresh.]”

25. We must now look into Section 127 of the MRTP Act. Section 127 reads thus:

“127. Lapsing of reservations.—(1) If any land reserved, allotted or designated for any
purpose specified in any plan under this Act is not acquired by agreement within ten
years from the date on which a final Regional Plan, or final Development Plan comes
into force [or if a declaration under sub-section (2) or (4) of Section 126 is not
published in the Official Gazette within such period, the owner or any person
interested in the land may serve notice, alongwith the documents showing his title or
interest in the said land, on the Planning Authority, the Development Authority or, as
the case may be, the Appropriate Authority to that effect; and if within twelve
months] from the date of the service of such notice, the land is not acquired or no
steps as aforesaid are commenced for its acquisition, the reservation, allotment or
designation shall be deemed to have lapsed, and thereupon, the land shall be deemed
to be released from such reservation, allotment or designation and shall become
available to the owner for the purpose of development as otherwise, permissible in
the case of adjacent land under the relevant plan.

(2) On lapsing of reservation, allocation or designation of any land under sub-section
(1), the Government shall notify the same, by an order published in the Official
Gazette.”

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2337946/

8

Nirmiti Developers Through Its ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 25 February, 2025

26. Section 127 of the MRTP Act is enacted for lapsing of reservation, allotment or designation for
any purpose specified in the plan. The section prescribes, that if any land reserved, allotted or
designated for any purpose specified in any plan under this Act is not acquired by agreement within
ten years from the date on which a final Regional Plan or Development Plan comes into force or if
proceedings for the acquisition of such land under this Act or under the Land Acquisition Act are not
commenced within such period the owner or any, person interested in the land may serve notice on
the Planning Authority, Development Authority or as the case may be, Appropriate Authority to that
effect. If the concerned Authority within twelve months from the date of service of such notice, fails
to acquire the land or no steps as aforesaid are initiated for its acquisition the reservation, allotment
or designation shall be deemed to have lapsed, and thereupon the land shall be deemed to be
released from such reservation, allotment or designation and shall become available to the owner for
the purpose of development as otherwise, permissible in the case of adjacent land under the relevant
plan.

POSITION OF LAW

27. This Court in Chhabildas v. State of Maharashtra and others reported in 2018 INSC 106 while
explaining Sections 49 and 127 of the MRTP Act respectively observed as under:

“9. The scheme of Section 49 of the MRTP Act is to lay down timelines within which
the appropriate authority must make an application to acquire the land in respect of
which a purchase notice has been confirmed. The moment any of the conditions
specified in the sub-section (1) are met, the owner or person affected may serve on
the State Government, within the time and manner prescribed by regulations, a
purchase notice requiring the appropriate authority to purchase the interest in the
land in accordance with the provisions of this Act.

10. On the receipt of the purchase notice as per sub-section (3), the State Government
is to forthwith call from the planning authority or the appropriate authority such
report or records as may be necessary, which the authority shall then forward to the
State Government as soon as possible but not later than 30 days from the date of
acquisition.

11. In sub-section (4), if the State Government is satisfied that the conditions
specified in sub-

section (1) are fulfilled, it may either confirm the purchase notice; refuse to confirm the purchase
notice; or direct that planning permission be granted with or without conditions. Under sub-

section (5), if the steps contemplated after service of purchase notice leads to a situation where the
State Government does not pass any orders thereon, the notice shall be deemed to have been
confirmed at the expiration of that period. And finally, under sub-section (7), if within one year from
the date of confirmation of purchase notice, the appropriate authority fails to make an application to
acquire the land in respect of which the purchase notice has been confirmed, the reservation,

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2337946/

9

Nirmiti Developers Through Its ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 25 February, 2025

designation, allotment, indication or restriction on development of the land shall be deemed to have
lapsed. Section 49(6), which was deleted by Maharashtra Act 6 of 1976, read as follows:

“Upon confirmation of the notice, the State Government shall proceed to acquire the
land or that part of any land regarding which the notice has been confirmed, within
one year of the confirmation of the purchase notice, in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter VII.” It is clear that, under this provision, if within one year
from the confirmation of the purchase notice, the State Government did not acquire
the land, then the consequence would be that the acquisition shall be deemed to have
lapsed. This was a salutary provision, but seems to have been deleted so that Section
49 cases are brought on par with Section 126 cases.

12. The object of Section 49 is thus clear that once a purchase notice is received by the
authorities, there arises, as the marginal note to the Section also indicates, an
obligation to acquire land. The timelines contemplated by the section also indicate
that the owner or person affected cannot be left to hang indefinitely without a
decision to follow up the purchase notice by acquisition of the land in question.

13. However, it has been argued on behalf of the State that Section 49 abruptly ends
with sub-section (7), after which there are no timelines indicated as to what is to
happen after the appropriate authority makes an application to acquire the land
within one year from the date of confirmation of the notice. In our view, this
argument must be rejected, inasmuch as Section 49(1) itself states that the purchase
notice must require the appropriate authority to purchase the interest in the land “in
accordance with the provisions of this Act”. This being so, once the appropriate
authority makes the necessary application to acquire the land within time under
Section 49(7), we move over to Sections 126 and 127 of the Act.

14. Under Section 126(1)(c), when after the publication of a draft regional plan or
development or other plan, any land is required or reserved for a public purpose, the
appropriate authority may make an application to the State Government, for
acquiring such land under the Land Acquisition Act.

Under sub-section (2) thereof, on receipt of such application, if the State Government is satisfied
that the land specified in the application is needed for the public purpose specified therein, then
excepting the cases falling under Section 49, the State Government may make a declaration under
Section 6 of the Land Acquisition Act, to that effect. However, such declaration under Section 126(2)
must be made within a period of one year from the date of publication of the plan in question.

15. A purchase notice may be served under Section 49, after the expiry of one year from the date of
publication of the plan in question, in which case Section 126(2) of the Act will not apply. Under
Section 126(4), the State Government may make a declaration under Section 6 subject to the
modification that the market value of the land shall be the market value at the date of the
declaration in the official gazette made for acquiring the land. But this does not mean that the State

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2337946/

10

Nirmiti Developers Through Its ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 25 February, 2025

Government has carte blanche to do as it pleases. Ordinarily, the State Government is bound to act
under Section 126(4) within a reasonable time from the appropriate authority making an application
to acquire the land. This should ordinarily be within a period of one year from the date such an
application is made. However, if such declaration is not made within the aforesaid period, it will be
open for the aggrieved person to move the Court to direct the State Government to make the
requisite declaration immediately.

16. But the matter does not end here. Thereafter, Section 127 kicks in. If a declaration under Section
6 of the Land Acquisition Act is not made within a period of 10 years from the date on which a plan
comes into force under sub-section (4) of Section 126, the owner or any person interested in the land
may serve a purchase notice on the authorities, and if within one year from the date of service of
such notice, the land is not acquired or no steps are commenced for its acquisition, the reservation,
allotment or designation shall be deemed to have lapsed.”

28. In Girnar Traders v. State of Maharashtra reported in (2007) 7 SCC 555, a three-Judge Bench,
by a majority judgment delivered by Naolekar, J. framed the question before the Court thus:

“19. The question that requires consideration and answer in the present case is:
Whether the reservation has lapsed due to the failure of the planning authority to
take steps within the period of six months from the date of service of the notice of
purchase as stipulated by Section 127 of the MRTP Act; and also the question as
regards applicability of new Section 11-A of the LA Act to the acquisition of land
under the MRTP Act.”

29. After setting out Sections 126 and 127 respectively, this Court then laid down the scheme of
Section 126, which makes it clear that the Section 6 notification under the Land Acquisition Act is to
be issued, in cases where acquisition is made under Section 126(1)(c), in pursuance of an application
by an appropriate authority to the State Government within one year from the publication of the
plan in question, or by way of the State Government making a fresh declaration beyond a period of
one year under Section 126(4). This is stated by the Court in para 28 as follows: (Girnar case SCC
para 28) “28. Sub-section (2) of Section 126 provides for one year's limitation for publication of the
declaration from the date of publication of the draft plan or scheme. Sub-section (4), however,
empowers the State Government to make a fresh declaration under Section 6 of the LA Act even if
the prescribed period of one year has expired. This declaration is to be issued by the State
Government for acquisition of the land without there being any application moved by the
planning/local authority under clause (c) of Section 126(1).”

30. Insofar as Section 127 is concerned, the Court went on to hold: (Girnar case, paras 31-32) “31.
Section 127 prescribes two-time periods. First, a period of 10 years within which the acquisition of
the land reserved, allotted or designated has to be completed by agreement from the date on which a
regional plan or development plan comes into force, or the proceedings for acquisition of such land
under the MRTP Act or under the LA Act are commenced. Secondly, if the first part of Section 127 is
not complied with or no steps are taken, then the second part of Section 127 will come into
operation, under which a period of six months is provided from the date on which the notice has

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2337946/

11

Nirmiti Developers Through Its ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 25 February, 2025

been served by the owner within which the land has to be acquired or the steps as aforesaid are to be
commenced for its acquisition. The six month period shall commence from the date the owner or
any person interested in the land serves a notice on the planning authority, development authority
or appropriate authority expressing his intent claiming dereservation of the land. If neither of the
things is done, the reservation shall lapse. If there is no notice by the owner or any person
interested, there is no question of lapsing reservation, allotment or designation of the land under the
development plan. Second part of Section 127 stipulates that the reservation of the land under a
development scheme shall lapse if the land is not acquired or no steps are taken for acquisition of
the land within the period of six months from the date of service of the purchase notice. The word
“aforesaid” in the collocation of the words “no steps as aforesaid are commenced for its acquisition”
obviously refers to the steps contemplated by Section 126 of the MRTP Act.

32. If no proceedings as provided under Section 127 are taken and as a result thereof the reservation
of the land lapses, the land shall be released from reservation, allotment or designation and shall be
available to the owner for the purpose of development. The availability of the land to the owner for
the development would only be for the purpose which is permissible in the case of adjacent land
under the relevant plan. Thus, even after the release, the owner cannot utilise the land in whatever
manner he deems fit and proper, but its utilisation has to be in conformity with the relevant plan for
which the adjacent lands are permitted to be utilised.”

31. The Court then went on to consider Municipal Corpn. of Greater Bombay v. Dr Hakimwadi
Tenants' Assn. reported in 1988 Supp SCC 55, and was of opinion that, the observations on the
expression “no steps as aforesaid are commenced for its acquisition” stipulated under Section 127
were obiter in nature. The majority then went on to state the law under Section 127 as follows:
(Girnar case paras 54-57) “54. When we conjointly read Sections 126 and 127 of the MRTP Act, it is
apparent that the legislative intent is to expeditiously acquire the land reserved under the Town
Planning Scheme and, therefore, various periods have been prescribed for acquisition of the owner's
property. The intent and purpose of the provisions of Sections 126 and 127 has been well explained
in Municipal Corpn. of Greater Bombay case [Municipal Corpn. of Greater Bombay v. Dr
Hakimwadi Tenants' Assn., 1988 Supp SCC 55]. If the acquisition is left for time immemorial in the
hands of the authority concerned by simply making an application to the State Government for
acquiring such land under the LA Act, 1894, then the authority will simply move such an application
and if no such notification is issued by the State Government for one year of the publication of the
draft regional plan under Section 126(2) read with Section 6 of the LA Act, wait for the notification
to be issued by the State Government by exercising suo motu power under sub-section (4) of Section
126; and till then no declaration could be made under Section 127 as regards lapsing of reservation
and contemplated declaration of land being released and available for the landowner for his
utilisation as permitted under Section 127. Section 127 permitted inaction on the part of the
acquisition authorities for a period of 10 years for dereservation of the land. Not only that, it gives a
further time for either to acquire the land or to take steps for acquisition of the land within a period
of six months from the date of service of notice by the landowner for dereservation. The steps
towards commencement of the acquisition in such a situation would necessarily be the steps for
acquisition and not a step which may not result into acquisition and merely for the purpose of
seeking time so that Section 127 does not come into operation.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2337946/

12

Nirmiti Developers Through Its ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 25 February, 2025

55. Providing the period of six months after the service of notice clearly indicates the intention of the
legislature of an urgency where nothing has been done in regard to the land reserved under the plan
for a period of 10 years and the owner is deprived of the utilisation of his land as per the user
permissible under the plan. When mandate is given in a section requiring compliance within a
particular period, the strict compliance is required therewith as introduction of this section is with
legislative intent to balance the power of the State of “eminent domain”. The State possessed the
power to take or control the property of the owner for the benefit of public cause, but when the State
so acted, it was obliged to compensate the injured upon making just compensation. Compensation
provided to the owner is the release of the land for keeping the land under reservation for 10 years
without taking any steps for acquisition of the same.

56. The underlying principle envisaged in Section 127 of the MRTP Act is either to utilise the land
for the purpose it is reserved in the plan in a given time or let the owner utilise the land for the
purpose it is permissible under the town planning scheme. The step taken under the section within
the time stipulated should be towards acquisition of land. It is a step of acquisition of land and not
step for acquisition of land. It is trite that failure of authorities to take steps which result in actual
commencement of acquisition of land cannot be permitted to defeat the purpose and object of the
scheme of acquisition under the MRTP Act by merely moving an application requesting the
Government to acquire the land, which Government may or may not accept. Any step which may or
may not culminate in the step for acquisition cannot be said to be a step towards acquisition.

57. It may also be noted that the legislature while enacting Section 127 has deliberately used the
word “steps” (in plural and not in singular) which are required to be taken for acquisition of the
land. On construction of Section 126 which provides for acquisition of the land under the MRTP Act,
it is apparent that the steps for acquisition of the land would be issuance of the declaration under
Section 6 of the LA Act. Clause (c) of Section 126(1) merely provides for a mode by which the State
Government can be requested for the acquisition of the land under Section 6 of the LA Act. The
making of an application to the State Government for acquisition of the land would not be a step for
acquisition of the land under reservation. Sub-section (2) of Section 126 leaves it open to the State
Government either to permit the acquisition or not to permit, considering the public purpose for
which the acquisition is sought for by the authorities. Thus, the steps towards acquisition would
really commence when the State Government permits the acquisition and as a result thereof
publishes the declaration under Section 6 of the LA Act.”

32. The scheme of Sections 126(2) and (4) was again reiterated in para 61 as follows: (Girnar case
para 161) “61. Proviso to sub-section (2) of Section 126 prohibits publication of the declaration after
the expiry of one year from the date of publication of draft regional plan, development plan or any
other plan or scheme. Thus, from the date of publication of the draft regional plan, within one year
an application has to be moved under clause (c) of Section 126(1) which should culminate into a
declaration under Section 6 of the LA Act. As per the proviso to sub-section (2) of Section 126, the
maximum period permitted between the publication of a draft regional plan and declaration by the
Government in the Official Gazette under Section 126(2) is one year. In other words, during one year
of the publication of the draft regional plan, two steps need to be completed, namely, (i) application
by the appropriate authority to the State Government under Section 126(1)(c); and (ii) declaration

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2337946/

13

Nirmiti Developers Through Its ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 25 February, 2025

by the State Government on receipt of the application mentioned in clause (c) of Section 126(1) on
satisfaction of the conditions specified under Section 126(2). The only exception to this provision
has been given under Section 126(4).”

33. In Shrirampur Municipal Council v. Satyabhamabai Bhimaji Dawkher reported in (2013) 5 SCC
627, this Court reiterated the findings given in Girnar (supra) majority judgment, and held that
there was no conflict between the judgment in Hakimwadi (supra) and the majority judgment in
Girnar(supra). This Court, thereafter, went on to hold:

“42. We are further of the view that the majority in Girnar Traders [Girnar Traders v.
State of Maharashtra, (2007) 7 SCC 555] had rightly observed that steps towards the
acquisition would really commence when the State Government takes active steps for
the acquisition of the particular piece of land which leads to publication of the
declaration under Section 6 of the 1894 Act. Any other interpretation of the scheme
of Sections 126 and 127 of the 1966 Act will make the provisions wholly unworkable
and leave the landowner at the mercy of the Planning Authority and the State
Government.

43. The expression “no steps as aforesaid” used in Section 127 of the 1966 Act has to
be read in the context of the provisions of the 1894 Act and mere passing of a
resolution by the Planning Authority or sending of a letter to the Collector or even the
State Government cannot be treated as commencement of the proceedings for the
acquisition of land under the 1966 Act or the 1894 Act. By enacting Sections 125 to
127 of the 1966 Act, the State Legislature has made a definite departure from the
scheme of acquisition enshrined in the 1894 Act. But a holistic reading of these
provisions makes it clear that while engrafting the substance of some of the
provisions of the 1894 Act in the 1966 Act and leaving out other provisions, the State
Legislature has ensured that the landowners/other interested persons, whose land is
utilised for execution of the development plan/town planning scheme, etc., are not
left high and dry. This is the reason why time-limit of ten years has been prescribed
in Section 31(5) and also under Sections 126 and 127 of the 1966 Act for the
acquisition of land, with a stipulation that if the land is not acquired within six
months of the service of notice under Section 127 or steps are not commenced for
acquisition, reservation of the land will be deemed to have lapsed. Shri Naphade's
interpretation of the scheme of Sections 126 and 127, if accepted, will lead to absurd
results and the landowners will be deprived of their right to use the property for an
indefinite period without being paid compensation. That would tantamount to
depriving the citizens of their property without the sanction of law and would result
in violation of Article 300-A of the Constitution.”

34. It is, thus, clear that the scheme of Sections 126 and 127 respectively would leave nobody in
doubt, for the reason that if a period of 10 years has elapsed from the date of publication of the plan
in question, and no steps for acquiring the land have been taken, then once a purchase notice is
served under Section 127, steps to acquire the land must follow within a period of one year from the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2337946/

14

Nirmiti Developers Through Its ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 25 February, 2025

date of service of such notice, or else the land acquisition proceedings would lapse.

35. This Court in Chhabildas (supra) summed up the position in law as under:

“24.1. In all Section 49 cases, where a purchase notice has been served and is
confirmed within the period specified, the appropriate authority must make an
application to acquire the land within one year from the date of confirmation of the
notice. If it does not do so, the reservation, designation, etc. shall be deemed to have
lapsed.

24.2. If within the period specified in Section 49(7), the appropriate authority makes
the requisite application, then the State Government may acquire the land by making
a declaration under Section 6 of the Land Acquisition Act as set out under Section
126(4), wherein the market value shall be the market value of the land as on the date
of Section 6 declaration. Ordinarily, such declaration must be made within 1 year of
the date of receipt of the requisite application. In case this is not done, it will be open
to the aggrieved person to move the Court to direct the State Government to make
the requisite declaration immediately.

24.3. If 10 years have passed from the date of publication of the plan in question, and
a purchase notice has been served under Section 127, and no steps have been taken
within a period of one year from the date of service of such notice, all proceedings
shall be deemed to have lapsed. Thus, even in cases covered by Section 49, the drill of
Section 126(4) and Section 127 will have to be followed, subsequent to the
appropriate authority making an application to acquire the land within the period
specified in Section 49(7).”

36. We take notice of the following:

a. On 11-01-1967, the MRTP Act came into force in the State of Maharashtra.

b. The property in question – Vacant plot admeasuring 50,138. Sq ft in Survey No.
81/3 (NEW) 3 (old) in Mouza Rajapeth Amravati, Maharashtra was originally owned
jointly by Smt. Akhtar Bano Rashid, Abdul Majid A. Samad and Mohd. Sajid A.
Samad respectively which was a part of the bigger plot admeasuring 2.47 hectare.

c. The erstwhile owners had submitted Land Development Plan for development of
2.47 hectare. The respondent No. 3 herein sanctioned the development plan for
residential area and the remaining area admeasuring 50,138 sq. ft. was reserved for
Government school.

d. On 25-02-1993, the revised development plan for Amravati came into effect in
which the property in question was shown as reserved for a private school i.e., for the
respondent No. 5.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2337946/

15

Nirmiti Developers Through Its ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 25 February, 2025

Respondent No. 5 is a Public Trust registered under the Maharashtra Public Trust
Act, 1950.

e. From 1993 till 2006 no action was taken by the respondents to acquire the
property for the private school.

f. On 04-07-2006, the erstwhile owners served purchase notice under Section 49 of
the Act, 1966 on respondent No. 1 calling upon him either to acquire the said
property or release it from reservation.

g. On 02-01-2007, the respondent No. 1 confirmed the purchase notice issued by the
erstwhile owners.

h. By a letter dated 02-01-2007, the respondent No. 1 directed the respondent No. 5
to complete the acquisition proceedings within twelve months from the 02-01-2007
failing which the reservation would lapse and the property would stand released from
reservation.

i. Respondent No. 1 was aware that the land acquisition proceedings had to be
completed within twelve months from 02- 01-2007 i.e., by 02-01-2008 failing which
the property would stand de-reserved by operation of Section 49(7) of the MRTP Act.

j. On 29-12-2007, i.e., just three days before the expiry of the last date of acquiring
the property i.e., 02-01-2008, the respondent No. 5 issued a letter to the respondent
No. 7 to commence the land acquisition proceedings under Section 126 of the MRTP
Act.

k. On 13-08-2014, erstwhile owner issued purchase notice under Section 127 of the
MRTP Act to Respondent Nos. 1,3,4 and 6 requesting them to acquire their land.

l. Indisputably, till 2018 the respondent No. 3 did not make any application to
acquire the property and no notification under Section 6 of the Land Acquisition Ac t,
1894 was published by the competent authority.

m. Indisputably, no amount towards compensation was deposited by the respondent
No. 5 with any authority for the said property.

n. Thus, by operation of Section 49(7) of the MRTP Act reservation of the property
lapsed on 02-01-2008 and the erstwhile owners were free to use the same as
permissible in law.

o. On 09-04-2015, the erstwhile owners submitted an application addressed to the
respondent No. 4 seeking permission to construct boundary wall surrounding the
property with a view to prevent encroachment.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2337946/

16

Nirmiti Developers Through Its ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 25 February, 2025

p. The respondent No. 4 vide letter dated 27-08-2015 declined to grant the
permission to put up the wall on the ground that the property was reserved for
respondent No. 5.

q. On 30-12-2015 by registered sale deed the erstwhile owners sold the property to
the appellants herein.

r. On 16-03-2016 the appellants herein filed a writ petition seeking direction that
either the respondent No. 5 shall deposit the amount towards compensation for the
land reserved for it since 1993 or declare that the reservation had lapsed under
Section 49(7) of the MRTP Act.

37. According to the learned counsel appearing for the appellants, in view of the aforesaid, the
reservation lapsed even under Section 127 on 13-08-2015.

38. It is very unfortunate to note that although the land was reserved almost 33 years back for the
benefit of Respondent No.5 yet the said respondent was unable to avail the benefit of the same.

39. It does not make any good sense to keep a plot reserved in a development plan for past 33 years.
The Authority did not allow the original owners to use the land and are now not permitting even the
purchasers i.e. the appellants – herein to utilize the land.

40. This Court in Chhabildas (supra) after explaining the provisions of Sections 49 and 127 of the
MRT Act respectively thought fit to invoke Article 142 of the Constitution to do complete justice
having regard to the long and inordinate delay in acquiring the land.

41. In the aforesaid context, we may refer to paras 25 to 31 of the Chhabildas (supra) as under:

“25. The learned counsel appearing for the State has relied upon this Court’s
judgment in Prakash R. Gupta v. Lonavala Municipal Council and others, (2009) 1
SCC 514, wherein this Court held that the scheme contemplated by Section 49 is
totally different from that of Section 127, for the reason that there is no period of 10
years in Section 49 as mentioned in Section 127.

26. This judgment does not carry the matter any further as it is clear that, once an application is
made within the requisite period contained in Section 49(7), land acquisition must follow in terms
of Section 49(1) to purchase the interest in the land, in accordance with the provisions of the MRTP
Act, as indicated above.

27. This Court, in Hasmukhrai V. Mehta v. State of Maharashtra & Ors., (2015) 3 SCC 154, held that
where an inordinately long delay takes place from the date on which the appropriate authority
makes an application to acquire the land (in that case 20 years), the land in question stands released
from reservation.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2337946/

17

Nirmiti Developers Through Its ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 25 February, 2025

28. In the aforesaid judgment, the purchase notice under Section 49 of the Act was dated 17th
August, 2000. The Director, Town Planning, wrote a letter to the Chief Officer of the Khopoli
Municipal Council stating that proceedings for land acquisition for an Agricultural Produce Market
Yard would be initiated within one year from 16th March, 2001. Consequently, the Khopoli
Municipal Council wrote a letter on 23rd April, 2001 to the Agricultural Produce Market Committee
to initiate acquisition proceedings. As nothing was done, the Appellant ran from pillar to post and
ultimately filed a writ petition in February, 2004, complaining that the Respondents are neither
acquiring the land belonging to the Appellant nor releasing the same from reservation for the
Agricultural Produce Market Yard. The High Court dismissed the aforesaid writ petition stating that
as the provisions of Section 127 were not attracted, there could be no lapse. This Court, after
referring to Sections 49 and 127 of the Act, held:

“12. We think it pertinent to mention here that APMC, Respondent 5, even after
service of notice, has not cared to contest this appeal. Also, we think it relevant to
mention that till date no steps appear to have been taken for acquisition of the land in
question or to release the same. The land of the appellant, in our opinion, cannot be
held up, without any authority of law, as neither the same is purchased till date by the
respondent authorities, nor acquired under any law, nor the appellant is being
allowed to use the land for the last more than twenty years.”

29. It thereafter referred to Vijayalakshmi v. Town Planning Member (2006) 8 SCC 502 and Girnar
(supra) and then held:

“15. In view of the principle of law laid down by this Court, as above, we are of the
view that in the present case since neither have steps been taken by the authorities
concerned for acquisition of the land, nor is the land of the appellant purchased
under purchase notice, nor is he allowed to use the land for the last more than twenty
years, the land will have to be released as the appellant cannot be deprived from
utilising his property for an indefinite period.

xxx xxx xxx

18. Accordingly, we allow the appeal and set aside the impugned order passed by the
High Court. Since no steps appear to have been taken till date for the last more than
twenty years either for acquisition or for purchase of the land under the MRTP Act,
1966 by the authorities concerned, as such, the land in question stands released from
reservation under Section 127 of the MRTP Act.”

30. The aforesaid judgment lays down that since more than 20 years had elapsed since the date of
the purchase notice under Section 49 on the facts of that case, the land will have to be released from
acquisition. No doubt this Court held that over 20 years is an inordinately long period of delay, and
therefore, lapsing has taken place under Section 127 of the MRTP Act. However, on the facts of that
case, no purchase notice under Section 127 was issued after 10 years had elapsed from the date of
publication of the requisite plan. This being the case, we read the judgment as having allowed a

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2337946/

18

Nirmiti Developers Through Its ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 25 February, 2025

lapse to take place, in view of the inordinately long delay of over 20 years, by really doing complete
justice on the facts of that case under Article 142 of the Constitution of India.

31. In the present case, 15 years have passed since the date of publication of the development plan,
and over 10 years have passed since the date of the purchase notice issued under Section 49.
Considering the fact that there has been no stay at any stage by any Court, it is clear that an
inordinately long period of time has elapsed, both since the date of publication of the development
plan, as well as the date of the purchase notice served under Section 49. No doubt, the letter of
26.9.2008 shows that an application was made within the requisite time period to acquire the
aforesaid land. However, on the facts of this case, since after the aforesaid letter nothing has been
done to acquire the appellant’s property, we are of the view that the reservation contained in the
development plan as well as acquisition proposal have lapsed. We make it clear that we hold this in
order to do complete justice between the parties under Article 142 of the Constitution of India.
However, in all future cases that may arise under the provisions of Section 49, the drill of Section
127 must be followed, i.e. that after 10 years have elapsed from the date of publication of the
relevant plan, a second purchase notice must be served in accordance with the provisions of Section
127, in order that lapsing can take place under the aforesaid section. With these observations, the
appeal is disposed of.”

42. In the context of delay, we would also like to refer to the decision of this Court in the case of
Bhavnagar Universit v.

Palitana Sugar Mills Pvt. Ltd. and Others reported in AIR 23 SC 511 more particularly paras 27, 32
to 35 and 38 respectively as under:

“27. An owner of a property, subject to reasonable restrictions which may be imposed
by the Legislature, is entitled to enjoy the property in any manner he likes. A right to
use a property in a particular manner or in other words a restriction imposed on user
thereof except in the mode and manner laid down under statute would not be
presumed.

xxx xxx xxx

32. Subsection (2) of Section 20, however, carves out an exception to the exercise of
powers by the State as regards acquisition of the land for the purpose of carrying out
the development of the area in the manner provided for therein; a bare reading
whereof leaves no manner of doubt that in the event the land referred to under
subsection (1) of Section 20 thereof is not acquired or proceedings under the Land
Acquisition Act are not commenced and further in the event an owner or a person
interested in the land serves a notice in the manner specified therein, certain
consequences ensue, namely, the designation of the land shall be deemed to have
lapsed. A legal fiction, therefore, has been created in the said provision.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2337946/

19

Nirmiti Developers Through Its ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 25 February, 2025

33. The purpose and object of creating a legal fiction in the statute is well known.
When a legal fiction is created, it must be given its full effect. In East End Dwelling
Co. Ltd. v. Finsbury Borough Council, [(1951) 2 All.E.R 587], Lord Asquith, J. stated
the law in the following terms:"

If you are bidden to treat an imaginary state of affairs as real, you must surely, unless
prohibited from doing so, also imagine as real the consequences and incidents which,
if the putative state of affairs had in fact existed, must inevitably have flowed from or
accompanied it. One of these in this case is emancipation from the 1939 level of rents.
The statute says that you must imagine a certain state of affairs; it does not say that
having done so, you must cause or permit your imagination to boggle when it comes
to the inevitable corollaries of that state of affairs."

The said principle has been reiterated by this Court in M. Venugopal v. Divisional Manager, Life
Insurance Corporation of India, Machilipatnam, A.P. & Anr. [(1994) 2 SCC 323]. See also Indian Oil
Corporation Limited v. Chief Inspector of Factories & Ors. etc., [(1998) 5 SCC 738], Voltas Limited,
Bombay v. Union of India & Ors.,[(1995) Supp. 2 SCC 498], Harish Tandon v. Addl. District
Magistrate, Allahabad, U.P. & Ors. [(1995) 1 SCC 537] and G. Viswanathan etc. v. Hon'ble Speaker,
Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly, Madras & Anr. [(1996) 2 SCC 353].

34. The relevant provisions of the Act are absolutely clear, unambiguous and implicit. A plain
meaning of the said provisions, in our considered view, would lead to only one conclusion, namely,
that in the event a notice is issued by the owner of the land or other person interested therein asking
the authority to acquire the land upon expiry of the period specified therein viz. ten years from the
date of issuance of final development plan and in the event pursuant to or in furtherance thereof no
action for acquisition thereof is taken, the designation shall lapse.

35. This Court in Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay's case (supra), in no uncertain terms
while construing the provisions of Section 127 of the Maharashtra Regional and Town Planning Act,
1966 held the period of ten years as reasonable in the following words:

"While the contention of learned counsel appearing for the appellant that the words
'six months from the date of service of such notice' in Section 127 of the Act were not
susceptible of a literal construction, must be accepted, it must be borne in mind that
the period of six months provided by Section 127 upon the expiry of which the
reservation of the land under a Development Plan lapses, is a valuable safeguard to
the citizen against arbitrary and irrational executive action. Section 127 of the Act is a
fetter upon the power of eminent domain. By enacting Section 127 the legislature has
struck a balance between the competing claims of the interests of the general public
as regards the rights of an individual."

It was observed that:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2337946/

20

Nirmiti Developers Through Its ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 25 February, 2025

"The Act lays down the principles of fixation by providing first, by the proviso to
Section 126(2) that no such declaration under subsection (2) shall be made after the
expiry of three years from the date of publication of the draft regional plan,
development plan or any other plan, secondly, by enacting subsection (4) of Section
126 that if a declaration is not made within the period referred to in subsection (2),
the State Government may make a fresh declaration but, in that event, the market
value of the land shall be the market value at the date of the declaration under
Section 6 and not the market value at the date of the notification under Section 4, and
thirdly, by Section 127 that if any land reserved, allotted or designated for any
purpose in any development plan is not acquired by agreement within 10 years from
the date on which a final regional plan or development plan comes into force or if
proceedings for the acquisition of such land under the Land Acquisition Act are not
commenced within such period, such land shall be deemed to be released from such
reservation, allotment or designation and become available to the owner for the
purpose of development on the failure of the Appropriate Authority to initiate any
steps for its acquisition within a period of six months from the date of service of a
notice by the owner or any person interested in the land.

It cannot be doubted that a period of 10 years is long enough., The Development or the Planning
Authority must take recourse to acquisition with some amount of promptitude in order that the
compensation paid to the expropriated owner bears a just relation to the real value of the land as
otherwise, the compensation paid for the acquisition would be wholly illusory. Such fetter on
statutory powers is in the interest of the general public and the conditions subject to which they can
be exercised must be strictly followed."

It is true that Section 21 of the Act imposes a statutory obligation on the part of the State and the
appropriate authorities to revise the development plan and for the said purpose Section 9 to 20 'so
far as may be' would be applicable thereto, but thereby the rights of the owners in terms of
subsection (2) of Section 20 are not taken away.

xxx xxx xxx

38. Section 21 does not envisage that despite the fact that in terms of subsection (2) of Section 20,
the designation of land shall lapse, the same, only because a draft revised plan is made, would
automatically give rise to revival thereof. Section 20 does not manifest a legislative intent to curtail
or take away the right acquired by a landowner under Section 22 of getting the land defreezed. In
the event the submission of the learned Solicitor General is accepted the same would completely
render the provisions of Section 20(2) otiose and redundant.”

43. In the last, we may refer to the decision of this Court in the case of Chairman, Indore Vikas
Pradhikaran v. Pure Industrial Coke and Chemicals Ltd. reported in (2007) 8 SCC 705 more
particularly paras 53, 54 and 55 respectively therein:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2337946/

21

Nirmiti Developers Through Its ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 25 February, 2025

“53. The right of property is now considered to be not only a constitutional right but
also a human right.

54. The Declaration of Human Rights (1789) enunciates under Article 17 "since the
right to property is inviolable and sacred, no one may be deprived thereof, unless
public necessity, legally ascertained, obviously requires it and just and prior
indemnity has been paid".

Further under Article 217 (IIII) of 10th December, 1948, adopted in the General Assembly
Resolution it is stated that : (i) Everyone has the right to own property alone as well as in association
with others. (ii) No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his property.

55. Earlier human rights were existed to the claim of individuals right to health, right to livelihood,
right to shelter and employment etc. but now human rights have started gaining a multifacet
approach. Now property rights are also incorporated within the definition of human rights. Even
claim of adverse possession has to be read in consonance with human rights. As President John
Adams (17971801)put it,:

"Property is surely a right of mankind as real as liberty."

Adding, "The moment the idea is admitted into society that property is not as sacred as the laws of
God, and that there is not a force of law and public justice to protect it, anarchy and tyranny
commence".”

44. The facts before us are very clear. We once again reiterate them before we close this matter:

(i) On 13-08-2014, the erstwhile owners issued purchase notice under Section 127 of
the MRTP Act.

(ii) Development Plan came into effect on 25-02-1993.

(iii) The land had to be acquired within ten years of 25-02-

1993 in view of Section 127 of the Act which indisputably was not done.

(iv) After the issuance of notice under Section 127 of the MRTP Act on 13-08-2014, the appropriate
authority could have acquired the land within twelve months, i.e., on/or before 13- 08-2015. The
same was not done. This puts an end to the entire debate.

(v) The reservation could be said to have lapsed even under Section 127 on 13-08-2015.

45. In such circumstances, when the erstwhile owners sold the land to the appellants herein on
30-12-2015, there was no reservation.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2337946/

22

Nirmiti Developers Through Its ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 25 February, 2025

46. This Court in the case of Prafulla C. Dave and Ors. v.

Municipal Commissioner and Ors. reported in (2015) 11 SCC 90 held thus:

“21. Under Section 127 of the M.R.T.P. Act, reservation, allotment or designation of
any land for any public purpose specified in a development plan is deemed to have
lapsed and such land is deemed to be released only after notice on the appropriate
authority is served calling upon such authority either to acquire the land by
agreement or to initiate proceedings for acquisition of the land either under the
M.R.T.P. Act or under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 and the said authority fails to
comply with the demand raised thereunder. Such notice can be issued by the owner
or any person interested in the land only if the land is not acquired or proceeding for
acquisition are not initiated within 10 years from the date on which the final
development plan had come into force. After service of notice by the land owner or
the person interested, a mandatory period of six months has to be lapsed within
which time the authority can still initiate the necessary action. Section 127 of the
M.R.T.P. Act or any other provision of the M.R.T.P. Act does not provide for
automatic lapsing of the acquisition, reservation or designation of the land included
in any development plan on the expiry of 10 years. On the contrary, upon expiry of
the said period of 10 years, the land owner or the person interested is mandated by
the statute to take certain positive steps i.e. to issue/serve a notice and there must
occur a corresponding failure on the part of the authority to take requisite steps as
demanded therein in order to bring into effect the consequences contemplated by
Section 127 of the M.R.T.P. Act………” (Emphasis supplied)

47. Thus, the principles underlying in Section 127 of the MRTP Act is either to utilize the land for the
purpose for which it is reserved in the timeline given or let the owner utilize the land for the purpose
as permissible under the town planning scheme. The reservation shall be deemed to have lapsed if
no steps are taken for acquisition of the said land within the prescribed period.

Indisputably, in the present case, the respondents have not taken any steps to issue notification after
receipt of the notice.

48. In Kolhapur Municipal corporation and Others v. Vasant Mahadev Patil (dead), through LRs &
Ors. reported in (2022) 5 SCC 758, this Court held that when by operation of law the reservation is
deemed to have lapsed under Section 127(1) of the MRTP Act, the reservation lapses for all purposes
and for all times to come. In the said decision, this Court was further pleased to observe that on the
deemed lapse of such reservation under Section 127(1) of the said Act no writ of mandamus can be
issued by the High Court to direct acquisition of that land and pay compensation to the landowners
as on the lapse of such reservation, the land becomes free and the landowners can use the land as if
there was no reservation.

49. This Court in Municipal Corpn., Greater Mumbai v. Hiraman Sitaram Deorukhar reported in
(2019) 14 SCC 411 was examining the reservation of land for a garden in a Development Plan in the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2337946/

23

Nirmiti Developers Through Its ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 25 February, 2025

year 1966 but the same was not acquired even after purchase notice was served by the landowner.
However, relying upon the judgment of this Court reported as Bangalore Medical Trust v. B.S.
Muddappa reported in (1991) 4 SCC 54 and some other judgments, it was held that the land
reserved for public park cannot be permitted to be converted for other public purposes.

50. The landowner cannot be deprived of the use of the land for years together. Once an embargo
has been put on a landowner not to use the land in a particular manner, the said restriction cannot
be kept open-ended for indefinite period. The statute has provided a period of ten years to acquire
the land under Section 126 of the Act. Additional one year is granted to the landowner to serve a
notice for acquisition prior to the amendment by Maharashtra Act 42 of 2015. Such timeline is
sacrosanct and has to be adhered to by the State or by the authorities under the State.

51. In the result, the appeals are allowed and the impugned order passed by the High Court is set
aside. It is declared that the reservation of the plot in question could be said to have lapsed by efflux
of time in view of the provisions under Sections 126 and 127 of the MRTP Act respectively.

52. Having regard to the gross delay of almost thirty years even without the aid of Section 127 of the
MRTP Act, we would have declared the reservation to have lapsed in exercise of our jurisdiction
under Article 142 of the Constitution to do complete justice in the matter.

53. Pending applications if any shall stand disposed of.

… … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … J   ( J . B .   P A R D I W A L A )   … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … J   ( R .
MAHADEVAN) NEW DELHI:

25th FEBRUARY, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2337946/

24

