Om Prakash Gupta Alias Lalloowa (Now ... vs Satish Chandra (Now Deceased) on 11 February, 2025

Om Prakash Gupta Alias Lalloowa (Now ... vs Satish Chandra
(Now Deceased) on 11 February, 2025

Author: Dipankar Datta

Bench: Prashant Kumar Mishra, Dipankar Datta

2025 INSC 183                                                                  REPORTABLE

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                       CIVIL APPEAL NO. 13407 OF 2024

             OM PRAKASH GUPTA ALIAS LALLOOWA
             (NOW DECEASED) & ORS.                                          … APPELLANTS

                                                       VERSUS

             SATISH CHANDRA (NOW DECEASED)                                  …RESPONDENT

                                                         WITH

                                       CIVIL APPEAL NO. 13408 OF 2024

             OM PRAKASH GUPTA ALIAS LALLOOWA
             (NOW DECEASED) & ORS.                                          … APPELLANTS

                                                       VERSUS

             SMT. ROOPRANI (NOW DECEASED)                                   …RESPONDENT

                                                  JUDGMENT

DIPANKAR DATTA, J.

BRIEF RESUME OF FACTS

1. FACTS OF CIVIL APPEAL NO. 13407 OF 2024:

a. Satish Chandra instituted a suit1 against Om Prakash Gupta2 seeking specific
performance of an agreement3. The suit was dismissed by the Om Prakash

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/12846086/

1

Om Prakash Gupta Alias Lalloowa (Now ... vs Satish Chandra (Now Deceased) on 11 February, 2025

agreement to sell dated 8th February,1970 trial court4 vide judgment and order
dated 7th October, 1974. In first appeal5, Satish Chandra succeeded and the suit was
decreed vide judgment and decree dated 31st March, 1977. Aggrieved, Om Prakash
preferred a second appeal6 before the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad7. The
High Court granted stay of operation of the decree vide order dated 11th May, 1977.

b. Satish Chandra passed away on 2nd December 1996 during the pendency of the
second appeal. On 2nd January, 1997, his heirs moved an application for
substitution8. The High Court was informed of the death of Satish Chandra by the
heirs and prayer was made for their substitution. Paragraph no. 1 of the application
for substitution contained details as follows:

“That in the above noted second appeal, the sole respondent Satish Chandra son of
Sri Ram died on 2.12.1996 leaving behind the following heirs and legal
representatives: -

1/1 Anil Kumar 1/2 Vimal Kumar 1/3 Manoj Kumar” Prayer in the said application is
as follows:

“It is prayed that the Hon’ble Court may be pleased to delete the name of the
respondent no. 1 Sri Satish Chandra from array of the parties and on his place the
following:

1/1 Anil Kumar 1/2 Vimal Kumar 1/3 Manoj Kumar All sons of Late Sri Satish
Chandra R/o Gandhi Tola, Nawabganj, Bareilly Be substituted as his heirs and legal
representatives” the court of the Civil Judge, Bareilly High Court, hereafter Civil
Miscellaneous Substitution Application No. 211 of 1997 c. Om Prakash died on 8th
December 2001.

d. From the sequence of orders passed in the second appeal between 17th March,
2004 and 8th December, 2006, it is seen that multiple opportunities were given to
counsel for Om Prakash to file an application for substitution. However, pendency of
the application for substitution filed by the heirs of Satish Chandra escaped the notice
of the High Court. e. Ultimately, the second appeal was ordered to have abated in the
whole vide order dated 2nd January 2007 on the ground that no application for
substitution was filed by Om Prakash or his heirs to bring on record the heirs/legal
representatives of Satish Chandra. f. In the year 2017, the heirs of Satish Chandra
initiated proceedings for execution of the decree9.

g .   P u t   o n   n o t i c e ,   t h e   h e i r s   o f   O m   P r a k a s h   p r e f e r r e d   a n   a p p l i c a t i o n   f o r
recall/restoration10 seeking recall of the aforesaid order recording abatement of the
second appeal. On the same day, they also filed an application for substitution11
along with an application for condonation of delay12.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/12846086/

2

Om Prakash Gupta Alias Lalloowa (Now ... vs Satish Chandra (Now Deceased) on 11 February, 2025

h. The restoration application was allowed by the High Court and the second appeal
restored to its original file and number vide order dated 25th May, 2018.

Civil Miscellaneous Restoration Application No. 2 of 2018 Civil Miscellaneous
Substitution Application No. 5 of 2018 Civil Miscellaneous Delay Condonation
Application No. 4 of 2018 i. Seeking recall of the said order, heirs of Satish Chandra
preferred an application for recall13 along with an application for condonation of
delay14. These applications were allowed vide order dated 11th January 2019, with
the result that the order restoring the second appeal to its original file upon setting
aside of abatement stood recalled. Liberty was, however, reserved for the heirs of Om
Prakash to file an application for setting aside abatement.

j. While hearing the pending applications, referred to in paragraph g.

(supra), the High Court did not find sufficient reasons for condoning the delay in
filing the application for substitution. Resultantly, such application filed by the heirs
of Om Prakash along with the application for substitution was dismissed vide
impugned order dated 27th February 2019.

k. Taking exception to such order of the High Court, the heirs of Om Prakash have filed Civil Appeal
No. 13407 of 2024.

2. FACTS OF CIVIL APPEAL NO. 13408 OF 2024:

a. Smt. Rooprani15, Satish Chandra’s wife, instituted a suit16 for specific
performance of an agreement17 against Om Prakash and his minor sons (represented
through their mother). The suit was dismissed vide order dated 7th October, 1974 by
the Trial Court18. In an appeal19 preferred by Recall Application No. 7 of 2018
Rooprani agreement to Sell dated 7th June, 1970 Court of Civil Judge, Bareilly
Rooprani, the suit was decreed vide judgment and decree dated 31st March, 1977. Om
Prakash carried the first appellate decree in a second appeal20. The High Court
granted stay of operation of the impugned decree vide order dated 11th May, 1977.

b. After the death of Rooprani on 18th May, 1991, an application21 was filed on or
about November/December, 1992 by deceased Rooprani’s son, Anil Kumar, praying
that the High Court may take note of an alteration made by Om Prakash and his heirs
in the decretal property. In the affidavit accompanying such application, it was stated
that the deponent (Anil Kumar) is one of the sons of deceased Rooprani (plaintiff).
The same is reproduced below:

“That the deponent is one of the sons of the deceased respondent Smt. Roop Rani and
conversant with the facts deposed.” c. As noted earlier, Om Prakash passed away on
8th December, 2001. d. The second appeal of Om Prakash was dismissed for
non-prosecution22 as the counsel for the remaining appellants (the heirs of Om

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/12846086/

3

Om Prakash Gupta Alias Lalloowa (Now ... vs Satish Chandra (Now Deceased) on 11 February, 2025

Prakash) submitted that his clients were not responding. e. After almost 11 (eleven)
years, on 15th September, 2017, the legal representatives of Rooprani filed for
execution of the decree23. f. This is when the heirs of Om Prakash, on 5th April,
2018, filed an application24 seeking recall of the order dismissing the second appeal
for vide order dated 3rd November, 2006 Recall/ Restoration Application No. 2 of
2018 in Second Appeal No. 884 of 1977 want of prosecution. They filed an
application25, 40 (forty) days later, praying for their substitution as heirs of deceased
Om Prakash, along with an application seeking condonation of delay26. g. Finding
that sufficient cause had been shown, the High Court allowed the recall application
and restored the second appeal to its original file and number vide order dated 25th
May, 2018.

h. Seeking recall of the aforesaid order, the heirs of Rooprani filed a recall
application27 which was dismissed by the High Court vide order dated 11th January,
2019. The High Court opined that restoration of the second appeal, in itself, did not
amount to setting aside of the abatement and unless abatement is set aside, the
second appeal is non-est in the eyes of law and no right will accrue to either side.

i. Thereafter, the impugned orders were passed by the High Court on 27th February,
2019. By the first order, the application by heirs of Om Prakash for condonation of
delay in filing the substitution application 28 was dismissed. The second order,
having regard to the first order, dismissed their application for substitution29. For
the reasons assigned in the first order, the High Court did not find sufficient reasons
to condone the delay. j. Taking exception to the above, the heirs of Om Prakash have
filed Civil Appeal No. 13408 of 2024.

PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THIS COURT Civil Miscellaneous Substitution Application
No. 5 of 2018 Civil Miscellaneous Application No. 4 of 2018 Recall Application No. 7
of 2018 C.M. Delay Condonation Application No.4 of 2018 C.M. Substitution
Application No.5 of 2018

3. A coordinate bench of this Court, on 12th July, 2019, granted permission to file the special leave
petitions and issued notice on such petitions as well as the accompanying applications for
substitution and the connected applications. Pursuant to service of notice, the heirs of Satish
Chandra and Rooprani entered appearance. Mr. Thomas Joseph, learned senior counsel and Mr.
Shekar Devessa, learned senior counsel represented the heirs of Om Prakash. Heirs of Rooprani
were represented by Mr. Raghenth Basant, learned senior counsel. While granting leave and
reserving judgment on these civil appeals, we had made an order allowing the applications for
substitution and the connected applications, filed in the present proceedings, subject to just
exceptions.

CONTENTIONS OF THE PARTIES

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/12846086/

4

Om Prakash Gupta Alias Lalloowa (Now ... vs Satish Chandra (Now Deceased) on 11 February, 2025

4. Learned senior counsel/counsel appearing for the parties have meticulously taken us through the
facts of both these appeals which, though not very complicated, are a bit extensive considering that
proceedings commenced in 1972-1973.

5. Learned senior counsel/counsel for the appellants have argued that the High Court fell in error on
both occasions by not granting the prayers of the appellants and having the two second appeals
heard on merits. According to them, procedural requirements have been allowed to steal a march
over substantive justice without duly appreciating the materials on record.

6. Per contra, Mr. Basant appearing for the respondents has assiduously contended that there is no
infirmity, far less manifest infirmity, in the impugned orders of the High Court and no interference
under Article 136 of the Constitution is warranted. He highlighted how Om Prakash was negligent in
pursuing the second appeals before the High Court. According to him, it well within the knowledge
of Om Prakash that Rooprani and then Satish Chandra passed away and who their heirs were. Lack
of due diligence by Om Prakash being writ large, he prayed that the longstanding dispute between
the parties be laid to rest by dismissing these appeals and leaving it open to the respondents to
pursue the execution applications in accordance with law, should the need arise.

ISSUES

7. The issue arising for decision in C.A. No.13407 of 2024 is, whether the High Court was justified in
dismissing the application for condonation of delay in filing the application for substitution and
could the second appeal be regarded as having abated.

8. In C.A. No. 13407 of 2024, whether the High Court was justified in passing the impugned orders
dismissing the applications filed by the appellants seeking substitution and condonation of delay is
the issue. ANALYSIS AND REASONS

9. The principles to guide courts while considering applications for setting aside abatement and
application for condonation of delay in filing the former application are laid down by this Court in
Perumon Bhagvathy Devaswom v. Bhargavi Amma30. An instructive passage from such decision
reads as follows:

“13. The principles applicable in considering applications for setting aside abatement
may thus be summarised as follows:

(i) The words ‘sufficient cause for not making the application within the period of
limitation’ should be understood and applied in a reasonable, pragmatic, practical
and liberal manner, depending upon the facts and circumstances of the case, and the
type of case. The words ‘sufficient cause’ in Section 5 of the Limitation Act should
receive a liberal construction so as to advance substantial justice, when the delay is
not on account of any dilatory tactics, want of bona fides, deliberate inaction or
negligence on the part of the appellant.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/12846086/

5

Om Prakash Gupta Alias Lalloowa (Now ... vs Satish Chandra (Now Deceased) on 11 February, 2025

(ii) In considering the reasons for condonation of delay, the courts are more liberal
with reference to applications for setting aside abatement, than other cases. While
the court will have to keep in view that a valuable right accrues to the legal
representatives of the deceased respondent when the appeal abates, it will not punish
an appellant with foreclosure of the appeal, for unintended lapses. The courts tend to
set aside abatement and decide the matter on merits, rather than terminate the
appeal on the ground of abatement.

(iii) The decisive factor in condonation of delay, is not the length of delay, but
sufficiency of a satisfactory explanation.

(iv) The extent or degree of leniency to be shown by a court depends on the nature of
application and facts and circumstances of the case. For example, courts view delays
in making applications in a pending appeal more leniently than delays in the
institution of an appeal. The courts view applications relating to lawyer’s lapses more
leniently than applications relating to litigant’s lapses. The classic example is the
difference in approach of courts to applications for condonation of delay in filing an
appeal and applications for condonation of delay in refiling the appeal after
rectification of defects.

(v) Want of ‘diligence’ or ‘inaction’ can be attributed to an appellant only when
something required to be done by him, is not done. When nothing is required to be
done, courts do not expect the appellant to be diligent. Where an appeal is admitted
by the High Court and is not expected to be listed for final hearing for a few years, an
appellant is not expected to visit the court or his lawyer every few weeks to ascertain
the position nor keep checking whether the contesting respondent is alive. He merely
awaits the call or information from his counsel about the listing of the appeal.”
(emphasis supplied in original) The aforesaid passage is followed by other instructive
passages too on special factors which have a bearing on what constitutes “sufficient
(2008) 8 SCC 321 cause”, with reference to delay in applications for setting aside
abatement and bringing the legal representatives on record. To the extent relevant for
decisions on these two appeals, the same are extracted hereunder:

“15. The first is whether the appeal is pending in a court where regular and periodical
dates of hearing are fixed. There is a significant difference between an appeal pending
in a subordinate court and an appeal pending in a High Court. In lower courts, dates
of hearing are periodically fixed and a party or his counsel is expected to appear on
those dates and keep track of the case. The process is known as ‘adjournment of
hearing’. ...

16. In contrast, when an appeal is pending in a High Court, dates of hearing are not
fixed periodically. Once the appeal is admitted, it virtually goes into storage and is
listed before the Court only when it is ripe for hearing or when some application
seeking an interim direction is filed. It is common for appeals pending in High Courts

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/12846086/

6

Om Prakash Gupta Alias Lalloowa (Now ... vs Satish Chandra (Now Deceased) on 11 February, 2025

not to be listed at all for several years.

(In some courts where there is a huge pendency, the non-hearing period may be as much as ten
years or even more.) When the appeal is admitted by the High Court, the counsel inform the parties
that they will get in touch as and when the case is listed for hearing. There is nothing the appellant is
required to do during the period between admission of the appeal and listing of the appeal for
arguments (except filing paper books or depositing the charges for preparation of paper books
wherever necessary). The High Courts are overloaded with appeals and the litigant is in no way
responsible for non-listing for several years. There is no need for the appellant to keep track whether
the respondent is dead or alive by periodical enquiries during the long period between admission
and listing for hearing. When an appeal is so kept pending in suspended animation for a large
number of years in the High Court without any date being fixed for hearing, there is no likelihood of
the appellant becoming aware of the death of the respondent, unless both lived in the immediate
vicinity or were related or the court issues a notice to him informing the death of the respondent.

17. The second circumstance is whether the counsel for the deceased respondent or the legal
representative of the deceased respondent notified the court about the death and whether the court
gave notice of such death to the appellant. Rule 10-A of Order 22 casts a duty on the counsel for the
respondent to inform the court about the death of such respondent whenever he comes to know
about it. When the death is reported and recorded in the order-sheet/proceedings and the appellant
is notified, the appellant has knowledge of the death and there is a duty on the part of the appellant
to take steps to bring the legal representative of the deceased on record, in place of the deceased.
The need for diligence commences from the date of such knowledge. If the appellant pleads
ignorance even after the court notifies him about the death of the respondent that may be an
indication of negligence or want of diligence.

18. The third circumstance is whether there is any material to contradict the claim of the appellant,
if he categorically states that he was unaware of the death of the respondent. In the absence of any
material, the court would accept his claim that he was not aware of the death.

19. Thus it can safely be concluded that if the following three conditions exist, the courts will usually
condone the delay, and set aside the abatement (even though the period of delay is considerable and
a valuable right might have accrued to the opposite party—LRs of the deceased—on account of the
abatement):

(i) The respondent had died during the period when the appeal had been pending
without any hearing dates being fixed;

(ii) Neither the counsel for the deceased respondent nor the legal representatives of
the deceased respondent had reported the death of the respondent to the court and
the court has not given notice of such death to the appellant;

(iii) The appellant avers that he was unaware of the death of the respondent and
there is no material to doubt or contradict his claim.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/12846086/

7

Om Prakash Gupta Alias Lalloowa (Now ... vs Satish Chandra (Now Deceased) on 11 February, 2025

(emphasis supplied)

10. Having the benefit of the aforesaid pertinent guiding principles, we also consider it prudent to
dwell on another matter of some importance which quite frequently this Court is called upon to
consider. It is the appropriate sequence in which remedies available to have an order for setting
aside abatement of a suit should be pursued. This discussion is necessitated in view of the facts in
C.A. No.13408 of 2024 revealing that the appellants had applied for substitution and an application
for condonation of delay in filing the former application was filed, without there being an
application for setting aside the abatement.

11. Rule 1 of Order XXII, CPC provides that when a party to a suit passes away, the suit will not abate
if the right to sue survives. In instances where the right to sue does survive, the procedure for
b r i n g i n g   o n   r e c o r d   t h e   l e g a l   r e p r e s e n t a t i v e ( s )   o f   t h e   p l a i n t i f f / a p p e l l a n t   a n d   t h e
defendant/respondent are provided in Rules 3 and 4, respectively, of Order XXII. The suit/appeal
automatically abates when an application to substitute the legal representative(s) of the deceased
party is not filed within the prescribed limitation period of 90 days from the date of death, as
stipulated by Article 120 of the Limitation Act, 1963. It could well be so that death of a
defendant/respondent is not made known to the plaintiff/appellant within 90 days, being the period
of limitation. Does it mean that the suit or appeal will not abate? The answer in view of the scheme
of Order XXII cannot be in the negative. In the event the plaintiff/appellant derives knowledge of
death immediately after the suit/appeal has abated, the remedy available is to file an application
seeking setting aside of the abatement, the limitation wherefor is stipulated in Article 121 and which
allows a period of 60 days. Therefore, between the 91st and the 150th day after the death, one has to
file an application for setting aside the abatement. On the 151 st day, this remedy becomes
time-barred; consequently, any application seeking to set aside the abatement must then be
accompanied by a request contained in an application for condonation of delay under Section 5 of
the Limitation Act in filing the application for setting aside the abatement. Thus, the total
time-frame for filing an application for substitution and for setting aside abatement, as outlined in
Articles 120 and 121 of the Limitation Act, is 150 (90 + 60) days. The question of condonation of
delay, through an application under Section 5 of the Limitation Act, arises only after this period and
not on the 91st day when the suit/appeal abates. From our limited experience on the bench of this
Court, we have found it somewhat of a frequent occurrence that after abatement of the suit and after
the 150th day of death, an application is filed for condonation of delay in filing the application for
substitution but not an application seeking condonation of delay in filing the application for setting
aside the abatement. The proper sequence to be followed, therefore, is an application for
substitution within 90 days of death and if not filed, to file an application for setting aside the
abatement within 60 days and if that too is not filed, to file the requisite applications for substitution
and setting aside the abatement with an accompanying application for condonation of delay in filing
the latter application, i.e., the application for setting aside the abatement. Once the court is satisfied
that sufficient cause prevented the plaintiff/appellant from applying for setting aside the abatement
within the period of limitation and orders accordingly, comes the question of setting the abatement.
That happens as a matter of course and following the order for substitution of the deceased
defendant/respondent, the suit/appeal regains its earlier position and would proceed for a
trial/hearing on merits. Be that as it may.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/12846086/

8

Om Prakash Gupta Alias Lalloowa (Now ... vs Satish Chandra (Now Deceased) on 11 February, 2025

12. We proceed with C.A. No.13407 of 2024 first.

13. Having regard to the facts noticed above, this appeal would require us to decide whether the
heirs of Om Prakash were required to file a separate application for substitution when, admittedly,
an application for substitution (Civil Misc. Substitution Application No. 211 of 1997) had previously
been filed by the heirs of Satish Chandra. If the answer is in the negative, the impugned orders and
also the order dated 2nd January 2007 (vide which the second appeal was dismissed as abated) will
have to be set aside, since dismissal of a second appeal as abated despite pendency of a valid
substitution application would be bad in law.

14. Order XXII of the Code of Civil Procedure31 is titled DEATH, MARRIAGE AND INSOLVENCY
OF PARTIES. Rule 4 thereof lays down the procedure in case of death of one of several defendants
or of sole defendant. It is clear on perusal of such rule that it does not expressly provide who
between the parties to a civil suit is to present an application for substitution.

15. In Union of India v. Ram Charan32, this Court held:

“10. It is not necessary to consider whether the High Court applied its earlier Full
Bench decision correctly or not when we are to decide the main question urged in this
appeal and that being the first contention. Rules 3 and 4 of Order 22 CPC lay down
respectively the procedure to be followed in case of death of one of several plaintiffs
when the right to sue does not survive to the surviving plaintiffs alone or that of the
sole plaintiff when the right to sue survives or of the death of one several defendants
or of sole defendant in similar circumstances. The procedure requires an application
for the making of the legal representatives of the deceased plaintiff or defendant a
party to the suit. It does not say who is to present the application. Ordinarily it would
be the plaintiff as by the abatement of the suit the defendant stand to gain. However,
an application is necessary to be made for the purpose. If no such application is made
within the time allowed by law, the suit abates so far as the deceased plaintiff is
concerned or as against the deceased defendant. The effect of such an abatement on
the suit of the surviving plaintiffs or the suit against the surviving defendants
depends on other considerations as held by this Court in State of Punjab v. Nathu
Ram [AIR 1962 SCR 89] and Jhandha Singh v. Gurmukh Singh [CA No. 344 of 1956
decided on April 10, 1962]. Anyway, that question does not arise in this case as the
sole respondent had died.” (emphasis supplied)

16. The law, laid down in Ram Charan (supra), is clear. There seems to be no legal requirement that
on the death of a defendant, an application for substitution in all cases has to be made by the
plaintiff only and that, any application, made by the heir(s)/legal representative(s) of the CPC AIR
1964 SC 215 deceased defendant seeking an order to allow him/them step into the shoes of the
deceased defendant and to contest the suit, cannot be considered. Once an application has been
made by either party and the court has been informed about the death of a party and who the
heir(s)/legal representative(s) he has left behind, the only thing that remains for the court is to pass
an order substituting the heir(s)/legal representative(s). Such being the case, we have no doubt in

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/12846086/

9

Om Prakash Gupta Alias Lalloowa (Now ... vs Satish Chandra (Now Deceased) on 11 February, 2025

holding that the application moved by the heirs of Satish Chandra (Civil Misc. Substitution
Application No. 211 of 1997), whereby the court was informed by them of his death and the heirs
that he had left behind, amounted to an application for substitution which was legally permissible
and valid and deserved consideration.

17. According to Mr. Basant, the application filed by the heirs of Satish Chandra was an application
intimating the death of Satish Chandra under Order XXII Rule 10-A, CPC and it was not an
application under Rule 4 thereof; thus, there being no valid and proper application for substitution,
the appeal was rightly held to have abated.

18. We find no force in the argument advanced by Mr. Basant. The application filed by the heirs of
Satish Chandra was registered as a substitution application and the prayer was also for deletion of
the name of Satish Chandra and substitution of his three sons in his place. In view thereof and
having regard to the law laid down in Ram Charan (supra), we hold that an application having been
filed by the heirs of Satish Chandra, the heirs of Om Prakash were not legally obliged to apply
separately for substitution.

19. In our opinion, the law not having expressly mandated that an application for substitution has to
be filed by the plaintiff/appellant upon receiving intimation of death, requiring a formal application
from the plaintiff only will serve no tangible purpose. A justice-oriented approach has to be followed
in interpreting the provisions of the CPC is the well settled law. Reference may usefully be made to
the decision in Chinnammal v. P. Arumugham33, where it was held:

“17. It is well to remember that the Code of Civil Procedure is a body of procedural
law designed to facilitate justice and it should not be treated as an enactment
providing for punishments and penalties. The laws of procedure should be so
construed as to render justice wherever reasonably possible. It is in our opinion, not
unreasonable to demand restitution from a person who has purchased the property
in court auction being aware of the pending appeal against the decree.” (emphasis
supplied)

20. The High Court having been duly informed of the death of Satish Chandra, and substitution
having been prayed by the heirs of the deceased, it ought to have proceeded to consider such
application and pass an order bringing the heirs of the deceased respondent on record. This, the
High Court omitted to order, perhaps, due to inadvertence whereby pendency of the application for
substitution filed by the heirs of Satish Chandra escaped its notice.

21. Therefore, the order dated 2nd January 2007 vide which the second appeal was dismissed as
having abated cannot sustain and will have to (1990) 1 SCC 513 be set aside. The said order, though
not under challenge before this Court, there is no bar for this Court to erase defective orders by
setting them aside, even in the absence of any challenge thereto. In A. Subash Babu v. State of
A.P.34, this Court discussed its powers to make any order to cure a manifest illegality and to avoid
travesty of justice even in the absence of any challenge to such order, and proceeded to express as
follows:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/12846086/

10

Om Prakash Gupta Alias Lalloowa (Now ... vs Satish Chandra (Now Deceased) on 11 February, 2025

“58. There may be several reasons due to which the State might not have challenged
that part of the judgment of the learned Single Judge quashing the complaint filed by
Respondent 2 under Section 498-A of the Penal Code. So also because of several
reasons such as want of funds, distance, non- availability of legal advice, etc. the
original complainant might not have approached this Court to challenge that part of
the judgment of the learned Single Judge which is quite contrary to the law declared
by this Court. However, this Court while entertaining an appeal by grant of special
leave has the power to mould relief in favour of the respondents notwithstanding the
fact that no appeal is filed by any of the respondents challenging that part of the
order which is against them. To notice an obvious error of law committed by the High
Court and thereafter not to do anything in the matter would be travesty of justice.

59. This Court while disposing of an appeal arising out of grant of special leave can
make any order which justice demands and someone who has obtained an illegal
order would not be justified in contending before this Court that in the absence of any
appeal against an illegal order passed by the High Court the relief should not be
appropriately moulded by the Court or that the finding recorded should not be upset
by this Court.

x x x

66. Further, the powers under Article 136 can be exercised by the Supreme Court, in
favour of a party even suo motu when the Court is satisfied that compelling grounds
for its exercise exist. Where there is manifest injustice, a duty is enjoined upon this
Court to exercise its suo motu power by setting right the illegality in the judgment of
the High Court as it is well settled that illegality should not be allowed to be
perpetuated and failure by this Court to interfere with the same would amount to
allow illegality to be perpetuated.

67. When an apparent irregularity is found by this Court in the order passed by the
High Court, the Supreme Court cannot ignore substantive rights of a litigant while
dealing with the cause pending before it. There is no reason why the relief cannot be
and should not be appropriately moulded while disposing of an appeal arising by
grant of special leave under Article 136 of the Constitution.” (2011) 7 SCC 616
(emphasis supplied)

22. There is another equally important aspect, which merits our attention.

The second appeal was restored by the High Court vide order dated 25th May, 2018. This order,
restoring the second appeal, was recalled vide order dated 11th January 2019. The reason given was
that, in the absence of an application praying for setting aside the abatement, the second appeal
could not have been ordered to be restored.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/12846086/

11

Om Prakash Gupta Alias Lalloowa (Now ... vs Satish Chandra (Now Deceased) on 11 February, 2025

23. We find it difficult to agree with such reasoning. When an application praying for substitution
had been made, then, even assuming that it does not have an explicit prayer for setting aside the
abatement, such prayer could be read as inherent in the prayer for substitution in the interest of
justice. We draw inspiration for such a conclusion, having read the decision in Mithailal Dalsangar
Singh v. Annabai Devram Kini35. This Court reiterated the need for a justice-oriented approach in
such matters. Inter alia, it was held that prayer to bring on record heir(s)/legal representative(s) can
also be construed as a prayer for setting aside the abatement. The relevant passage reads as under:

“8. Inasmuch as the abatement results in denial of hearing on the merits of the case,
the provision of abatement has to be construed strictly. On the other hand, the prayer
for setting aside an abatement and the dismissal consequent upon an abatement,
have to be considered liberally. A simple prayer for bringing the legal representatives
on record without specifically praying for setting aside of an abatement may in
substance be construed as a prayer for setting aside the abatement. So also a prayer
for setting aside abatement as regards one of the plaintiffs can be construed as a
prayer for setting aside the abatement of the suit in its entirety. Abatement of suit for
failure to move an application for bringing the legal representatives on record within
the prescribed period of limitation is automatic and a specific order dismissing the
suit as abated is not called (2003) 10 SCC 691 for. Once the suit has abated as a
matter of law, though there may not have been passed on record a specific order
dismissing the suit as abated, yet the legal representatives proposing to be brought on
record or any other applicant proposing to bring the legal representatives of the
deceased party on record would seek the setting aside of an abatement. A prayer for
bringing the legal representatives on record, if allowed, would have the effect of
setting aside the abatement as the relief of setting aside abatement though not asked
for in so many words is in effect being actually asked for and is necessarily implied.
Too technical or pedantic an approach in such cases is not called for.

9. The courts have to adopt a justice-oriented approach dictated by the uppermost consideration
that ordinarily a litigant ought not to be denied an opportunity of having a lis determined on merits
unless he has, by gross negligence, deliberate inaction or something akin to misconduct, disentitled
himself from seeking the indulgence of the court. The opinion of the trial Judge allowing a prayer for
setting aside abatement and his finding on the question of availability of ‘sufficient cause’ within the
meaning of sub-rule (2) of Rule 9 of Order 22 and of Section 5 of the Limitation Act, 1963 deserves
to be given weight, and once arrived at would not normally be interfered with by superior
jurisdiction.

10. In the present case, … such an approach adopted by the Division Bench verges on too fine a
technicality and results in injustice being done. There was no order in writing passed by the court
dismissing the entire suit as having abated. The suit has been treated by the Division Bench to have
abated in its entirety by operation of law. For a period of ninety days from the date of death of any
party the suit remains in a state of suspended animation. And then it abates. The converse would
also logically follow. Once the prayer made by the legal representatives of the deceased plaintiff for
setting aside the abatement as regards the deceased plaintiff was allowed, and the legal

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/12846086/

12

Om Prakash Gupta Alias Lalloowa (Now ... vs Satish Chandra (Now Deceased) on 11 February, 2025

representatives of the deceased plaintiff came on record, the constitution of the suit was rendered
good; it revived and the abatement of the suit would be deemed to have been set aside in its entirety
even though there was no specific prayer made and no specific order of the court passed in that
behalf.” (emphasis supplied)

24. Hence, the impugned orders as well as the order dismissing the second appeal as abated, under
challenge in the first of the two appeals, is bad in law; the same deserve to be set aside.

25. Turning to the second of the two appeals, the facts are a little distinct.

26. The order of the High Court dated 27th February, 2019 records as follows:

“... this application was served on counsel for appellants on 12.11.1992, therefore, it
cannot be said that appellants were not aware of death of sole plaintiff-respondent
and this fact also came to their notice that aforesaid application was filed in this
court. Appellant 1 was also alive on that date, as admittedly he died in 2001, but no
substitution application was filed, therefore, appeal stood abated in 1992 itself. When
no attempt was made by appellant 1 himself for substitution and setting aside the
abatement, now appellants 2, 3 and 3 (sic, 4) cannot be allowed to take advantage
subsequently. More so, mother of appellants 2, 3 and 4 who represented appellants in
filing appeal, was also aware of pendency of the case and it is not the case of
appellants that she never told them about pendency of the case.”

27. In this context, it is fruitful to refer to Order XXII Rule 10-A, CPC. The same is reproduced below
for convenience:

“Wherever a pleader appearing for a party to the suit comes to know of the death of
that party, he shall inform the Court about it, and the Court shall there upon give
notice of such death to the other party, and, for this purpose, the contract between
the pleader and the deceased party shall be deemed to subsist.”

28. Rule 10-A was not originally contained in CPC, but was inserted in the CPC in the year 1976 for a
noble purpose which has been acknowledged by this Court in multiple decisions. The first of such
decisions, perhaps, is Gangadhar v. Raj Kumar36 where this Court held:

“3. … Rule 10-A which has been added in Order XXII of the Code of Civil Procedure
by the Amending Act of 1976 provides that when a pleader appearing for a party to
the suit comes to know of the death of the party, he shall inform the court about it
and the court thereafter shall issue notice to the other party. In the case of an appeal,
the word ‘suit’ has to be read as ‘appeal’. This provision was introduced specifically to
mitigate the hardship arising from the fact that the party to an appeal may not come
to know about the death of the other party during the pendency of the appeal but
when it is awaiting its turn for being heard. The appeal lies dormant for years on end
and one cannot expect the other party to be a watch-dog for day-to-day survival of the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/12846086/

13

Om Prakash Gupta Alias Lalloowa (Now ... vs Satish Chandra (Now Deceased) on 11 February, 2025

other party. When the appeal on being notified for hearing is activated, knowledge
occasionally dawns that one or the other party has not only died, but the time for
substitution has run out and the appeal has abated. In order to see that
administration of justice is not thwarted by such technical procedural lapse, this very
innovative provision has been introduced, whereby, a duty is cast upon the learned
advocate appearing for the party who comes to know about the death of the party to
intimate to the court about the death of the party represented by the learned counsel
and for this purpose a deeming fiction is introduced that (1984) 1 SCC 121 the
contract between dead client and lawyer subsists to the limited extent after the death
of the client.

(emphasis supplied)

29. Rule 10-A casts a duty upon a pleader appearing for a party to the suit to intimate the court
about the death of such party. It further provides that once the court is informed by the pleader of a
party that he is no more, the court “shall” notify the opposing party of the death. A straightforward
interpretation of this rule would suggest that the court's obligation to issue notice to the other party
is indeed mandatory. Nonetheless, this obligation may not arise in all circumstances. One notable
exception could be when the information regarding the party's death is conveyed to the court in the
presence of the opposing party's pleader or is documented by the court in the order sheet. In such
cases, if the pleader of the concerned party (and consequently the party itself) has already been
notified, issuing a further notice from the court would not serve any substantial purpose other than
being an exercise by way of abundant caution. Therefore, in the aforementioned scenario, the
absence of a notice from the court would not imply a failure to comply with Rule 10A, suggesting
that it is not “always mandatory”.

30. Had the circumstance outlined above applied to the present appeal, we would have likely
concluded that Rule 10-A has been substantially complied with. However, the facts in this instant
case are not particularly clear-cut. As previously noted, in the affidavit submitted alongside an
application by Anil Kumar which primarily was not intended to inform the court of Rooprani's
death, it was stated that he is “one of the sons of deceased Rooprani”. The inclusion of such
pertinent information within an inconspicuous section of an application meant for a different
purpose without the date of death does not, in our considered view, constitute sufficient compliance
with Rule 10-A either by the pleader of the deceased or amount to due notice to Om Prakash by the
court (without such death being recorded in any order passed subsequently in the presence of
counsel for Om Prakash). To rule otherwise would undermine the intention of Rule 10-A, which
mandates the clear communication of information relating to death of a party which, obviously,
would mean not only the factum of death being conveyed but also the date of death since limitation
to apply under Article 120 of the Limitation Act, 1963 for substitution begins to run from the date of
death. It is implicit that this information must be conveyed in a straightforward and unambiguous
manner to enable the plaintiff or the appellant, as the case may be, to take steps and apply for
substitution. No advantage should be allowed to be derived if such death is, by clever drafting,
sought to be disclosed in an obscure corner of an application seeking to bring to the notice of the
court an alleged subsequent development resulting in violation of a court’s order.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/12846086/

14

Om Prakash Gupta Alias Lalloowa (Now ... vs Satish Chandra (Now Deceased) on 11 February, 2025

31. Having held that the manner of conveying information of the death of Rooprani was not wholly
in accordance with Rule 10-A, information through the application of Anil Kumar cannot operate
adversely against Om Prakash. Had Om Prakash been noticed by the High Court in due compliance
with Rule 10-A, yet, did not file an application for substitution, he would be estopped from pleading
ignorance and we would have been inclined to hold otherwise. This not being the case, the
abatement of the second appeal ought to be set aside.

32. Although no application praying for setting aside of abatement was ever made by the appellants
before the High Court, but as held in Mithailal (supra), prayer for setting aside of abatement can be
read in a prayer for substitution. Accordingly, the abatement of the second appeal can and ought to
be set aside for ends of justice.

CONCLUSION

33. For the foregoing reasons, the appeals merit success.

34. While allowing Civil Appeal No. 13407 of 2024, the application for substitution37 filed by the
heirs of Satish Chandra is ordered to succeed. We set aside the order dismissing the second
appeal38 as abated. The said appeal is restored to its original file and number. Cause-title of the said
appeal shall be amended to record the death of Satish Chandra and his heirs - Anil Kumar, Vimal
Kumar and Manoj Kumar - shall be brought on record as substituted respondents.

35. Insofar as Civil Appeal No. 13408 of 2024 is concerned, the impugned orders stand set aside.
The abatement of the second appeal is also set aside. Resultantly, the prayer for substitution stands
granted. Cause- title of the said appeal shall be amended to record the death of Rooprani and her
heirs – Anil Kumar, Vimal Kumar and Manoj Kumar - shall be Civil Miscellaneous Substitution
Application No. 211 of 1997 brought on record as substituted respondents in the second appeal.

Consequently, Civil Appeal No. 13408 of 2024 is allowed.

36. Having regard to the long lapse of time ever since the second appeals were presented before the
High Court, that the original parties are now dead and that the suits were for specific performance of
contracts for sale, we request the roster bench of the High Court to consider the second appeals on
priority and decide the same, subject to its convenience, preferably within 6 (six) months from date.

37. There shall be no order for costs.

………..…………………J. (DIPANKAR DATTA) …………….…………..………………J. (PRASHANT KUMAR
MISHRA) NEW DELHI;

11th FEBRUARY, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/12846086/

15

