Omi @ Omkar Rathore vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 3 January, 2025

Omi @ Omkar Rathore vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 3
January, 2025

                                                                    1

                                                                                                   REPORTABLE
2025 INSC 27                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                         EXTRAORDINARY APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                             SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRL.) No(s). 17781 OF 2024

        OMI @ OMKAR RATHORE & ANR.                                                             Petitioner(s)

                                                                   VERSUS

        THE STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH & ANR.                                                     Respondent(s)

                                                                 O R D E R

1. This petition arises from the judgment and order passed by the High Court of Madhya Pradesh at
Gwalior dated 23-10-2024 in Criminal Revision No.3172/2022, by which the High Court rejected
the revision application filed by the petitioners – herein and thereby affirmed the order passed by
the 4 th Additional Sessions Judge, Gwalior in Sessions Trial No.233/2018 summoning the
petitioners – herein to face the trial for the offence of murder in exercise of powers under Section
319 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

2. The First Information Report bearing Crime No.96/18 came to be registered with the Padav
Police Station, District Gwalior for the offence punishable under Sections 302, 307, 147, 148 and 149
of the Indian Penal Code (for, short the “IPC”).

3. The FIR came to be registered in all against seven individuals. The FIR includes the name of the
two petitioners – herein.

Date: 2025.01.06 15:35:27 IST Reason:

4. At the end of the investigation, the Investigating Officer filed a closure report so far as the two
petitioners – herein are concerned. Against the other accused persons, the charge-sheet was filed for
the offences enumerated above.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/111135998/

1

Omi @ Omkar Rathore vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 3 January, 2025

5. The Trial Court started recording oral evidence. The original first informant – PW3 stepped into
the box. In his examination-in- chief, he reiterated what he narrated in the FIR.

6. In his examination-in-chief the PW3 – Raghvendra Tomar, deposed as under :-

“1. The date of the incident is 20.02.2018. I had gone to the District Court with
Abhishek Tomar for appearing in a case. While returning after hearing, Pankaj
Sikarwar, Veeru Tomar in an Apache vehicle, Sonu Rathore, Omi Rathore, Ravindra
Sikarwar, Vijay Bhadoriya and Amit Bhadoriya in a Safari car surrounded us near the
LIC office at Tansen Nagar Road. After surrounding us, Pankaj Sikarwar shot at us
with a pistol which hit Abhishek in his head. The second shot was fired by Veeru
Tomar which hit Abhishek in the stomach. Then Sonu Rathore, Omi Rathore,
Ravindra Sikarwar, Vijay Bhadoriya, Amit Bhadoriya, all of them together shot
Abhishek with the common intention of killing him. Then Raman and Sanjay came
from behind on a bike and tried to save Abhishek. All these people fired at them too.
After firing, these people fled from the place of occurrence.

2. After this we called an ambulance. As soon as the ambulance arrived, the police
also arrived on the spot. As soon as the police arrived, we brought Abhishek to Sahara
Hospital by an ambulance. In Sahara Hospital, the doctors declared Abhishek dead.
As soon as all his family members arrived then his body was taken for postmortem. I
lodged a Dehatinalishi, which is Ex.P/10, whereupon A to A part bears my signature.
First Information Report was registered on the basis of Dehatinalishi. The map
panchayatnama was prepared before me which is Ex.P/11, on which A to A part bears
my signature. Police called me to the police station and questioned me and took my
statement. I am able to identify the accused persons. Among the accused persons
produced through VC of Gwalior jail, I recognize accused Veeru Tomar, but I do not
know the remaining accused Rahul Rajawat and Anand Rathore. I do not recognize to
accused Banti alias Ajay produced through VC of Badwani jail.

Seeing the accused Prithviraj present in the court, the witness expressed that I do not recognize him.
I also do not recognize to the absent accused Gaurav. I do not know to Vikram by name; if he
appears in the Court then I can recognize him.”

7. Thus, it appears that in the examination-in-chief, the original first informant categorically
deposed against the two petitioners – herein and also attributed a specific overt act.

8. Relying on the oral evidence of PW-3, an application was filed under Section 319 of the Code to
summon the two petitioners as accused for the purpose of facing the trial along with the other
co-accused.

9. The petitioners being dissatisfied with the order passed by the Trial Court summoning them to
face the trial preferred Criminal Revision Application before the High Court. The High Court
rejected the revision application and thereby affirmed the order passed by the Trial Court

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/111135998/

2

Omi @ Omkar Rathore vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 3 January, 2025

summoning the petitioners in exercise of its powers under Section 319 of the CrPC.

10. In such circumstances, referred to above, the petitioners are here before this Court with the
present petition.

11. We have heard Mr. Anil Kaushik, the learned Senior counsel appearing for the petitioners.

12. In Ramesh Chandra Srivastava v. State of U.P. & Another (2021) 12 SCC 608 while this Court has
approved of relying upon deposition which has not suffered cross-examination for the purpose of
invoking Section 319 CrPC, it is relevant to note the standards which have been fixed by this Court
for invoking the power under Section 319 CrPC. The statement of law in this regard is contained in
paras 105 and 106 respectively of Hardeep Singh [Hardeep Singh v. State of Punjab, (2014) 3 SCC
92 :(2014) 2 SCC (Cri) 86] :(SCC p. 138) “105. Power under Section 319CrPC is a discretionary and
an extraordinary power. It is to be exercised sparingly and only in those cases where the
circumstances of the case so warrant. It is not to be exercised because the Magistrate or the Sessions
Judge is of the opinion that some other person may also be guilty of committing that offence. Only
where strong and cogent evidence occurs against a person from the evidence led before the court
that such power should be exercised and not in a casual and cavalier manner.

106. Thus, we hold that though only a prima facie case is to be established from the evidence led
before the court, not necessarily tested on the anvil of cross-examination, it requires much stronger
evidence than mere probability of his complicity. The test that has to be applied is one which is more
than prima facie case as exercised at the time of framing of charge, but short of satisfaction to an
extent that the evidence, if goes unrebutted, would lead to conviction. In the absence of such
satisfaction, the court should refrain from exercising power under Section 319 CrPC. In Section 319
CrPC the purpose of providing if ‘it appears from the evidence that any person not being the accused
has committed any offence’ is clear from the words ‘for which such person could be tried together
with the accused.’ The words used are not ‘for which such person could be convicted’. There is,
therefore, no scope for the court acting under Section 319 CrPC to form any opinion as to the guilt of
the accused.”

13. The test as laid down by the Constitution Bench of this Court for invoking the powers under
Section 319 CrPC inter alia includes the principle that only when strong and cogent evidence occurs
against a person from the evidence the power under Section 319 CrPC should be exercised. The
power cannot be exercised in a casual and cavalier manner. The test to be applied, as laid down by
this Court, is one which is more than prima facie which is applied at the time of framing of charges.
It will all depend upon the evidence which is tendered in a given case as to whether there is a strong
ground within the meaning of para 105 of Hardeep Singh (supra)referred to above.

14. The only argument canvassed before us is that the Trial Court before summoning the petitioners
as accused in exercise of its powers under Section 319 of the CrPC should have taken into
consideration the closure report filed by the I.O. exonerating the petitioners from the alleged
offence. According to the learned counsel, the Trial Court as well as the High Court should not have
overlooked the report because the report clearly states that the two petitioners – herein are in no

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/111135998/

3

Omi @ Omkar Rathore vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 3 January, 2025

manner connected with the alleged crime.

15. The closure report is on the record of this case. The relevant portion of the closure report reads
thus:

“Since the offence under section-302,307,147,148,149,120B IPC & 25/27 Arms Act
was found proved against Accused persons Gajendra alias Gadra S/o Ramjilal Koli
(Mahor) aged 25 years resident of Tundila Police station Malanpur , Bhind and Pussu
alias Pushpendra Bhadoriya son of Yogendra Singh Bhadoriya aged 26 years, R/o
Kashi Naresh ki Gali, P.S. Kilagate Gwalior, so issuing the supplementary
chargesheet No.86D/2018 on 08.11.2020 , it was produced before the court of
respected CJM Sir Gwalior vide missal No. 1776/18 on 09/11.2020.

That the complainant Raghvendra Singh Tomar has got written the names of Pankaj
Sikarwar, Ravindra Sikarwar, Sonu Rathore, Omi alias Omkar Rathore, Vijay
Bhadoriya, Amit Bhadoriya in the FIR. During the investigation, applications were
given in the superior office by Poonam Rathore, Rajendra Singh Bhadoriya, Santosh
Singh Sikarwar who are the family members of aforesaid persons. Action was taken
by including the applications in the investigation. During the proceedings, CDR and
statements of Smt. Poonam Rathore, Rajendra Singh Bhadoriya, Santosh Singh
Sikarwar, Rakesh alias Banti Mishra, Mukesh Bhadoriya, Mahesh Singh alias Pintu
Shikarwar, Rajabeti Tomar, Anita Sikarwar, Girija Devi Sikarwar, Dharmendra Singh
Parihar, Vinod Nagar, Shambhu Singh Parihar, Bharat Singh Parihar, Narayan
Chhawda, Dharmendra Gaud, Anurag alias Cheeku Rine were recorded and records
relating to FIR of named accused persons and complainant in the case in various
police stations were collected. It was found suspicious the presence of the above
named accused at the scene of incident. Presently sufficient evidence is not available
against them.

Statement of witness Rajender Singh Bhadoriya was recorded regarding presence of
accused Vijay Bhadoria and Amit Bhadoriya in different place from the incident.
Applicant Rajendra Singh Bhadoriya stated in his statement that he had three sons,
the eldest being Ajay Bhadoria, second son Sanjay Bhadoria both are mentally
handicapped and third son was Suraj Bhadoria who was murdered on the door of my
house on 21.10.2013 by Abhishek Tomar, Parimal Tomar, Manish Kori, Deepak Jat
and other here persons whose FIR was lodged under section 302 in police station
Gwalior. Abhishek Tomar was the main accused, he had shot a bullet to my son Suraj.
Amit Bhadoriya is a witness in a case of my son Suraj and Vijay Singh Bhadoria is
family uncle (Tau) of Suraj. Amit Bhadoria is with me in the case of my son Suraj.
Names of Amit and Vijay Bhadoria have been got written to put pressure in the case.
On the date of incident 20.02.2018, Amit Bhataria had gone to attend his duty in
Civil Hospital Morar at 7.30 am in the morning and he stayed there till 3.45 pm in the
evening, after that, he returned to his home Yadav Dharam Kanta where he stayed till
6:00 O’clock of evening and Vijay Bhadoria is posted with me and my guard

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/111135998/

4

Omi @ Omkar Rathore vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 3 January, 2025

Rajkumar Bhadoria HC 188 in 13th Battalion is posted in Gwalior. Sanjay Agarwal,
Uma Bauhan, Arvind Singh Kushwah R/o Indore were present in the wedding of my
friend Rakesh Vyas's brother-in-law's daughter in Kanak Garden at 2:00 pm, in
which all of we stayed till 3:30 pm and then went to Maharajpura Air Force Station to
drop Uma aunty. We stayed there till about 4:00 pm, after leaving to Uma Chauhan,
all of we went to Vijay Tomar's house behind Hotel Adityaj, we took tea there and we
stayed till 5:00 O’clock in the evening, writing the detailed statement, it was included
with CD, thus presence of accused persons Amit Bhadoria and Vijay Bhadoria has not
been found at the place of incident.

Statements of witnesses Pintu Sikarwar, Smt. Girja Devi, Raja beti and Anita Sikarwar were
recorded in respect of the presence of accused Pankaj Sikarwar and Ravindra Sikarwar apart from
the incident place. They told that Pankaj Sikarwar and Ravindra Sikarwar were sleeping at their
home at about 4.30 O’clock in the evening on 20.02.18and Witness Santosh Singh stated in his
statement that Pankaj Sikarwar and Ravindra Sikarwar were present at their home at 4.30 O’clock
in the evening on 20.02.18. Thereafter Pankaj Sikarwar and Ravindra Sikarwar reached at their side
(workplace) at Adityapuram and reached City Centre at 5:00 pm. Raghavendra Tomar, Ravindra
Chauhan and Sanjay Tomar used to have animosity with Pankaj and Ravindra.

That Pankaj Sikarwar had lodged a case Crime No. 22/17 under Section 307 of IPC against Raman
Chauhan, Manoj Kirar, Parmal Tomar and deceased Abhishek Tomar in police station Hajira in
which Pankaj was shot a bullet in which chargesheet has been produced before the court. Manoj
Kirar had lodged a cross case relating to same incident Crime No. 23/17 under section 307 against
Pankaj Sikarwar, Ravindra Shikarwar, Sonu Rathore and Pankaj’s brother Bhoora alias Omkar
Sikarwar. In which during investigation, due to not getting any evidence for chargesheet, FR was
issued. Raman Chauhan’s brother Neeraj Chauhan had lodged a case crime No. 275/17 under
Section 308,34 of IPC in PS Hajira on 15.06.17 against suspects Pankaj Sikarwar, Ravindra
Sikarwar, Sonu Rathore and Saurabh Rajawat and on 27.10.17, Sandeep Sikarwar who is
brother-in-law of Raman Chauhan had lodged a case Crime No. 534/10 under section 307 in PS
Gole Ka Mandir against Pankaj Sikarwar, Sonu Rathore and Ravindra Sikarwar in which
involvement of Pankaj Sikarwar, Sonu Rathore and Ravindra Sikarwar was not found, and
investigation was conducted by the C.S.P. Maharajpura Sir in his matter, it was disclosed in the
investigation that complainant Sandeep Sikarwar brother in law of Raman Chauhan had lodged the
names due to animosity. Pankaj had lodged a case bearing Crime No. 22/2017 under Section 307 of
IPC against Raghvendra Tomar’s brother Parmal Tomar, due to which, Raghvedra Tomar had got
the names of Vijay Bhadoria, Amit Bhadoria, Pankaj Sikarwar, Sonu Rathore, Ravindra Sikarwar
and Omi alias Omkar Rathor lodged for mounting pressure in the matter.

That the call details of 20.02.18 of Pankaj Sikarwar and Ravinder Sikarwar were obtained in which
at 15.08 pm at the time of occurrence of crime, tower location of Pankaj Sikarwar's mobile no.
9425187361 was in Rameshwari Nagar Gadaipura Gwalior from 16.15 to 16.45 pm and tower
location of Ravindra Sikarwar's Mobile No. 9754530830 was obtained in which it was found at
Rameshwari Nagar Gadaipura Gwalior from 14:00 and 16:48 pm, Pankaj Sikarwar has been
murdered in the area of police station Hazira.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/111135998/

5

Omi @ Omkar Rathore vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 3 January, 2025

That when the statement of Neeraj Mishra was recorded then he stated that on 20.02.18, he talked
with Ravindra Sikarwar at about 4.30 p.m. then Ravindra Sikarwar was at his home at that time of
the incident and witness Rakesh alias Banti Mishra told in his statement that the information was
received at about 4.00 O’clock in the evening on 20.02.18 that Abhishek Tomar has been murdered
then I reached to the house of Pankaj Sikarwar, Pankaj Sikarwar was sleeping at his home at that
time, I got awoke to Pankaj and told about the happening of incident then I went to Ravindra's
house with Pankaj, after that Ravindra and Pankaj went somewhere by a car. Similarly, the presence
of accused persons Pankaj Sikarwar and Ravindra Sikarwar has not been found at the scene of the
incident. That in connection with the presence of accused Sonu Rathore separate from the incident,
statement of witness Poonam Rathore wife of accused Sonu Rathore was recorded, who said in her
statement that on 20.02.18, my husband Sonu Rathore had gone to the shop named Subham Band
Rajakheda in village Padua Pura, Pinahat, district Agra at 10-30 O’clock in the morning by his
Innova car to get a band for the wedding of my nephew Annu alias Anupam, who was with the band
owner between 4:00 to 5:00 pm, the bill of the band is made in the name of my husband, the
statement of the shop owner named Vinod was recorded, who told in his statement that Sonu
Rathore was present at his shop Subham Band Rajakheda in Pinahat district Agra between 4:00 to
5:00 o’clock in the evening on 20.02.18 thus the presence of accused Sonu Rathore was not found at
the spot of incident.

That on 05.01.18, witness Santosh Singh Sikarwar appeared at the police station who had stated that
the CCTV footage of accused in the case Omi alias Omkar Rathore in the bank from 4:00 to 5:00 pm
on 20.02.18 was preserved in the bank. Thereafter correspondence was made with Bank and CCTV
footage was obtained in which Omi alias Omkar Rathore is seen present in the bank from 4:00 to
5:00 pm on 20.02.18, photos of which are attached in the diary. Similarly, the presence of Omi alias
Omkar Rathore was not found at the place of incident. The above mentioned facts have come to light
in the investigation conducted by the then investigating officer Inspector Santosh Singh.

That, after the transfer of Inspector Santosh Singh, further investigation of the case was conducted
by Inspector Kamlesh Prajapati of Police Station Padav, Inspector Sanju Kamle Officer Incharge of
Police Station padav, Inspector Anil Bhadauriya officer Incharge of Police Station Padav, Inspector
Prashant Yadav officer Incharge of Police Station Padav, S.I. Balbir Mawai officer Incharge of Police
Station Padav, Inspector Gyanendra Singh, officer Incharge, Police Station Padav, later on the
investigation of the case was done by me, Inspector Vivek Ashthana, Police Station Padav.

Another accused in the case Pankaj Sikarwar has been murdered earlier in area of police station
Hajira. Name of Pankaj Sikarwar is separated from this case. Death certificate of Pankaj Sikarwar is
included in this regard.

The above named accused persons are 01 - Vijay Bhadoria son of Faujdar Bhadoria resident of Kala
Mahal Char Shahar ka Naka, 02 - Amit Bhadoria son of Shiv Singh resident of Sadar, 03- Ravindra
Sikarwar son of Rambir Singh Sikarwar, 42 years, resident of Gopal Nagar Gadaipura, Birlanagar
Gwalior 04- Sonu Rathore son of late Shri Brijendra Singh Rathore, 39 years, resident of Char
Shahar Ka Naka, Ranipur Hajira Gwalior, 05. Omi alias Omkar Rathore son of late Shri Brajendra
Singh Rathore, age 45 years, resident of Dhar Shahar Naka Ranipur Hajira Gwalior, have not been

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/111135998/

6

Omi @ Omkar Rathore vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 3 January, 2025

found present at scene of incident. There is complete lack of evidence against the above accused
prersons. At present, no sufficient evidence is available against them for challan proceedings. After
obtaining permission from the Superintendent of Police, District Gwalior, Closure report was made
against the above accused persons on 04.03.2022. Which would be produced before the Honourable
Court.

Previously arrested accused persons in the case : Due to being found the offence proved against i.e.
1. Prithviraj alias Raj son of Vijay Singh Chauhan aged 20 years resident of Gudha Gudhi ka Naka
Kampu Gwalior, 2. Banty alias Ajay Bhadoriya son of Shyam Singh Bhadoriya aged 23 years,
Resident of Shitla Mata ke bagal ke Kanchmill Hajira Gwalior 3. Anand alias Annu Rathore son of
Naresh Rathore, aged 23 years, Resident Hanuman Chauraha opposite Gupta Coal Depot,
Laxmiganj Gwalior 4. Virendra alias Veeru Tomar son of Bahadur Singh Tomar, age 37 years,
resident of Indranagar Char Shahar ka Naka Hajira Gwalior

5. Gaurav Rana s/o Manoj Rana, aged 21 years, resident of village Udaipur Post Bijoli, Police Station
Bijol, District Gwalior 6. Rahul Rajawat son of Ravindra Rajawat, aged 26 years, resident of New
Colony No.-01, Kanchmill, Hajira Gwalior 7. Vikram Singh Rana son of Diwan Singh Rana, age 27
years, resident of village Bijoli, Gwalior 8. Surendra alias Meenu Rathore son of Pan Singh Rathore,
age 25 years, resident of Indranagar Vyas Wali Gali, Char Shahar ka Naka, Hajira Gwalior, 9.
Gajendra alias Gadra Koli alias Mahor son of Ramji Lal Koli, aged 25 years, resident of village
Tundila, Police Station Malanpur, District Bhind, 10. Pushpendra alias Pussu son of Gopendra Singh
Bhadoriya, age 26 years, resident of Kashi Naresh Ki Gali Kila gate Gwalior the crime was proved
against Kilagate Gwalior, a challan has already issued and produced before the honourable court.
Therefore the report is respectfully sent to your goodself.

                                             Sd/-     16.03.2022
                                        Officer in charge Police
                                        Station Padav, District
                                        Gwalior.”

16. We are not impressed with the submission as noted in para 14 above canvassed by the learned
Senior counsel for the simple reason that a person is named in the FIR by the complainant but the
police, after investigation finds no role of that particular person and files charge-sheet without
implicating him, the Court is not powerless and at the stage of summoning, if the Trial Court finds
that a particular person should be summoned as accused, even though not named in the
charge-sheet, it can do so.

17. In the aforesaid context, we may refer to a decision of this Court in the case of S. Mohammed
Ispahani v. Yogendra Chandak, (2017) 16 SCC 226 wherein the Court observed in Para 35 as under:-

“It needs to be highlighted that when a person is named in the FIR by the
complainant, but police, after investigation, finds no role of that particular person

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/111135998/

7

Omi @ Omkar Rathore vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 3 January, 2025

and files the charge-sheet without implicating him, the Court is not powerless, and at
the stage of summoning, if the trial court finds that a particular person should be
summoned as accused, even though not named in the charge-sheet, it can do so. At
that stage, chance is given to the complainant also to file a protest petition urging
upon the trial court to summon other persons as well who were named in the FIR but
not implicated in the charge-sheet. Once that stage has gone, the Court is still not
powerless by virtue of Section 319 CrPC. However, this section gets triggered when
during the trial some evidence surfaces against the proposed accused.”

18. Thus, even in a case where the stage of giving opportunity to the complainant to file a protest
petition urging upon the trial court to summon other persons as well who were named in the FIR
but not implicated in the charge-sheet has gone, in that case also, the Court is still not powerless by
virtue of Section 319 CrPC and even those persons named in the FIR but not implicated in the
charge- sheet can be summoned to face the trial provided during the trial some evidence surfaces
against the proposed accused.

19. It is relevant to note at this stage that the closure report filed by the police in the case on hand is
yet to be looked into by the court concerned. The same has not been accepted till this date. However,
the closure report now pales into insignificance in view of the order passed by the trial court under
Section 319 of the Cr.P.C. summoning the petitioners herein to force the trial. We may only add that
it would have been in fitness of things if the Court concerned would have looked into the closure
report at the earliest & passed an appropriate order one way or the other after hearing the
defacto-complainant. The Court should not keep the closure report pending for consideration for a
long time. Such report should be looked into promptly.

20. In the overall view of the matter, we are convinced that the High Court committed no error not
to speak of any error of law in passing the impugned order.

21. The principles of law as regards Section 319 of the CrPC may be summarised as under:

a. On a careful reading of Section 319 of the CrPC as well as the aforesaid two
decisions, it becomes clear that the trial court has undoubted jurisdiction to add any
person not being the accused before it to face the trial along with other accused
persons, if the Court is satisfied at any stage of the proceedings on the evidence
adduced that the persons who have not been arrayed as accused should face the trial.
It is further evident that such person even though had initially been named in the
F.I.R. as an accused, but not charge sheeted, can also be added to face the trial.

b. The trial court can take such a step to add such persons as accused only on the
basis of evidence adduced before it and not on the basis of materials available in the
charge- sheet or the case diary, because such materials contained in the charge sheet
or the case diary do not constitute evidence.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/111135998/

8

Omi @ Omkar Rathore vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 3 January, 2025

c. The power of the court under Section 319 of the CrPC is not controlled or governed
by naming or not naming of the person concerned in the FIR. Nor the same is
dependent upon submission of the chargesheet by the police against the person
concerned. As regards the contention that the phrase 'any person not being the
accused' occurred in Section 319 excludes from its operation an accused who has
been released by the police under Section 169 of the Code and has been shown in
column No. 2 of the charge sheet, the contention has merely to be stated to be
rejected. The said expression clearly covers any person who is not being tried already
by the Court and the very purpose of enacting such a provision like Section 319(1)
clearly shows that even persons who have been dropped by the police during
investigation but against whom evidence showing their involvement in the offence
comes before the Criminal Court are included in the said expression.

c. It would not be proper for the trial court to reject the application for addition of
new accused by considering records of the Investigating Officer. When the evidence
of complainant is found to be worthy of acceptance then the satisfaction of the
Investigating Officer hardly matters. If satisfaction of Investigating Officer is to be
treated as determinative then the purpose of Section 319 would be frustrated.

22. In the result, this petition fails and is hereby dismissed.

23. It is needless to clarify that it shall be open for the petitioners to raise all contentions available to
them in law before the Trial Court including placing reliance on the closure report whatever its
worth.

24. Pending applications, if any, also stand disposed of.

……………………………………………….J. (J.B. PARDIWALA) …………………………………………….J. (R.
MAHADEVAN) New Delhi.

3rd January, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/111135998/

9

