Patel Babubhai Manohardas vs The State Of Gujarat on 5 March, 2025

Patel Babubhai Manohardas vs The State Of Gujarat on 5 March,
2025

Author: Surya Kant

Bench: Surya Kant, Dipankar Datta

2025 INSC 322
                                                                        REPORTABLE

                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1388 OF 2014

                         PATEL BABUBHAI MANOHARDAS & ORS.              APPELLANT(S)

                                                   VERSUS

                         STATE OF GUJARAT                            RESPONDENT(S)

                                               JUDGMENT

UJJAL BHUYAN, J.

This appeal by special leave is directed against the judgment and order dated 17.12.2013 passed by
the High Court of Gujarat at Ahmedabad (briefly ‘the High Court’ hereinafter) in Criminal Appeal
No. 626 of 2011.

2. It may be mentioned that the four appellants are accused Nos. 1 to 4. They were convicted by the
Court of Additional Sessions Judge, Mehsana vide the judgment and 15:26:40 IST Reason:

order dated 12.05.2011 in Special Atrocity Case No. 53/2009 under Sections 306 and
114 of Indian Penal Code, 1860 (‘IPC’ for short) and sentenced to rigorous
imprisonment (RI) for 5 years and to pay a fine of Rs. 10,000.00 each with a default
stipulation.

3. Aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, appellants preferred Criminal Appeal No.
626 of 2011 before the High Court. State of Gujarat also filed Criminal Appeal No. 796 of 2011 for
enhancement of sentence. By the common judgment and order dated 17.12.2013, the High Court
dismissed the appeal of the appellants and affirmed the conviction and sentence imposed on the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/77724265/

1

Patel Babubhai Manohardas vs The State Of Gujarat on 5 March, 2025

appellants by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Mehsana (‘trial court’ for short). The appeal
filed by the State was also dismissed.

4. It is against the aforesaid judgment and order dated 17.12.2013 passed by the High Court that the
appellants preferred the related SLP (Crl.) No. 2809/2014. However, State did not challenge before
this Court dismissal of its appeal by the High Court.

5. This Court by order dated 07.04.2014 had issued notice both on the special leave petition as well
as on the prayer for bail. By order dated 04.07.2014, leave was granted. Thereafter, vide the order
dated 17.10.2014, this Court granted bail to appellant No. 4. Vide the order dated 11.05.2015,
appellant No. 1 was also granted bail. Thereafter, by the order dated 14.09.2015, appellant Nos. 2
and 3 were granted bail.

6. Prosecution case in brief is that one Jaybalaben lodged first information before the Mehsana
Taluka police station on 14.05.2009 stating that at 08:00 AM on 25.04.2009, she and her daughter
Priyanka had gone to the Amipura water park dispensary as she was working there. At around 01:00
PM, one Jayantibhai Kalidas, a neighbour, came to her dispensary and told her that her
mother-in-law was ill. On hearing this, she and her daughter came back home immediately in a
rickshaw. When she reached her house, she saw many people had gathered there. She went inside
the house and saw her husband Dashrathbhai Karsanbhai lying on a cot with his younger and elder
brothers standing nearby. Though she tried to revive him, he did not respond; he had already died.
As she started weeping, the ladies who were present there told her that her husband had consumed
poison. Foul smell of poison was coming from his mouth. First informant stated that her husband
was taken to the village dispensary where he was declared dead. Thereafter police came. After
completion of necessary paper works, body of her husband was taken to Mehsana Civil Hospital for
postmortem examination on completion of which the body was handed over to the family.

6.1. Jaybalaben continued with her narration. She stated that about a year ago, a case of
misappropriation was registered against her husband Dashrathbhai Karsanbhai in his office. She
and her elder brother-in-law Jayantibhai had asked her husband as to why he needed so much of
money to which the reply of her husband was that one cleaning worker in his office by the name
Geetaben had trapped him in a love scandal and thereafter started blackmailing him for money. It
was for this reason that he had to withdraw money from the office to give her.

6.2. When her elder brother-in-law Jayantibhai called Geetaben, her mother Jasiben, her husband
Dahyabhai and relative Babubhai Patel to return the money, they initially agreed to do so but did
not return. They also took away ornaments (jewellery).

6.3. Jaybalaben also stated that at the time of death of her husband, they found one note of two
pages from the pocket of her husband’s trouser which was shown to her by Jayantibhai, her elder
brother-in-law. She stated that from that note, it was apparent that Geetaben and her family
members were blackmailing her husband after taking various photographs and videos of him with
her in compromising position. She stated that her husband had also stolen ornaments (jewellery) of
her daughter and gave those to Geetaben and her family members. It was for this reason that her

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/77724265/

2

husband Dashrathbhai Karsanbhai had consumed poison.

Patel Babubhai Manohardas vs The State Of Gujarat on 5 March, 2025

7. The aforesaid complaint was registered as I.C.R. No. 107/2009 by the Mehsana Taluka police
station under Sections 306/114 of IPC read with Section 3(2)(5) of The Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 (‘the Prevention of Atrocities Act’ hereinafter).
The investigating officer on conclusion of investigation filed chargesheet against the appellants
before the Court of Chief Judicial Magistrate, Mehsana. As the case was triable by the Court of
Sessions, it was committed to the Court of Additional Sessions Judge, Mehsana (trial court) where
the case was numbered as Special Atrocities Case No. 53/2009. Prosecution examined as many as 14
witnesses and exhibited a number of documents to prove its case. On completion of prosecution
evidence, statements of the appellants were recorded under Section 313 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (Cr.P.C.). Appellants denied the prosecution case and alleged false implication.

8. On consideration of the oral as well as documentary evidence and after hearing the parties, trial
court vide the judgment and order dated 12.05.2011 convicted the appellants under Sections
306/114 of IPC but acquitted them of the charge under Section 3(2)(5) of the Prevention of
Atrocities Act. Upon such conviction, the trial court sentenced the appellants to undergo RI for 5
years and to pay fine of Rs. 10,000.00 each with a default stipulation for the offence punishable
under Sections 306/114 IPC.

9. Appellants assailed the aforesaid conviction and sentence of the trial court before the High Court
in Criminal Appeal No. 626 of 2011. As pointed out above, State also filed Criminal Appeal No.
796/2011 for enhancement of sentence.

10. High Court vide the judgment and order dated 17.12.2013 upheld the conviction and sentence of
the appellants and dismissed their appeal. High Court also did not find any good ground to enhance
the sentence. Consequently, the criminal appeal filed by the State was dismissed.

11. Learned counsel for the appellants submits that both the trial court and the High Court failed to
appreciate that the prosecution case was not supported by any material evidence, such as, video
cassette and objectionable photographs of the deceased with the accused persons etc. Therefore, the
story of blackmailing by the accused persons compelling the deceased to commit suicide is not at all
believable.

11.1. From the evidence tendered by the prosecution witnesses, no intention on the part of the
accused persons to aid or instigate or abet the deceased to commit suicide is discernible. Appellants
were neither present at the time and place of recovery of the dead body nor at any proximate point
of time. Therefore, no case for abetment to commit suicide can be said to have been made out
against the appellants. 11.2. Learned counsel for the appellants further submits that the so-called
suicide note was produced before the police 20 days after the death of the deceased. As such, no
reliance can be placed on such suicide note.

11.3. Learned counsel further submits that both the courts below failed to appreciate that PW-7
Jayantibhai Karshanbhai Parmar, elder brother of the deceased, did not support the case of the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/77724265/

3

Patel Babubhai Manohardas vs The State Of Gujarat on 5 March, 2025

prosecution. As such the charge under Section 306 IPC cannot be said to have been proved by the
prosecution against the appellants beyond all reasonable doubt.

11.4. He also points out that according to the prosecution case, the deceased had given money and
ornaments to the appellants on their blackmailing him. But there was neither recovery of any money
nor ornaments from the accused persons (appellants). Learned counsel for the appellants submits
that there could be various other reasons which compelled the deceased to take the extreme step,
such as, disciplinary proceeding initiated in his office against him for misappropriation of money
leading to his suspension but certainly no case of abetment to commit suicide can be said to have
been made out against the appellants.

11.5. That being the position, learned counsel contends that appellants have been wrongly convicted
under Sections 306/114 IPC and, therefore, are entitled to a clear acquittal. Appeal should
accordingly be allowed.

12. Per contra, learned counsel for the respondent submits that death of Dashrathbhai Karsanbhai
Parmar had taken place due to consumption of poison. This has been proved by the postmortem
report. He submits that the suicide note (Ex. 33) was written in the own handwriting of the deceased
and this has been proved as per the opinion of the handwriting expert. From the suicide note, it is
apparent that appellants had extracted money from the deceased by blackmailing him with
compromising photographs of the deceased with appellant No. 3. As the deceased became unable to
withstand the same, he took the drastic step. 12.1. Learned counsel for the respondent submits that
on a conjoint reading of all the oral and documentary evidence, it is evident that prosecution had
proved the charge against the appellants beyond all reasonable doubt. Therefore, the trial court
rightly convicted the appellants under the aforesaid provisions of law which conviction has been
affirmed by the High Court. He, therefore, submits that there is no merit in this appeal and
consequently the appeal should be dismissed.

13. Submissions made by learned counsel for the parties have received the due consideration of the
Court.

14. Before we proceed to advert to the evidence of the material prosecution witnesses and to analyse
the same, it would be apposite to refer to the legal provisions and the judicial precedents relevant for
adjudication of the present criminal appeal.

15. Attempt to commit suicide is an offence in India. Section 309 IPC says that whoever attempts to
commit suicide and does any act towards such act, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for
a term which may extend to one year or with fine or with both. However, once suicide is carried out,
the offence is complete. Considering the nature of the offence, obviously such a person would be
beyond the reach of the law. Therefore, question of penalising him would not arise but whoever
abets the commission of such suicide would be penalised under Section 306 IPC. Punishment
prescribed under Section 306 IPC is imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to 10 years and shall also be liable to fine. What Section 306 IPC says is that if any person
commits suicide, then whoever abets the commission of such suicide shall be punished as above.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/77724265/

4

Patel Babubhai Manohardas vs The State Of Gujarat on 5 March, 2025

16. Therefore, the crucial word in Section 306 IPC is ‘abets’. ‘Abetment’ is defined in Section 107 of
IPC. As per Section 107 IPC, a person would be abetting the doing of a thing if he instigates any
person to do that thing or if he encourages with one or more person or persons in any conspiracy for
doing that thing or if he intentionally aids by any act or illegal omission doing of that thing. There
are two explanations to Section 107. As per Explanation 1, even if a person by way of wilful
misrepresentation or concealment of a material fact which he is otherwise bound to disclose
voluntarily causes or procures or attempts to cause or procure a thing to be done, is said to instigate
the doing of that thing. Explanation 2 clarifies that whoever does anything in order to facilitate the
commission of an act, either prior to or at the time of commission of the act, is said to aid the doing
of that act.

17. Section 114 IPC is an explanation or clarification of Section 107 IPC. What Section 114 IPC says is
that whenever any person is absent but was present when the act or offence for which he would be
punishable in consequence of the abetment is committed, he shall be deemed to have committed
such an act or offence and would be liable to be punished as an abettor.

18. In Ramesh Kumar v. State of Chhattisgarh1, this Court held that to ‘instigate’ means to goad,
urge, provoke, incite or encourage to do ‘an act’. To satisfy the requirement of ‘instigation’, it is not
necessary that actual words must be used to that effect or that the words or act should necessarily
and specifically be suggestive of the consequence. Where the accused by his act or omission or by his
continued course of conduct creates a situation that the deceased is left with no other option except
to commit suicide, then ‘instigation’ may be inferred. A word uttered in a fit of anger or emotion
without intending the consequences to actually follow cannot be said to be ‘instigation’.

19. Elaborating further, this Court in Chitresh Kumar Chopra versus State (Govt. of NCT of Delhi)2
observed that to constitute ‘instigation’, a person who instigates another has to provoke, incite, urge
or encourage the doing of an act by the (2001) 9 SCC 618 (2009) 16 SCC 605 other by ‘goading’ or
‘urging forward’. This Court summed up the constituents of ‘abetment’ as under:

(i) the accused kept on irritating or annoying the deceased by words, deeds or wilful
omission or conduct which may even be a wilful silence until the deceased reacted or
pushed or forced the deceased by his deeds, words or wilful omission or conduct to
make the deceased move forward more quickly in a forward direction; and

(ii) that the accused had the intention to provoke, urge or encourage the deceased to
commit suicide while acting in the manner noted above.

Undoubtedly, presence of mens rea is the necessary concomitant of instigation.

20. Amalendu Pal alias Jhantu versus State of West Bengal3 is a case where this Court held that in a
case of alleged abetment of suicide, there must be proof of direct or indirect act(s) of incitement to
the commission of suicide. Merely on the allegation of harassment without there being any positive
action proximate to the time of occurrence on the part of the accused which led or compelled the
deceased to commit suicide, conviction in terms of Section 306 IPC would not be (2010) 1 SCC 707

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/77724265/

5

Patel Babubhai Manohardas vs The State Of Gujarat on 5 March, 2025

sustainable. Similar view has been expressed by this Court in case of Ude Singh versus State of
Haryana4.

21. After considering the provisions of Sections 306 and 107 of IPC, this Court in Rajesh versus State
of Haryana5 held that conviction under Section 306 IPC is not sustainable on the allegation of
harassment without there being any positive action proximate to the time of occurrence on the part
of the accused which led or compelled the person to commit suicide.

22. Abetment to commit suicide involves a mental process of instigating a person or intentionally
aiding a person in the doing of a thing. Without a positive proximate act on the part of the accused
to instigate or aid in committing suicide, conviction cannot be sustained. Besides, in order to convict
a person under Section 306 IPC, there has to be a clear mens rea to commit the offence.

23. This Court in Amudha versus State6 held that there has to be an act of incitement on the part of
the accused proximate to the date on which the deceased committed (2019) 17 SCC 301 (2020) 15
SCC 359 2024 INSC 244 suicide. The act attributed should not only be proximate to the time of
suicide but should also be of such a nature that the deceased was left with no alternative but to take
the drastic step of committing suicide.

24. Again, in the case of Kamaruddin Dastagir Sanadi versus State of Karnataka7, this Court
observed that discord and differences in domestic life are quite common in society. Commission of
suicide largely depends upon the mental state of the victim. Until and unless some guilty intention
on the part of the accused is established, it is ordinarily not possible to convict the accused for an
offence under Section 306 IPC.

25. Prakash versus State of Maharashtra8 is a case where this Court after analysing various
decisions on the point summed up the legal position in the following manner:

14. Section 306 read with Section 107 of IPC, has been interpreted, time and again,
and its principles are well established. To attract the offence of abetment to suicide, it
is important to establish proof of direct or indirect acts of instigation or incitement of
suicide by the accused, which must be in close proximity to the commission of suicide
by the deceased. Such instigation or incitement should reveal a clear mens rea to abet
the (2024) SCC Online SC 3541 2024 INSC 1020 commission of suicide and should
put the victim in such a position that he/she would have no other option but to
commit suicide.

25.1. In the aforesaid judgment, this Court referred to its earlier decision in Sanju @ Sanjay Singh
Sengar versus State of M.P.9 and held that in a given case, even a time gap of 48 hours between
using of abusive language by the accused and the commission of suicide would not amount to a
proximate act.

26. Having surveyed the relevant legal provisions and the case laws on the subject, let us now deal
with the material prosecution witnesses.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/77724265/

6

Patel Babubhai Manohardas vs The State Of Gujarat on 5 March, 2025

27. PW-2 is Jayabalaben Dashrathbhai Parmar, the informant. In her evidence in chief, she stated
that the incident had occurred on the 25th of the fourth month (April). She deposed that she worked
as a clean worker in the water park, having studied up to 10th standard. Her husband Dashrathbhai
Karsanbhai Parmar was serving in the postal department. Her husband’s last posting was at Linch.
They had 5 children, 3 girls and 2 boys. She stated that she came to know (2002) 5 SCC 371 later
that there was a misappropriation case against her husband in his office.

27.1. Geetaben of Linch (appellant/accused No. 3) befriended and became close to them. That way
she started coming home. PW-2 alleged that by performing some ‘black art’ and giving her husband
some liquid substance, she made him her own. Geetaben left her husband after taking away his
money.

27.2. On 25.04.2009, PW-2 had gone to the water park in connection with her service. During noon,
one Jayantibhai Kalabhai Parmar came to her office and told her that her mother-in-law was ill. On
hearing this, she came back home. In front of her residence, she saw a huge crowd. As she entered
her house, she saw the dead body of her husband. She tried to wake him up by shaking him but
there was no response. 27.3. PW-2 stated that she had some ornaments but those had been taken
away by the accused persons. She stated that she did not notice anything at the time of the death of
her husband but later on she found one slip (note). She read that note wherefrom she could gather
that lot many things were written in that letter. In the note, it was written that the appellants had
trapped him and after making video cassette, they used to blackmail him. Fed up with such
harassment, he committed suicide by consuming poison.

27.4. She, therefore, lodged a complaint before the police on 14.05.2009 (Ex. 22/1).

27.5. PW-2 was cross-examined. She stated in her cross-examination that the incident had occurred
on 25.04.2009. Police had taken her two statements on 14.05.2009 and 15.05.2009. In so far the
misappropriation case of her husband is concerned, PW-2 stated that she and her husband had paid
back Rs. 1,20,000.00 to the postal department, receipt of which was given. She also admitted that
there was a case against her husband for which he was arrested by the police though released on bail
subsequently. She however admitted that the chit (note) was found by her elder brother-in-law
(PW-7) and not by her. Before she reached her home on 25.04.2004, relatives had taken her
husband to the hospital.

27.6. Jayantibhai, the elder brother-in-law (PW-7), told PW-2 about the note on the next day and
that is how she came to know that her husband had written the note. When panchnama was drawn
on 25.04.2009, no note was found. From the time of death till the lodging of complaint, the note
was with PW-7. PW-2 did not go to the police station to say about the note. She described the
relationship between the accused as follows: Geetaben (appellant/accused No. 3) who used to work
in the office of her husband; appellant/accused No. 4 is the mother of Geetaben; appellant/accused
No. 2 is the husband of Geetaben; and appellant/accused No. 1 is a relative of the other accused
persons. PW-2 stated that neither Geetaben nor the accused persons had ever come to her
residence.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/77724265/

7

Patel Babubhai Manohardas vs The State Of Gujarat on 5 March, 2025

27.7. PW-2 stated that her husband was suspended from service about 2 years back. He was worried
about the misappropriation case. PW-2 denied the suggestion that the note was not written by her
husband and that the accused persons had not taken away money from him.

28. Amrutbhai Karshanbhai Parmar is PW-6.

Deceased was his brother. On that fateful day, while he was having lunch at home, his niece came to
him and told him that something had happened to her father. Then he went to the house of his
brother Dashrathbhai and found him lying motionless. He believed that he had consumed poison.
When he took his brother to the hospital, he was declared dead. At that time, his other brother
Jayantibhai (PW-7) was also there. On searching the body of his brother, PW-6 stated that they
found one note from his pocket. In that note, the deceased had mentioned 3-4 names further stating
that they were blackmailing him; so he had committed suicide. It was in the own handwriting of
Dashrathbhai. However, he stated that he did not know the persons whose name were mentioned in
the note.

29. PW-7 is the elder brother of the deceased, Jayantibhai Karshanbhai Parmar. Narrating about the
incident, he stated that while he was at home during noon, his brother Amrutbhai came and told
him that Dashrathbhai was lying unconscious. They rushed to Dashrathbhai’s house and found him
in an unconscious condition. They dialled 108 and also informed the police. They took Dashrathbhai
to the hospital where he was declared dead. PW-7 stated that though he searched the body of his
brother Dashrathbhai, he did not find anything. Contradicting the above statement, he stated that
though one note was found, who found that note and what was written in it, he did not know. He
stated that he did not know for what reason, his brother died.

29.1. This witness was declared hostile.

29.2. In his cross-examination, he stated that he had no idea that in his statement before the police
he had stated that one note was found in his brother’s pocket wherein it was written that he had an
affair with Geetaben (appellant No. 3) and for that reason he had committed suicide. He denied
making any statement before the police on 15.05.2009 that his brother Dashrathbhai had given the
misappropriated money to Geetaben and that the accused persons were blackmailing his brother by
showing him compromising photos and videos of him and Geetaben. He also denied making any
statement before the police that his deceased brother had given ornaments meant for his daughter’s
marriage to the appellants.

30. PW-11 is Champaben Nathalal, women head constable. In her evidence, she stated that while she
was on duty in the afternoon on 14.05.2009, the complaint came to be registered. In her
cross-examination, she stated that as per Diary No. 17/09 dated 24.04.2009 (sic), she was on duty
when inquest was carried out. She stated that no note was found at the time of the inquest and no
such note was presented at the police station.

31. On a careful analysis of the evidence tendered by the above prosecution witnesses, it would
reveal that though the incident had occurred on 25.04.2009, the complaint was lodged by PW-2 on

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/77724265/

8

Patel Babubhai Manohardas vs The State Of Gujarat on 5 March, 2025

14.05.2009, thus there being a delay of 20 days. Though there is a GD entry on 25.04.2009, it
appears that barring postmortem and inquest, no FIR was registered and no other investigation was
carried out by the police. It was only after lodging of the complaint that police recorded the
statement of PW-2 on 14.05.2009 and 15.05.2009 and of the other witnesses thereafter. Though
delay in lodging of first information is not always fatal but considering the fact that in this case, the
delay is of 20 days which has remained unexplained, it would have a material bearing on the
prosecution case.

32. PW-11 who served as the head constable in the concerned police station, deposed that she was on
duty in the afternoon of 14.05.2009 when the complaint came to be registered. In her
cross-examination, she stated that she was also on duty when Diary Entry No. 17/09 dated
24.04.2009 was made. She was categorical in her statement that no suicide note was found at the
time of the inquest; no such note was presented at the police station either.

33. There are significant inconsistencies in the evidence of the prosecution witnesses regarding the
occurrence. PW-2 stated in her substantive evidence that on being informed about her
mother-in-law's illness, she had come home from her office. On reaching home, she saw a huge
crowd in front of her residence. As she entered her house, she saw the dead body of her husband.
However, in her cross- examination, she stated that when she reached home on that fateful
afternoon, the relatives had already taken her husband to the hospital. Such inconsistent testimony
cast serious doubts about the veracity of the evidence of the said prosecution witness.

34. In so far the suicide note is concerned, PW-2 stated that PW-7 had told her on the next day
about the same. It was only then that she came to know that her husband had written a suicide note.
In fact, when the panchnama was drawn on 25.04.2009, no note was found on the body of the
deceased. She stated that from the time of death till the lodging of complaint, the suicide note was
with PW-7. This again cast serious aspersions about the credibility of the suicide note.

35. There is another significant inconsistency. PW-6 stated that while he was at home having lunch,
his niece came and told him that something had happened to her father (Dashrathbhai Karsanbhai
Parmar). So he went to the residence of his brother and found him lying motionless. At that time,
PW-7 was also present. On the other hand, PW-7 stated that while he was at home, his brother PW-6
came and told him that brother Dashrathbhai was lying unconscious. It was thereafter that he
rushed to Dashrathbhai’s house. Such inconsistencies clearly impeach the credibility of the above
two prosecution witnesses.

36. That apart, there is nothing on record to show recovery of any jewellery (ornaments) by the
police from the accused persons. No signed cheques of the deceased or cheque book or passbook of
the deceased were recovered and exhibited in court. In such circumstances, the very sub-stratum of
the prosecution case that the accused persons were making illegal gain by blackmailing the deceased
falls flat.

37. Before we move on to the alleged suicide note, it would be appropriate to advert to the
postmortem report. As per the said report, cause of death was due to consumption of Dichlorvos

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/77724265/

9

Patel Babubhai Manohardas vs The State Of Gujarat on 5 March, 2025

Organophosphorus Non-thio poison. The doctor who carried out the postmortem examination, Dr.
Prakash Laxmandas, deposed as PW-1. He stated that in the course of postmortem examination,
400 cc of coffee coloured foul smelling liquid was found in the small intestine and as per
postmortem note, the same was Dichlorvos Organophosphorus Non-thio poison. He stated that if
anybody drinks such poisonous substance then this type of death can happen.

38. However, there is no recovery of any trace of the poison consumed by the deceased at the place
of occurrence. No bottle/container of such poison was recovered from the residence of the deceased.
Moreover, the prosecution could not place before the court any material as to wherefrom the
deceased had procured the poison.

39. In Kumar @ Shiva Kumar versus State of Karnataka10, this Court opined that in a case of death
due to consumption or administering of poison, be it homicidal or 2024 INSC 156 suicidal, recovery
of the trace of such poison is crucial. This Court held thus:

46. …….As a general principle, it can be said that in a case of death by poisoning, be it
homicidal or suicidal and which is based on circumstantial evidence, recovery of the
trace of poison consumed by or administered to the deceased is of critical
importance. It forms a part of the chain; rather it would complete the chain to prove
homicide or suicide.

40. This takes us to the suicide note (Ex. 33). We have already noted the delayed and controversial
circumstances under which the suicide note surfaced which makes it highly suspect. Nonetheless,
since it was exhibited, let us deal with the same. Sum and substance of the suicide note allegedly
written by Dashrathbhai Karsanbhai Parmar (the deceased) with the date given as 24.04.2009 is
that appellant No. 3 had joined his office following the illness of the existing cleaner. She used to
come to the office daily for cleaning purposes. Slowly they developed intimacy. It is alleged that
appellant No. 3 had performed ‘black art’ on the deceased so much so that, he fell in love with her.
Taking advantage of the situation, she took photographs and video of them in compromising
position. All the accused persons were shameless persons. As they started blackmailing him, he
initially paid Rs. 80,000.00 to them and thereafter started giving them ornaments. He also gave
them his passbook and cheque books after signing on the cheques. Because of such blackmailing, he
had to misappropriate money from his office for which he was suspended. It is stated that he was
totally ruined and, therefore, he had committed suicide as he had no other alternative.

41. The suicide note was sent to the Forensic Science Laboratory (FSL) for examination. The Deputy
Chief Handwriting Expert of FSL, Gandhinagar opined that the handwriting was of the deceased.
However, the prosecution did not examine the Deputy Chief Handwriting Expert as an expert
witness. The records also do not indicate that the accused had admitted genuineness of the report of
the handwriting expert.

42. In Shashi Kumar Banerjee versus Subodh Kumar Banerjee (since deceased)11, this Court
observed that expert’s evidence as to handwriting is opinion evidence. It can rarely, if ever, take the
place of substantive evidence. Before acting on such opinion evidence, it is necessary to see if it is

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/77724265/

10

corroborated either by clear direct evidence or by circumstantial evidence. AIR 1964 SC 529

Patel Babubhai Manohardas vs The State Of Gujarat on 5 March, 2025

43. In the case of Murari Lal versus State of M.P.12, this Court opined that having due regard to the
imperfect nature of the science of identification of hand-writing, the approach of the court should be
one of caution. Reasons for the opinion must be carefully probed and examined. In an appropriate
case, corroboration may be sought. Where the reasons for the opinion are convincing and there is no
reliable evidence throwing a doubt, uncorroborated testimony of a handwriting expert may be
accepted.

44. This Court dealt with the effect of placing reliance on the opinion of handwriting expert without
examining him in court in Keshav Dutt versus State of Haryana13. One of the questions which fell
for consideration in that case was whether the opinion of a handwriting expert can be admitted in
evidence without examination of the handwriting expert. In this connection, this Court took the view
that when the trial court chose to rely on the report of the handwriting expert, it ought to have
examined the handwriting expert in order to give an opportunity to the accused to cross-examine
the said expert. In that case, it was found that there was nothing on record to show (1980) 1 SCC 704
(2010) 9 SCC 286 that the accused persons had admitted to the report of the handwriting expert.

45. Finally, even if we take the suicide note as correct and genuine, we do not find any act of
incitement on the part of the appellants proximate to the date on which the deceased committed
suicide. No act is attributed to the appellants proximate to the time of suicide which was of such a
nature that the deceased was left with no alternative but to commit suicide. In such circumstances, it
cannot be said that any offence of abetment to commit suicide is made out against the appellants.

46. Accordingly and in the light of the above, we allow this appeal. Consequently, the impugned
judgment and order of the High Court dated 17.12.2013 and of the trial court dated 12.05.2011 are
hereby set aside. Since the appellants are already on bail, their bail bonds stand discharged.

……………………………J. [ABHAY S. OKA] ……………………………J. [UJJAL BHUYAN] NEW DELHI;

MARCH 05, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/77724265/

11

