Racing Promotion Private Limited vs Dr. Harish on 20 February, 2025

Racing Promotion Private Limited vs Dr. Harish on 20 February,
2025

Author: Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha

Bench: Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha

2025 INSC 252                                                                       REPORTABLE

                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 2755-2758/2025
                            ARISING OUT OF SLP(C) NOS. 10926-10929 OF 2024

             RACING PROMOTIONS PRIVATE LIMITED                                 ...APPELLANT(S)

                                                       VERSUS

             DR. HARISH & ORS.                                                …RESPONDENT(S)

                                                  JUDGMENT

PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA, J.

1. Leave granted.

2. The present appeals arise out of an order dated 19.02.2024 passed by the Madras High Court
disposing of various writ petitions filed as public interest litigations (‘PILs’) against the conduct of
Formula 4 racing in the city of Chennai, Tamil Nadu, in which the following directions were issued:

“22. Accordingly, this batch of writ petitions are disposed of, with the following
directions

(i) The Formula 4 Race proposed to be conducted in the Chennai Racing Circuit is
permitted to be held on the dates to be decided by the State Government in
consultation with the stakeholders

3.7 km as stipulated, shall be carried on, with highest degree of public safety and avoiding
inconvenience to the public, especially Reason:

the in-patients of the Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital, Madras Medical
College, and Omandurar Government Multi-

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106817539/

1

Racing Promotion Private Limited vs Dr. Harish on 20 February, 2025

speciality Hospital. This can be ensured by installing necessary silencing equipment
like sound silence panels/acoustic sound panel for noise control in the hospitals
during the time of the racing events.

(iii) The RPPL shall ensure that all public viewers will be provided with necessary
protective gear for their safety during the Race

(iv) The RPPL shall reimburse the expenditure made by the State Government (i e)
Rs 42 crores from the public exchequer, to them, prior to the conduct of the event

(v) The State Government must ensure that RPPL or anyone should deposit in
advance (prior to next year and the upcoming third year's event) the stipulated
expenditure of Rs 15 crores for the upcoming two years for holding the Street Circuit
in Chennai

(vi) The RPPL cannot expect anything more than facilitation as well as arrangements
along with co-ordination and co-operation of the State authorities, and the
expenditure for the event will have to be completely borne out only by the RPPL

(vii) In future, the State is expected to take upon itself the responsibility of
conducting of such event in furtherance of its policy to encourage the racing sport
and seek the support of private bodies having experience and expertise in the field.
This will ensure fairness and also dispel any doubt as to mala fides in distribution of
the State largesse”

3. The directions contained in paragraphs 22(iv) to (vii) alone are impugned before
us.

4. The short facts that are necessary for us are that Racing Promotion Private Ltd,
hereinafter referred to as the appellant, is involved in sponsoring and conducting the
Formula 4 championship, which is a motorsport series of races. The appellant
entered into a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) dated 16.08.2023 with the
Sports Development Authority of Tamil Nadu, hereinafter referred to as SDAT, for a
term of three years for organising the event. The MoU sets out the obligations of both
parties, and the relevant clauses are that while the appellant is under an obligation to
spend Rs. 202 crores as part of its responsibility, the SDAT is required to spend Rs.
42 crores towards license and operations fee, roads, and miscellaneous expenditures
including road beautification and painting. The relevant portion of the clauses are as
under:

‘MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING’ This Memorandum of Understanding
(“MOU”) is made in Chennai on 16th day of August 2023 (“Effective Date”) by and
between. A. Racing Promotions Private Limited… AND B. Sports Development
Authority…

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106817539/

2

Racing Promotion Private Limited vs Dr. Harish on 20 February, 2025

1. Principles of Collaboration 1.1 The Parties recognize each other’s interest and
expertise and hereby agree to work together for the organization and promotion of
the Festival.

1.2 The Parties agree that….

2. Term and Termination…

3. Obligation of the Parties 3.1 RPPL shall be responsible for the following
deliverables and costs.

a) Sr. No. Particulars Cost (in INR)

1. Circuit Electronic System 34,00,00,000

2. Patended Debris Fence Panel 48,00,00,000

3. TechPro Barrier 20,00,00,000

4. Tyre Barrier 6,00,00,000

5. Kerbs 4,00,00,000

6. Hospitality for the Festival 4,00,00,000

7. Race Operations for the 10,00,00,000 Festival

8. Event Management for the 10,00,00,000 Festival

9. Marketing of the Festival 10,00,00,000

10. Formula 4 Cars 20,00,00,000

11. IRL Cars 10,00,00,000

12. Fire & Medical for the Festival 2,00,00,000

13. Grand Stands 8,00,00,000

14. Festival miscellaneous costs 8,00,00,000

15. Other miscellaneous costs 8,00,00,000 Total 2,02,00,00,000

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106817539/

3

Racing Promotion Private Limited vs Dr. Harish on 20 February, 2025

b) Further, in addition to the aforementioned deliverables, RPPL shall also be
responsible for pit building, concrete blocks and circuit lighting system.

3.2 The Host City shall be responsible for the following deliverables and costs:

a) Sr. Item Cost (in INR) Remarks No .

1 License and 30,00,00,000 For License & Racing operation fee Permit, Pit Building, (“Fees”)
Concrete Blocks, Circuit Lighting System 2 Roads 6,00,00,000 3 Miscellaneous 6,00,00,000
(including without limitation ad beautification and painting) Total 42,00,00,000

b) The Host City shall pay the Fees to RPPL in 3 instalments, 50% advance upon signing of the
MOU, 25% within 60 days of signing of the MOU and 25% within 120 days of signing of the MOU.
Any revisions to the same shall be mutually agreed, upon between the Parties in writing.

c) It is clarified that the costs mentioned in Clause 3.2(a) shall be only for the first year of the Term.
The estimated costs to be borne by the Host City are INR 15,00,00,000 (Indian Rupees Fifteen
Crores Only), per year, for the remainder of the Term, to be paid 90 days before the Festival. Any
revisions to the same shall be mutually agreed upon between the Parties in writing.

d) Further, in addition to the aforementioned deliverables, the Host City shall also be responsible
for the following.

(i) Local police permission for traffic control and other law and order required for the Festival;

(ii) Fire department support;

(iii) Pollution control measures,

(iv) Health, safety and sanitation measures,

(v) Permission for radio frequencies,

(vi) Permission required for storage of fuel;

(vii) No objection certificate from the relevant district magistrate;

(viii) VIP movement protocols,

(ix) Maintenance department;

(x) Agreement letter from hospital for admitting and treating injured drivers on priority basis.

(xi) Any other reasonable assistance required by RPPL for the Festivals.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106817539/

4

Racing Promotion Private Limited vs Dr. Harish on 20 February, 2025

3.3 Any modifications to the costs and/or the deliverables of either Party shall be mutually agreed
upon between the Parties in writing in good faith.

4. Testing…

5. Miscellaneous…”

5. Pursuant to a decision to conduct the fifth round of the races in the city of Chennai, the
Government of Tamil Nadu issued a Press Release dated 02.11.2023 regarding the conduct of the
event between 08.12.2023 to 10.12.2023.

6. At this stage, various writ petitions in the form of public interest litigation were instituted before
the High Court raising multiple objections. Broadly, the grounds raised in these petitions pertained
to public inconvenience, lack of safety measures, noise pollution, environmental and ecological
damage, and the lack of transparency in the use of public funds for the event in a manner that
benefits a private party, i.e., the appellant.

7. The High Court, by way of the impugned order, held that it will not interfere with the policy
decision of the government to promote and encourage motor racing as a sport. It also took note of
the submission of the learned Advocate General before it that all requisite approvals for the event
had been taken, and precautionary and safety measures were being taken to prevent public
inconvenience and noise pollution. However, it observed that the event was being conducted by the
appellant, which is a private party, and the role of the State Government was limited to facilitating
the event. The revenue and profits would accrue only to the appellant, and the State Government
would not have any share in the same as per the MoU. In this light, the High Court issued the
directions that are impugned before us.

8. We have heard the learned senior counsels appearing for the parties and have also perused their
written submissions.

9. A detailed counter affidavit is filed on behalf of the Sports Development Authority which
sufficiently answers all the questions, including those that are expressed by the High Court in the
order impugned before us. It is therefore necessary to extract the relevant portions of the counter
affidavit. To start with, the affidavit explains the role, purpose, and object of the constitution of the
SDAT and the role that is assigned to it for development of sports and necessary infrastructure.

“2. It is submitted that the Sports Development Authority of Tamil Nadu (hereinafter referred as
SDAT) is the nodal government authority in the State of Tamil Nadu for the promotion of sports and
the development and welfare of sportspersons. Over the years SDAT has taken various initiatives to
promote several sports through various measures like creating infrastructure, enable specialised
training, provide financial support etc.

3. It is submitted that the SDAT aims to make Tamil Nadu a global sports hub. One of the measures
that SDAT has taken to achieve this objective is by hosting several National and International

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106817539/

5

championships of various sports in the State.

Racing Promotion Private Limited vs Dr. Harish on 20 February, 2025

4. It is submitted that by conducting these national and international level events, the sporting
infrastructure of international standards are being created systematically for various sports.
Therefore, upcoming sportspersons will have the opportunity to train in stadiums, turfs, tracks,
gyms and other facilities which are of international standards to further develop their skills in their
respective sports. When these events are conducted, the sportspersons are exposed to the new
techniques of other State and Country players, which could also be a learning opportunity for our
sportspersons. Conducting these sporting events at National and International level would also
bring a greater influx of fans and followers of these sports which will create a vibrant sports culture
amongst the youth in the State. This involvement of youth in sports would promote positive
behaviour and sense of responsibility. The creation of this infrastructure within the State and better
access to these sporting events will also enable budding sportspersons from weaker economic
backgrounds to participate in the national and international events and thus enable greater diversity
in sports. It is SDAT’s aim to use sports as a means of fostering and building strong community ties
and understanding among different groups.”

10. The SDAT has also explained the consequential economic benefit that the State derives from
conducting such events and this is explained as under:

“5. It is submitted that there is also greater economic benefits to the State while
conducting these National and International events by generating tourism revenue,
job creation, infrastructure developments, increased investment, media rights and
sponsorship, local business growth etc. The influx of tourists boosts revenue for
hotels, restaurants, transportation services and local attractions. While hosting large
scale sporting events it generates numerous job opportunities, both temporary and
permanent. These jobs span various sectors, including construction, event
management, hospitality, security, and retail. Preparing for international sports
events often necessitates the development or improvement of sports facilities,
transportation networks, and other infrastructure. These enhancements can have
long-term economic benefits, facilitating future events and boosting local economies.
High-profile sports events can attract domestic and foreign investment. Businesses
may invest in sponsorships, infrastructure, and services to capitalize on the event's
visibility and associated economic activity. Local businesses benefit from the
increased foot traffic and spending associated with large sports events. This includes
not only businesses directly related to the event, such as sports shops and venues, but
also those in hospitality, retail and entertainment. International sports events can
generate significant revenue through the sale of broadcasting rights and sponsorship
deals. This not only brings in immediate income but also enhances the country’s
global visibility and attractiveness for future events. Post-event, the facilities
developed for International sports events can be used for local and National events,
community activities, and as training centers for athletes. This ongoing use can
provide continued economic benefits. Therefore, the conducting of larger scale
sporting events will boost the economy of the State in wider perspective.”

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106817539/

6

Racing Promotion Private Limited vs Dr. Harish on 20 February, 2025

11. After explaining in detail how the State successfully conducted national and international events
from 2022, deriving great benefits and securing large number of medals for the State in the various
sports/games that were held from time to time, the affidavit goes on to explain the infrastructure
that the State of Tamil Nadu has created for motor sports in the following terms:

“9. With regard to the sport of racing (both four and two- wheelers), Tamil Nadu
occupies a pride of place for several reasons. The foremost reason is that the birth of
motor sports in India was from Chennai (then known as Madras) with the
establishment of the Madras Motorsports Club (still in existence). Consequently,
Chennai also became the headquarters for the Federation of Motor Sports Clubs of
India (FMSCI) which is the apex body governing motorsports in India. One of the
country's premier internationally recognised race tracks is also situated at
Irungattukottai in the outskirts of Chennai. Hence, SDAT decided to host the
Formula 4 (F4) Indian Championship, a motorsport series of races at Chennai with
the Racing Promotions Private Limited (herein after referred to as RPPL) i.e. the
petitioner in this Special Leave Petition. RPPL is the only license holder to hold the
F4 Indian Championship Formula 4, which is accredited by the International
Governing body of Motorsports i.e, Federation Internationale l'Automobile. Earlier,
RPPL has conducted this racing event at Hyderabad and Noida in the year of 2023.
An economic study conducted by Neilson Sports Analysis calculated that the racing
sport event named Greenko Hyderabad E-Prix, 2023 hosted by Formula E in
collaboration with the Telangana Government delivered an economic impact of
nearly about 84 million US Dollar and significant inward investment to their local
economy.”

12. Addressing the issue arising for consideration in the batch of writ petitions, the SDAT has
referred to the reason for entering into the MoU and has explained the same in the following terms:

“11. It is submitted that after careful consideration of the potential long term gains
that the State stood to gain from hosting this event, an MoU was entered into
between SDAT and the RPPL to conduct the Indian Racing League and Formula 4.
These two events together was called the Indian Racing Festival in Chennai and
would be conducted annually for a period of three years. (F4 in year 1 & F3 in year II
& Year III) As per the MOU, SDAT shall be responsible for the obligations set out in
Clause 3.2 of the MoU which is as follows -

(a) License and Operations Fee

(b) Roads

(c) Miscellaneous (including without limitation and beautification and painting).”

13. In order to assure this Court that the decision to enter into the MoU was not unilateral and that
the said decision was taken after much deliberation, the SDAT explained the background indicating

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106817539/

7

Racing Promotion Private Limited vs Dr. Harish on 20 February, 2025

the constitution of a high-level working committee to coordinate the organisation of the event and
also indicated the officials involved in the decision making as follows:

“13. It is submitted that SDAT had formed a High-level Working Committee to
coordinate the organizing of this racing event. The committee held several meetings
with the following officials to oversee and monitor the organising of the event -

(a) Commissioner, Greater Chennai Corporation

(b) Director General of Police, Tamil Nadu

(c) Additional Chief Secretary to Government, Highways and Minor Ports

(d) Additional Chief Secretary to Government, Youth Welfare and Sports Department

(e) Director General of Police /Commissioner of Police, Greater Chennai Police

(f) Principal Secretary to Government, Public Works Department

(g) Managing Director, Tamil Nadu Tourism Development Corporation

(h) Joint Commissioner (Works), Greater Chennai Corporation (1) Additional
Director, Information Department

(j) Member Secretary, Sports Development Authority of Tamil Nadu

(k) Additional Commissioner of Police (Traffic), Greater Chennai Police (1) Director
(Distribution), Tamil Nadu Generation & Distribution Corporation Limited

(m) Deputy Secretary to Government, Health & Family Welfare Department

(n) Lieutenant General, General Officer Commanding (GOC), Dakshin Bharat Area,
Chennai

(o) Naval officer in Charge (Tamil Nadu)

(p) Chairman, Racing Promotions Private Ltd. (RPPL) A meeting was held on
24.11.2023 with above-mentioned officials of the High-level Working Committee and
each and every aspect of this event was carefully deliberated and decided including
issues of adequate safety precautions, traffic management, protection of spectators,
safeguarding of places around the circuit, mitigation of pollution etc to be taken care
of.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106817539/

8

Racing Promotion Private Limited vs Dr. Harish on 20 February, 2025

The army and the navy representatives provided their consent to the conduct of the Race since the
circuit passed near the Army and Naval areas.”

14. Referring to the issue relating to safety, the SDAT explained in detail the steps taken to ensure
that the event is conducted after taking sufficient precautions. The relevant portion of the affidavit is
as under:

“15. It is reiterated before this Hon'ble Court that all measures for safety and
precaution have been provided. It is submitted that appropriate alternate traffic
diversions have been identified and will be implemented; the event will be conducted
at a sufficient distance from the hospitals and will not cause any inconvenience to the
public and also in-patients in the hospital. It is reiterated that appropriate safety
protocols will be implemented - the viewer grand stands will be barricaded and the
crash barriers will also be installed to ensure maximum protection for the spectators.
Fire extinguishers will be placed at designated sites to ensure fire safety.”

15. Referring to the specific direction of the High Court in paragraph 22(vii) that in future the State
itself should take upon the responsibility of conducting such events, the SDAT explained the
consequence as under:

“19. A direction has been issued at para 22 (vii) of the impugned common order of the
Hon'ble High Court of Madras in W.P. Nos. 33687, 33741, 33911 and 33914 of 2023
that in future the State Government should conduct this event by itself. It is
submitted that such a direction is not legally possible or feasible. Licenses/rights for
international events are granted only to associations/national sports federations by
the international sports body. A city or State is then permitted to host this
international event in association with the license/rights holder for the event. In such
situation, it is submitted that the State Government supports the conduct of sporting
events by providing monetary support towards license fee, event management, prize
money, publicity and media management amongst other things along with the
necessary coordination with various government Departments for the successful
conduct of the event.

20. It is also submitted that, providing logistics and monitoring for conduct of
international and national sporting events is a global practice to nurture excellence in
sports, building capacity, economic benefits and city branding. It is on this basis that
t h e   S t a t e   G o v e r n m e n t   h o s t s   s p o r t i n g   e v e n t s   i n   c o - o r d i n a t i o n   w i t h   t h e
National/International Federations and licensed bodies.

21. Infact there is precedent of the State Government being a major sponsor of an
international sporting event, namely the Chennai Open ATP Tennis Tournament for
several years, where even World Champions like Rafael Nadal have come and
participated. Likewise, the Government of Tamil Nadu had organized the 44th Chess
Olympiad along with International Chess Federation (FIDE - the acronym is as per

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106817539/

9

Racing Promotion Private Limited vs Dr. Harish on 20 February, 2025

its French name), the Asian Men's Hockey Championship with Hockey India
Federation and Asian Hockey Federation (AHF), the World Surfing League
competition in co-ordination with the International Surfing Federation. The
successful conduct of these events is due to the support and infrastructure provided
by the State Government to these recognized/licensed sporting bodies who have the
expertise and domain knowledge regarding their respective sports.”

16. In view of the above, the SDAT submitted that the direction of the Madras High Court for the
State to conduct the event by itself in the future will be unviable. It is also submitted that the
implementation of the direction would cause “great loss to the city and its sportsperson and also
affect the long-term goal of promoting and situating Chennai as a global sports centre”.

17. The appellant has no objection with respect to the caution expressed by the High Court about
public safety and health. They do not challenge directions (i), (ii), and (iii) in paragraph 22,
requiring necessary precaution to be taken before permitting the sports event. The appellant is
aggrieved about the direction in paragraph 22(iv) to reimburse Rs. 42 crores spent by the State, the
direction in paragraph 22(v) that the Government must ensure that the appellant must make an
advance deposit of Rs. 15 crores for the upcoming two events, and the further direction in para
22(vi) where it was directed that the appellant cannot expect anything more than facilitation from
the State and that the entire expenditure for the event will have to be borne by them. These
directions are challenged before us on various grounds.

18. We have examined the facts and circumstances of the case in detail and have studied the
Memorandum of Understanding in detail. We are of the opinion that directions (iv), (v), and (vi)
relate to prescription of new terms and conditions for the Memorandum of Understanding between
the parties. Direction (vi) relates to the policy decision of the State.

19. We have already extracted the relevant clauses of the MoU as per which the appellant has an
obligation to spend Rs. 202 crores towards various heads under clause 3.1(a) of the MoU. The next
clause provides the obligations of the Host City as per which the Host City is obligated to provide
deliverables amounting to Rs. 42 crores. These contractual clauses were entered into after a great
amount of deliberation.

20. The Sports Development Authority is an instrumentality of the State and acts as a nodal
Governmental Authority for promoting sports and the welfare of sports persons. It is nobody’s case
that the State through SDAT is distributing largesse or that public funds are being frittered away or
that there is any defalcation of funds. The scope of judicial review in matters concerning contractual
relationship of the State or its instrumentality with private participation, particularly as regards the
scope and ambit of work and finances, are limited. This aspect is clear from a large number of
decisions of this Court, which need not be dealt with in detail. 1

21. To ensure equitable distribution of goods and services and to be assured that they subserve the
common good, the State has the authority to formulate a suitable policy. Initially, such policy is
focussed on the government identifying resources and expanding them to subserve common good.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106817539/

10

Racing Promotion Private Limited vs Dr. Harish on 20 February, 2025

At one stage, to increase their capacity, governments had even nationalised private resources to 1
Master Marine Services (P) Ltd. v. Metcalfe & Hodgkinson (P) Ltd., (2005) 6 SCC 138, paras 11-12;
Arun Kumar Agrawal v. Union of India, (2013) 7 SCC 1, para 41; Silppi Constructions Contractors v.
Union of India, (2020) 16 SCC 489, paras 19-20. subserve the public interest. However, experience
has shown that the resources generated by the government were inadequate and also that the
management of these resources was inefficient and ineffective. Over a period, the policy shifted
towards public-private partnerships or private finance initiatives. The shift is based on the
experience that delivery of goods and services as part of public service can be provided more
effectively by means of contracting with private enterprise than by direct provision by the
Government. This micro-economics, as perceived in public finance, involves private participation
and it can now be seen in three strategic investments. First, where the private sector provides capital
to build infrastructure, and the State leases them out. Second, where private sector participation is
involved in building infrastructure such as airports, metro rail transport, bridges by using their own
resources, for which they would secure their consideration through tolls and usage charges. There
are also instances where assets are built partly through private contributions and partly through
government funding. The rationale for this micro-economic strategy is the limited resources of the
State and the understanding about their functioning as lacking flexibility, or effective expertise.

22. The case at hand involves the conduct of the sports event through the collaborative effort of the
instrumentalities of the State of Tamil Nadu, being the SDAT, and the appellant, a private
enterprise.

23. Once the High Court was satisfied that the decision to hold the sports event is a matter of policy,
it could not have proceeded to interfere with the specific terms of the MoU entered into between the
authority and the appellant herein. Issues such as the mutual obligations, including the
apportionment of expenditure that the contracting parties must bear, are beyond the scrutiny of the
High Court in a public interest litigation. 2 Finally, direction (vii) calling upon the State itself to take
up the responsibility of conducting such sports events ignores the principle of public-private
partnership adopted by governments across the globe as a matter of good governance, which takes
into account the limited resources of the State coupled with issues of efficiency and expertise. We
are 2 Orissa State Financial Corporation v. Narsingh Ch. Nayak, (2003) 10 SCC 261, para 6; Orix
Auto Finance (India) Ltd v. Jagmander Singh, (2006) 2 SCC 598, para 9. Further, it is also a settled
position that courts cannot rewrite contractual terms between the parties, see General Assurance
Society Ltd v. Chandumull Jain, AIR 1966 SC 1644, para 11; Rajasthan State Industrial Development
and Investment Corporation v. Diamond & Gem Development Corporation Ltd, (2013) 5 SCC 470,
para 23; Shree Ambica Medical Stores v. Surat People’s Coop Bank Ltd, (2020) 13 SCC 564, para 20;
Venkataraman Krishnamurthy v. Lodha Crown Buildmart Pvt Ltd, (2024) 4 SCC 230, paras 21-22.
of the opinion that the High Court committed an error in issuing directions (iv), (v), (vi) and (vii),
which cannot be sustained in law.

24. For the reasons stated above, we partly allow the appeals and set aside the directions of the High
Court in paragraphs 22(iv), (v),

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106817539/

11

Racing Promotion Private Limited vs Dr. Harish on 20 February, 2025

(vi), and (vii) of the judgment and order in Writ Petition Nos. 33687, 33741, 33911 and 33914 of
2023 by order dated 19.02.2024.

25. No order as to costs.

26. Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.

………………………………....J. [PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA] ………………………………....J.
[MANOJ MISRA] NEW DELHI;

FEBRUARY 20, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106817539/

12

