Rahul Verma vs Rampat Lal Verma on 21 February, 2025

Rahul Verma vs Rampat Lal Verma on 21 February, 2025

 2025 INSC 296                                                                       REPORTABLE

                                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                         EXTRAORDINARY CIVIL JURISDICTION

                          PETITION FOR SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (C) NO. 4330 OF 2025

                         RAHUL VERMA & Ors.                                   ... PETITIONER(S)

                                                          VERSUS

                         RAMPAT LAL VERMA & Ors.                            ... RESPONDENT(S)

                                                         ORDER

1. This petition arises from the judgment and order passed by the Gauhati High Court in Case No.
Arb. A./6/2024 dated 22.10.2024 whereby the High Court allowed the appeal filed by the
respondents herein under Section 37(1)(a) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (for short,
“Act of 1996”) and thereby quashed and set aside the order dated 09.08.2024 passed by the Civil
Judge (Sr. Div.), Dibrugarh in Misc. (J) Case No. 206/2024 arising out of Commercial Suit No.
02/2024 (“impugned judgment”).

2. We heard Ms. Shagufa Salim, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners and Mr. Pavan Kumar
Chaturvedi, learned counsel appearing for the respondents.

3. This litigation originates from a dispute between a partner of a partnership firm consisting the
legal heirs of another deceased partner. The partnership firm consisted of three partners. It so
happened that two of them passed away on 24.12.2022 and 21.11.2023, respectively. It appears from
the materials on record that the respondents herein (original defendants in Commercial Suit No.
02/2024) preferred a petition under Section 8 of the Act of 1996 as Misc. (J) Case No. 206/2024 in
Commercial Suit No. 02/2024 before the Commercial Court, at Dibrugarh for dismissal of the suit
and a reference to arbitration. The petition was filed on the basis of an arbitration clause in the
partnership deed. The said petition was dismissed by the Civil Judge.

4. Aggrieved by the dismissal of their petition under Section 8 of the Act of 1996, the respondents
preferred an arbitration appeal in Case No. Arb. A./6/2024. The High Court vide the impugned
judgment held that a reading of clause no. 2 of the partnership deed makes it evident that the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6536428/

1

Rahul Verma vs Rampat Lal Verma on 21 February, 2025

partnership deed is binding upon the heirs of the deceased partner. The said clause reads as
follows:-

“2. The partnership came into existence on and from 1st day of April 1984 and
continued and that the changed constitution came into existence on and from 18th
day of September 1989 on the terms as mentioned therein and henceforward with
effect from 1st day of April 1992 shall continue in future in accordance with the terms
and provisions of this instrument and shall be AT WILL and may be carried on for
any time till it is agreed to be carried on by the partners and determinable
nevertheless as hereinafter provided. The death or retirement of any partner shall not
have the effect of dissolving the partnership which will continue between the other
partners and one of the heirs or one of the representatives of the deceased partner if
so agreed. This partnership can be dissolved by any party giving two months’ notice
in writing to the other of his/her intention to do so, by common consent the
partnership can be dissolved at any time.”

5. It further observed that clause no. 15 of the partnership deed specifies the circumstances under
which the parties may resort to arbitral proceedings. It held that the dispute between the parties
pertains to the affairs of the partnership firm, specifically its dissolution. Since this particular
circumstance is addressed in the partnership deed, Section 42(c) of the Partnership Act, 1932 would
not impede the court from referring the matter to arbitration. The legal heirs of the deceased partner
are entitled to invoke the arbitration clause and the sole surviving partner is also entitled to invoke
the arbitration clause against the legal heirs of the deceased partner. The said clause reads as
follows:-

“15. In case of any dispute or difference of opinion regarding the partnership affairs
or regarding dissolution or discontinuance of the partnership business or at any time
the matter shall be to referred to arbitration. The award of the arbitrator of the Board
of arbitrator so given shall be final and binding on the parties.”

6. In such circumstances, referred to above, the petitioners-legal heirs of the deceased partner are
here before this Court with the present petition.

7. Having gone through the materials on record, two questions fall for our consideration:

(i) Whether the legal heirs of a deceased partner in a partnership firm, being
non-signatories to the partnership deed and in the absence of their explicit consent,
can still be bound by the arbitration agreement prescribed therein?

(ii) Whether the right to sue for the rendition of accounts survive to the legal heirs of
the deceased partner, entitling them to invoke the arbitration clause in the
partnership deed?

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6536428/

2

Rahul Verma vs Rampat Lal Verma on 21 February, 2025

8. The decision in the case of Ravi Prakash Goel v. Chandra Prakash Goel & Anr., reported in (2008)
13 SCC 667, squarely covers the facts of the present case. This Court held that an arbitration
agreement does not cease to exist on the death of any party and the arbitration agreement can be
enforced by or against the legal representatives of the deceased. The Court emphasized on the
definition of a ‘legal representative’ under Section 2(1)(g) of the Act of 1996 to hold that an arbitral
agreement and the award is enforceable by or against the legal representatives of the deceased. The
relevant observations are reproduced hereinbelow:-

“18. It is clear from Section 40 of the Arbitration Act that an arbitration agreement is
not discharged by the death of any party thereto and on such death it is enforceable
by or against the legal representatives of the deceased, nor is the authority of the
arbitrator revoked by the death of the party appointing him, subject to the operation
of any law by virtue of which the death of a person extinguishes the right of action of
that person.

19. Section 2(1)(g) defines “legal representative” which reads thus:

“2. (1)(g) ‘legal representative’ means a person who in law represents the estate of a
deceased person, and includes any person who intermeddles with the estate of the
deceased, and, where a party acts in a representative character, the person on whom
the estate devolves on the death of the party so acting;”

20. The definition of “legal representative” became necessary because such
representatives are bound by and also entitled to enforce an arbitration agreement.
Section 40 clearly says that an arbitration agreement is not discharged by the death
of a party. The agreement remains enforceable by or against the legal representatives
of the deceased. In our opinion, a person who has the right to represent the estate of
the deceased person occupies the status of a legal person (sic representative). Section
35 of the 1996 Act which imparts the touch of finality to an arbitral award says that
the award shall have binding effect on the “parties and persons claiming under
them”.

Persons claiming under the rights of a deceased person are the personal representatives of the
deceased party and they have the right to enforce the award and are also bound by it. The arbitration
agreement is enforceable by or against the legal representative of a deceased party provided the
right to sue in respect of the cause of action survives.

xxx

27. We are of the opinion that in view of the provisions of Section 46 read with Section 48 of the
Partnership Act as well as Section 40 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, the application
for appointment of an arbitrator under the arbitration clause of the partnership deed was liable to
be allowed and the learned Chief Justice has erred in overlooking the said provisions. While right to
sue for rendition of accounts of partnership firm survives on the legal representative of a deceased

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6536428/

3

partner, he is also entitled to invoke the arbitration clause contained in the partnership deed.

Rahul Verma vs Rampat Lal Verma on 21 February, 2025

xxx

29. As already stated, it was not legally essential to specifically make a mention that the partners
included their legal heirs, representatives, assigns or legatees, etc. and the arbitration clause could
be invoked by the appellant as the legatee as well as the legal heir/legal representative of the
deceased Dulari Devi particularly where the dispute had arisen during her lifetime. The appellant's
claim in the instant case is based on the will as well as being a legal heir of the deceased Dulari Devi.
The appellant, in our opinion, possessed a legal and enforceable right to invoke arbitration clause
and move application under Section 11 of the Arbitration Act before the High Court for appointment
of arbitrator. The word “party” as used in the partnership deed does not exclude inclusion of legal
heirs, legal representatives, etc. as being canvassed by the respondents. Thus, in our opinion, in view
of the provisions of Sections 40 and 46 of the Partnership Act read with Section 40 of the
Arbitration Act, the appellant has a legal right to commence arbitration by moving an application
under Section 11 of the Arbitration Act in the High Court as in our view, the right to sue survives on
him as legal representative of the deceased Dulari Devi and he is entitled to invoke Clause 13 of the
partnership deed. Moreover, the dispute referable to arbitration had already arisen during the
lifetime of Dulari Devi which is also well settled that where a dispute is referable to arbitration, the
parties cannot be compelled to take recourse to in the civil courts.” (Emphasis supplied)

9. In Jyoti Gupta v. Kewalsons & Ors., reported in 2018 SCC OnLine Del 7942, the High Court of
Delhi also held that an arbitration agreement does not stand discharged on the death of a partner
and it can be enforced by the legal heirs of the deceased-partner. It categorically held that merely
because the arbitration agreement refers to the disputes between ‘partners’, it cannot bar the legal
heirs from seeking their remedies by virtue of the arbitration agreement. The relevant observations
are reproduced hereinbelow:-

“12. A reading of the above judgments would clearly show that it is no longer res
integra that upon death of a partner, the arbitration agreement between the partners
shall survive and can be enforced by the legal heirs of the deceased partner. Whether
upon the death of a partner, the surviving partners were under an obligation to
induct one of the legal heirs of the deceased partner or not into the partnership as
also whether such decision can be challenged by the legal heirs, and in case the legal
heirs accept the decision of the surviving partners not to induct any legal heirs of the
deceased partner into the partnership, what would be the effect, are all questions to
be determined by the Arbitral Tribunal constituted in terms of the arbitration
agreement between the parties. Further, merely because the arbitration agreement
refers to the disputes between ‘partners’, the same cannot debar or take away the
right of enforcement of such an arbitration agreement vested in the legal heirs of the
deceased partner in view of Section 40 of the Act.” (Emphasis supplied)

10.It is a well-established position of law that the term ‘partners’ extends to and would include their
legal heirs, representatives, assigns or legatees, etc. Persons claiming under the rights of a deceased

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6536428/

4

Rahul Verma vs Rampat Lal Verma on 21 February, 2025

person are the representatives of the deceased party, and therefore, both the parties to the
agreement and their legal heirs are entitled to enforce an arbitral award and are bound by it. In light
of Section 40 of the Act of 1996 the existence of an arbitration agreement is not affected by the death
of a party to the arbitration agreement. As a consequence, the right to sue for rendition of account
also survives, ensuring that the legal representatives can assert or defend claims arising from the
partnership agreement.

11.Applying the above exposition of law in the facts of the present case, since the legal heirs of the
deceased partner, namely, Sampat Lal Verma, have stepped into the shoes of the deceased, clause 15
of the partnership agreement will operate to bind both the petitioners and the respondents.

12.For all the aforesaid reasons, we have reached the conclusion that no error not to speak of any
error of law could be said to have been committed by the High Court in passing the impugned
judgment.

13.As a result, the special leave petition stands dismissed. Parties shall bear their own costs. Pending
application(s), if any, stand disposed of.

…..……………………………J. (J. B. Pardiwala) ………………………………J. (R. Mahadevan) New Delhi;

21st February, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6536428/

5

