Rajnish Singh @ Soni vs State Of U.P on 3 March, 2025

Rajnish Singh @ Soni vs State Of U.P on 3 March, 2025

Author: Vikram Nath

Bench: Vikram Nath

2025 INSC 308                                                   REPORTABLE
                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S).         OF 2025
                            (ARISING OUT OF SLP(CRL.) NO(S). 8549 OF 2023)

             RAJNISH SINGH @ SONI                                ….APPELLANT(S)

                                                       VERSUS

             STATE OF U.P. AND ANOTHER                          …RESPONDENT(S)

                                                    JUDGMENT

Mehta, J.

1. Heard.

2. Leave granted.

3. The appellant herein has preferred the instant appeal by special leave, assailing the order dated
24th April, 2023, passed by the learned Single Judge of the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad1
dismissing the petition filed by the appellant, being Application U/S 482 No. 43177 of 2022, for
quashment of the proceedings of Criminal Case No. 1246 of 2022 arising out of chargesheet in Case
Crime No. 269 of 2022 under Sections 376, POOJA SHARMA Date: 2025.03.03 18:31:46 IST
Reason:

1 Hereinafter, referred to as ‘High Court’.

384, 323, 504, 506 of the Indian Penal Code, 18602 at Police Station Bakewar, District Etawah.

4. Brief facts relevant and essential for the disposal of the present appeal are reproduced
hereinbelow.

5. Ms. A, respondent No. 2-complainant3, lodged an FIR in Case Crime No. 269 of 2022 dated 5th

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66709154/

1

Rajnish Singh @ Soni vs State Of U.P on 3 March, 2025

July, 2022, against the appellant at Police Station Bakewar, District Etawah alleging, inter alia, that
she is a resident of village Kudaria and was qualified with degrees in M.Com and B.Ed. and since
2008, she had been serving on the post of Lecturer in AFS Bhemora College in Lucknow.

6. It was alleged that the accused, appellant herein, sometime in the year 2006, sneaked into the
house of the complainant in the night and subjected her to forcible sexual intercourse. She was
neither able to scream nor could call out for help as the appellant had gagged her mouth due to
which her parents, who were also present in the house, were unable to get a wind of the incident.
She warned the appellant that she would disclose about the incident to her family members, upon
which the appellant apologised profoundly and requested her to remain quiet and gave her an
assurance of marriage. The complainant, therefore, neither 2 Hereinafter, being referred to as ‘IPC’.

3 For short, ‘complainant’.

lodged any complaint nor did she take other action in respect of the incident of sexual assault upon
her.

7. The appellant initially, was working as a constable in the police department. Later, in 2009, he
joined as a Clerk in the State Bank of India in Dhani branch of Maharajganj district. In the
intervening period, the intimacy between the appellant and the complainant continued to flourish.
The appellant had once called the complainant to Maharajganj, where he made her to consume
some intoxicant mixed with ENO, without her knowledge, which made her semi-conscious. Taking
advantage, the appellant subjected her to forcible sexual intercourse. He not only video- graphed the
offending acts but later, showed it to the complainant when she regained consciousness. The
complainant, fearing retribution in society, did not share information about the said incident with
anyone. Subsequently, the complainant became pregnant which was confirmed with a pregnancy
detection kit. When this information came to the knowledge of the appellant, he mixed some
medication in water and made the complainant to drink it in order to cause miscarriage. Since the
appellant continuously blackmailed and threatened the complainant using the obscene video, she
did not tell anyone about the abortion.

8. The complainant had initially gone to meet the appellant out of her own free will, but the
appellant, later on, pressurised her under the threat of making the obscene video/pictures viral. She
would therefore, meet him only with the objective of collecting the video from him so that she could
delete it. In 2015, the appellant called the complainant to Pratapgarh and threatened her that if she
did not accede to his demands, he would make the video viral.

9. Additionally, it was also alleged in the FIR that the appellant forcibly took money from the
complainant on a number of occasions. In 2011, the appellant had taken a cheque of Rs.94,000/-
from the complainant, however, he did not return a dime to her. As the appellant threatened her by
using the obscene video of intimate relations that he possessed, she did not complain to anyone,
about the aforesaid criminal acts that had taken place with her between the years 2006 to 2021.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66709154/

2

Rajnish Singh @ Soni vs State Of U.P on 3 March, 2025

10. In 2021, a woman, named Namrata, entered into the life of the appellant, whereupon the
complainant filed a complaint with Lucknow Commissionerate. However, she was advised to go to
Etawah Police Station. Thereupon, she lodged a complaint against the appellant at the One Stop
Centre, Lalitpur on 23rd March, 2022 which was closed based upon an agreement entered into
between the complainant and the appellant, wherein they both agreed to marry each other.
However, on 22nd April, 2022, the appellant resiled from his promise and married Namrata. When
the factum of appellant’s marriage came to the complainant’s knowledge, she immediately shared
the information of the illegal acts and incidents of sexual assaults by the appellant with her family
members and the people of her community. Later, when she decided to take police action, the
appellant along with his brother- Ashwani and father-Rajbahadur made an attempt to cause harm to
her parents. On 1st May, 2022, the appellant barged into her house, in the presence of her parents,
and threatened that she would be killed if she continued with the legal cases filed by her.

11. Based on the above allegations, an FIR4 dated 5th July, 2022, came to be registered against the
appellant for the offences punishable under Sections 313, 376, 384, 323, 504 and 506 of IPC and
investigation was commenced. Almost similar allegations were set in the statements of the
complainant recorded under Sections 161 and 164 of Code of Criminal Procedure, 19735 and in
addition, she further stated that upon discovering that the appellant had developed relations with
Namrata, she had disclosed everything to 5 Hereinafter, referred to as ‘CrPC’.

her but in spite thereof, Namrata got married to appellant on 22nd April, 2022.

12. Consequent to the completion of the investigation, the police submitted a report under Section
173(2) CrPC dated 29th September, 2022, against the appellant for the offences punishable under
Sections 376, 384, 323, 504 and 506 IPC in the Court of learned Additional Chief Judicial
Magistrate, Court No.-04, Etawah. Vide order dated 10th November, 2022, the learned Magistrate
took cognizance for the above offences and issued summons to the appellant. Aggrieved, the
appellant filed a criminal petition under Section 482 CrPC seeking quashing of the proceedings in
Criminal Case No. 1246 of 2022 in the High Court. The quashing petition stands rejected vide order
dated 24th April, 2023, which is assailed in this appeal by special leave. SUBMISSIONS ON
BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT: -

13. Learned counsel for the appellant vehemently and fervently urged that the entire case as set out
in the impugned FIR and the chargesheet is false and cooked up. The complainant is a major
educated girl, who was fully conscious of the consequences of the intimate relationship which
flourished between her and the appellant for a period of almost 16 years. The acts of repeated
intimacy and sexual relations were totally consensual in nature and were not established under any
false promise, threat, duress or coercion. The appellant all along intended to marry the complainant.
He thus, urged that the case of a prolonged voluntary relationship/love affair between two
consenting adults has been given a colour of forcible sexual intercourse with oblique purposes and
motive.

14. Learned counsel further submitted that, as a matter of fact, the appellant and the complainant
had performed the rituals of marriage with each other during the subsistence of their love affair

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66709154/

3

Rajnish Singh @ Soni vs State Of U.P on 3 March, 2025

which extended to over one and a half decade. However, the relationship went sour leading to the
strife and culminated into the FIR. In this regard, he placed reliance on the application dated 25th
May, 2022, given by the complainant to the Senior Superintendent of Police, Etawah and urged that
the said application was filed prior to the lodging of the FIR, wherein the complainant had
categorically mentioned her marital status as the wife of the appellant. She had also alleged in the
complaint that her husband, i.e., the appellant herein, had refused to keep her with him.

15. Learned counsel urged that it is a case of voluntary sexual relationship between two consenting
adults and hence, the proceedings of the criminal case registered against the appellant for the
aforesaid offences, tantamount to a gross abuse of the process of law and therefore, the same
deserve to be quashed. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENTS: -

16. Per contra, learned counsel for the State and learned counsel appearing for the complainant have
vehemently opposed the submissions advanced by the counsel for the appellant. They urged that the
appellant won over the confidence of the complainant by giving her false assurances of marriage and
based on such promise he sexually exploited her, when in fact, he had no intentions to marry her.
After subjecting the complainant to forcible sexual intercourse repeatedly over a period of almost 15
years, the appellant ditched her and married another woman.

17. Learned counsel further contended that the appellant had also recorded intimate videos and
pictures of the complainant and blackmailed her under the threat of making them viral. They, urged
that the High Court was justified in dismissing the criminal petition filed by the appellant and
hence, sought rejection of the present appeal.

ANALYSIS AND CONCLUSION: -

18. We have given our anxious consideration to the submissions advanced at the bar and have
carefully gone through the impugned judgment and the material placed on record.

19. The allegation that the appellant spiked the complainant’s drink and caused her miscarriage
stands refuted as the Investigation Officer has deleted Section 313 IPC while submitting the police
report under Section 173(2) CrPC dated 29th September, 2022. Further, Investigation Officer also
concluded that the involvement of the other co-accused, i.e., the relatives of the appellant who were
arraigned by the complainant in the FIR, was not substantiated by any reliable evidence and thus,
the chargesheet was only submitted against the appellant.

20. Therefore, we have to consider whether in the facts and circumstances of the present case, the
appellant is liable to be prosecuted for committing rape upon the complainant by giving her a false
promise of marriage.

21. There is no dispute that the complainant, a highly qualified female, was major at the time when
her relationship with the appellant sprouted. The first act of sexual intercourse between the
appellant and the complainant is alleged to have taken place in the year 2006 and that too in her
own house. However, at that time, the complainant did not make any complaint to anyone,

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66709154/

4

Rajnish Singh @ Soni vs State Of U.P on 3 March, 2025

including her own family members, that the appellant had established sexual relations with her
based on an express promise to marry her in future. It needs to be highlighted that the complainant
categorically came out with a case in the FIR that the first act of sexual relation between her and the
appellant (albeit forcible as per the complainant) took place in her own house where her parents
were also present. The very manner in which this incident is said to have taken place, puts the case
of the complainant under serious doubt. It is difficult to swallow that the complainant, a
well-qualified major girl, was subjected to forcible sexual intercourse by an outsider in her own
house where her parents were present and still, they did not get a whiff about the incident. Thus, the
complainant’s allegations seem to be a well-orchestrated story and nothing beyond that.

22. It was nearly 16 years since the first incident, in a highly belated FIR, that the complainant
alleged, for the first time, that the appellant, who was on friendly terms with her, forcibly subjected
her to sexual intercourse in the year 2006. Further, she also stated that though she initially
protested to this act and intended to report the matter to the police, she changed her mind trusting
the appellant’s assurance that he loved her and if she refrained from spilling the beans, he would
marry her. Under this guise, the appellant continued to establish sexual relations with the
complainant.

23. Admittedly, the appellant got a job in the year 2006 as a Constable in the police department and
was posted in a different town. The complainant alleged that whenever the appellant would visit the
village Kudaria, he would establish sexual relations with her under the promise of marriage.
However, she has not clarified or elaborated when and where these acts of fornication took place. In
the year 2008, the complainant came to be appointed as a Lecturer in the Kendriya Vidyalaya
whereas, the appellant in the year 2009, got a job as a Clerk in the State Bank of India. As per the
complainant, in the year 2009, the appellant called her to his residence in the town Farinda, Anand
Nagar, where he mixed certain intoxicating substance in her drink and thereafter, subjected her to
sexual assault and while she was in the state of drug induced stupor, he recorded her obscene videos
and pictures. He, thereafter, sent offensive messages to the complainant on WhatsApp, threatening
that he would make her videos and pictures viral unless she continued to have sexual relations with
him.

24. It does not stand to reason that when the intimate relations were continuing between the parties
without any hitch for more than three years, then why would the appellant be impelled to take the
trouble of spiking the drink of the complainant in order to establish sexual relations with her.

25. It is hard to believe that the complainant, being a highly qualified and well-placed major woman,
kept on bending to the demands of the appellant for a period of nearly 16 years without raising any
protest to any quarter that the appellant was exploiting her sexually under the pretext of a false
promise of marriage. The prolonged period of 16 years during which the sexual relations continued
unabatedly between the parties, is sufficient to conclude that there was never an element of force or
deceit in the relationship. The complainant and the appellant were posted at different places
pursuing their respective jobs. On a few occasions, the appellant would visit the complainant at her
place whereas on other occasions, the complainant was called by the appellant to his house where
these acts of fornication continued unabatedly till the year 2020/2021. It is almost impossible to

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66709154/

5

Rajnish Singh @ Soni vs State Of U.P on 3 March, 2025

swallow the version of the complainant that for the entire period of 16 years, she unreservedly
allowed the appellant to subject her to repeated acts of sexual intercourse under the impression that
the accused would on someday act upon his promise of marriage.

26. In the case of Mahesh Damu Khare v. State of Maharashtra6, this Court held that to make a
man, accused of having sexual relationship by making a false promise of marriage, criminally liable,
the physical relationship must be traceable directly to the false promise made and it must not be
qualified by other circumstances or consideration. In a situation where the woman knowingly
maintains the physical relationship for a prolonged period, it cannot be said with certainty that the
said physical relationship was purely because of alleged promise made by the accused to marry her.

27. In conclusion, the Court held that unless it can be shown that the physical relationship was
purely because of the promise of marriage and without being influenced by any other consideration,
it cannot be said that there was vitiation of consent under misconception of fact. It was further held
that even if it is assumed that a false promise of marriage was made to the 6 2024 SCC OnLine SC
3471.

complainant initially by the accused, the fact that the relationship continued for a period of nine
long years would render the plea of the complainant that her consent for all these years was under

misconception of the fact that the accused would marry her implausible.

28. In the case of Prashant v. State (NCT of Delhi)7, this Court observed that it is
inconceivable that the complainant would continue to meet the accused or maintain a
prolonged association or physical relationship with him in the absence of voluntary
consent on her part.

29. Testing the facts of the case at hand, on the touchstone of the above precedents, it
is clear that the complainant, being a highly qualified major woman continued in a
consensual intimate sexual relationship with the appellant over a period of 16 years.
At some point in time, the relationship went sour leading to the filing of the FIR. No
reasonable man would accept the version that the complainant allowed the accused
to establish sexual relations with her over a period of 16 years purely under the
misconception of marriage.

7 2024 SCC OnLine SC 3375.

30. There is no dispute that from the year 2006 onwards, the complainant and the appellant were
residing in different towns. The complainant is an educated woman and there was no pressure
whatsoever upon her which could have prevented her from filing a police complaint against the
accused if she felt that the sexual relations were under duress or were being established under a false
assurance of marriage. On many occasions, she even portrayed herself to be the wife of the appellant
thereby, dispelling the allegation that the intention of the appellant was to cheat her right from the
inception of the relationship. We cannot remain oblivious to the fact that it was mostly the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66709154/

6

Rajnish Singh @ Soni vs State Of U.P on 3 March, 2025

complainant who used to travel to meet the appellant at his place of posting. Therefore, we are
convinced that the relationship between the complainant and appellant was consensual without the
existence of any element of deceit or misconception.

31. Further, the application filed by the complainant at One Stop Center, Lalitpur on 23rd March,
2022, makes it abundantly clear that she was in a consensual relationship with the appellant since
2006. It is alleged in the complaint that when she had proposed that they should marry and live
together, the appellant physically abused her and beat her up. If at all there was an iota of truth in
this allegation then the FIR should have been registered immediately after this incident. However, it
is only when it came to the knowledge of the complainant that the appellant was getting married to
another woman, in an attempt to stop his marriage, she filed aforesaid complaint at the One Stop
Center wherein she also admitted that she was equally guilty as the appellant and therefore, his
marriage must be stopped.

32. Further, on the perusal of the statement made by the complainant under Section 161 CrPC, it is
evident that she came to know about the relations between the appellant and Namrata in the year
2020-2021. Thus, once the complainant was aware that the appellant had broken the ties with her
and was involved in a relationship with another woman, there was no reason for her to hold back
from filing the FIR.

33. To the contrary, the complainant has herself set up a case that there was a secret marriage
ceremony between her and the appellant. Therefore, in our opinion, even if the allegations made by
the complainant are accepted on their face value, it is evident that the appellant and the
complainant were in a long-standing live-in relationship during which they even performed
marriage rituals albeit informal in nature.

34. It is trite that there is a distinction between rape and consensual intercourse. This Court in
Deepak Gulati v. State of Haryana,8 differentiated between a mere breach of promise and not
fulfilling a false promise and held that an accused will only be liable if the Courts concludes that his
intentions are mala fide and he has clandestine motives. The relevant extract is reproduced
hereinbelow: -

“21. Consent may be express or implied, coerced or misguided, obtained willingly or
through deceit. Consent is an act of reason, accompanied by deliberation, the mind
weighing, as in a balance, the good and evil on each side. There is a clear distinction
between rape and consensual sex and in a case like this, the court must very carefully
examine whether the accused had actually wanted to marry the victim, or had mala
fide motives, and had made a false promise to this effect only to satisfy his lust, as the
latter falls within the ambit of cheating or deception. There is a distinction between
the mere breach of a promise, and not fulfilling a false promise. Thus, the court must
examine whether there was made, at an early stage a false promise of marriage by the
accused; and whether the consent involved was given after wholly understanding the
nature and consequences of sexual indulgence. There may be a case where the
prosecutrix agrees to have sexual intercourse on account of her love and passion for

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66709154/

7

Rajnish Singh @ Soni vs State Of U.P on 3 March, 2025

the accused, and not solely on account of misrepresentation made to her by the
accused, or where an accused on account of circumstances which he could not have
foreseen, or which were beyond his control, was unable to marry her, despite having
every intention to do so. Such cases must be treated differently. An accused can be
convicted for rape only if the court reaches a conclusion that the intention of the
accused was mala fide, and that he had clandestine motives.

...

24. Hence, it is evident that there must be adequate evidence to show that at the
relevant time i.e. at the initial stage itself, the accused had no intention whatsoever,
of keeping his promise to marry the victim. There may, of (2013) 7 SCC 675.

course, be circumstances, when a person having the best of intentions is unable to marry the victim
owing to various unavoidable circumstances. The “failure to keep a promise made with respect to a
future uncertain date, due to reasons that are not very clear from the evidence available, does not
always amount to misconception of fact. In order to come within the meaning of the term
“misconception of fact”, the fact must have an immediate relevance”. Section 90 IPC cannot be
called into aid in such a situation, to pardon the act of a girl in entirety, and fasten criminal liability
on the other, unless the court is assured of the fact that from the very beginning, the accused had
never really intended to marry her.” (emphasis supplied)

35. It is, therefore, clear that the accused is not liable for the offence of rape if the victim has wilfully
agreed to maintain sexual relations. The Court has also recognised that a prosecutrix can agree to
have sexual intercourse on account of her love and passion for the accused.

36. This Court in Shivashankar v. State of Karnataka,9 had quashed criminal proceedings on the
ground that it is difficult to hold sexual intercourse in the course of a relationship, which continued
for eight years, as ‘rape’ especially when the complainant therein had alleged that they lived together
as man and wife. The relevant extract is reproduced hereinbelow: -

“4. In the facts and circumstances of the present case, it is difficult to sustain the
charges levelled against the appellant who may have possibly, made a false promise
of marriage to the complainant. It is, however, difficult to hold sexual intercourse in
the course of a relationship which has continued for eight years, as “rape” especially
in the face of (2019) 18 SCC 204.

the complainant's own allegation that they lived together as man and wife.” (emphasis supplied)

37. Thus, by no stretch of imagination, can this Court be convinced that present is a case wherein the
appellant is liable to be prosecuted for having sexually exploited/assaulted the complainant based
on a false promise of marriage. The allegations of the complainant are full of material contradictions
and are ex facie unbelievable. Throughout the prolonged period of 16 years, the complainant kept
completely quiet about the alleged sexual abuse, meted out to her by the appellant until she learnt

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66709154/

8

Rajnish Singh @ Soni vs State Of U.P on 3 March, 2025

that the appellant had married another woman. Further in complete contradiction to the case setup
in the FIR, the complainant has on many occasions portrayed herself to be the wife of the appellant
and thus, evidently, they lived together as man and wife. Additionally, the long gap of 16 years
between the first alleged act of sexual intercourse, continued relations for one and a half decade till
the filing of the FIR convinces us that it is a clear case of a love affair/live in relationship gone sour.

38. In this background, we are of the opinion that allowing the prosecution of the appellant to
continue for the offences alleged, under Sections 376, 384, 323, 504 and 506 IPC would be nothing
short of a gross abuse of the process of law.

39. The order dated 24th April, 2023, passed by the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad is
quashed and set aside and as a consequence, the impugned FIR No. 269 of 2022 and all the
consequent proceedings sought to be taken thereunder against the appellant are also quashed and
set aside.

40. The appeal is allowed accordingly.

41. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.

………………………….J. (VIKRAM NATH) ………………………….J. (SANDEEP MEHTA) NEW DELHI;

MARCH 03, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66709154/

9

