Raju @ Nirpendra Singh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 27 February, 2025

Raju @ Nirpendra Singh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 27
February, 2025

Author: Vikram Nath

Bench: Sanjay Karol, Vikram Nath

2025 INSC 392

                                                                       REPORTABLE
                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1172 OF 2014

                            RAJU @ NIRPENDRA SINGH                    …APPELLANT(S)

                                                    VERSUS
                            THE STATE OF MADHYA
                            PRADESH                              ...RESPONDENT(S)
                                                      WITH
                                   CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1173 OF 2014
                                AND CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.2575 OF 2014

                                                   ORDER

VIKRAM NATH, J.

1. The instant appeals have been preferred by the accused-appellants against the common judgment
dated 15.05.2013 passed by the High Court of Madhya Pradesh in Criminal Appeal No. 1850 of 2010
and other connected matters wherein the High Court had dismissed the appellants’ appeals and
affirmed the conviction 366 and 376(2)(g) of the Indian Penal Code, 18601.

2. The appeals arise from a common set of facts and interlinked offences which have been briefly
stated below. The prosecution case is that the prosecutrix, who at the relevant point of time was an
unmarried girl aged about 17 years, and was residing with her paternal aunt named Premwati since
childhood in village Chowka Sonvarsha. Indrapal (Accused No. 2, i.e. “A2”) was the Sarpanch of
Gram Panchayat Dhoraha whereas Sheshmani (Accused No. 1, i.e. “A1”) was the husband of
Sarpanch of Gram Panchayat Chowka Sonvarsh. Houses belonging to A1 Sheshmani and Premwati
were located in the same neighbourhood.

3. It was alleged that around 4th/5th June, 2005, A1 Sheshmani assured the prosecutrix, who by
then had studied upto Class X, of securing her employment in near future. Nearly 25 days later, A2

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/165147907/

1

Raju @ Nirpendra Singh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 27 February, 2025

Indrapal and Surendra (Accused No. 5, i.e. “A5”) and two unknown persons who were IPC
introduced as brothers-in-law of A5 Surendra came to the house of the prosecutrix and she was told
that A5 Surendra is a resident of Sidhi and posted at Bhopal, and will be able to secure a job for the
prosecutrix.

4. Thereafter, on 06.07.2005 at around 12 noon, A1 Sheshmani visited the house of Premwati and
asked the prosecutrix to accompany him to Rewa where she has been called in by A2 Indrapal and
A5 Surendra for the purpose of providing employment. When the prosecutrix wished to seek
permission from Premwati, A1 Sheshmani insisted on not informing Premwati who was asleep at
that time. As such, A1 Sheshmani took the prosecutrix to a house located near LPG godown in Rewa
where A2 Indrapal and Raju (Accused No. 3, i.e. “A3”) were already present. After a while, A5
Surendra also came there and all the three accused persons, i.e. A2, A3 and A5 committed rape upon
the prosecutrix. Thereafter, she was made to stay at that house till 10.07.2005 where she was
repeatedly subjected to gang rape at the hands of the appellants.

5. Subsequently, on 10.07.2005, the prosecutrix was taken by A2 Indrapal and A3 Raju to Sidhi
where Suresh (Accused No. 4, i.e. “A4”) was telephoned, post which he also came there and took the
prosecutrix to Prince Hotel where she was again subjected to rape. Thereafter, the prosecutrix was
taken to the house of one Kalli @ Kalawati with whom she was made to reside till 14.07.2005.

6. Then on 15.07.2005, the prosecutrix was brought back to the house occupied by A2 Indrapal at
Rewa where he and A3 Raju again committed gang rape on her. On the same day, they took her to
Malhar wherefrom they boarded a train. There was a woman in the same train who was previously
known to A2 Indrapal and A3 Raju and the prosecutrix was handed over to the said woman for
being taken to A5 Surendra’s place at Bhopal. However, the woman took the prosecutrix to an
unknown destination near Delhi where she was made to reside with the said woman in a house till
10.09.2005. In the intervening period, A2 Indrapal and A3 Raju frequently visited that house and
subjected the prosecutrix to rape repeatedly.

7. It was only on 08.09.2005 that A2 Indrapal informed the prosecutrix about a report alleging his
involvement in her kidnapping, post-which the woman deputed a boy to render assistance to the
prosecutrix for boarding a train to Allahabad. The prosecutrix reached Allahabad on 11.09.2005 and
from there, she straightaway proceeded to the Police Station at Laur, where upon an application
made by Premwati, a case of missing person had already been registered. Further, in light of the
statement of the prosecutrix, the SHO of P.S. Laur, district Rewa registered a case under Sections
363, 366 and 376(2)(g) of the IPC against the accused- appellants and others including the unknown
woman.

8. Subsequently, the prosecutrix was sent to GMC, Rewa where she was examined by Dr. Rajshri
Bajaj who prepared two slides from vaginal smear of the prosecutrix and observed that she was
accustomed to sexual intercourse. The prosecutrix was also examined by a Dental Surgeon, Dr. R.J.
Sharma, who by noticing the number and position of teeth erupted, ascertained the age of the
prosecutrix as below 17 years.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/165147907/

2

Raju @ Nirpendra Singh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 27 February, 2025

9. After due investigation and charge-sheet being filed, which showed all the accused-appellants as
absconding, the case was committed to the Court of Session for Trial.

10. The Trial Court, after duly examining the witnesses and appreciating the evidence on record,
held that the accused Indrapal, Suresh and Surendra kidnapped the prosecutrix, who was below 18
years of age, from lawful guardianship of her paternal aunt Premwati for committing illicit
intercourse with her and accused Indrapal, Suresh, Surendra and Raju committed gang rape on
prosecutrix several times during the period from 06.07.2005 to 12.09.2005 against her will. The
accused persons were convicted under the following sections and subjected to punishment as
follows:

Accused Conviction Punishment A1 366 IPC Rigorous imprisonment Sheshmani of
ten years along with fine of Rs. 2,000/-; in default, further rigorous imprisonment of
one year A2 Indrapal 363 IPC Rigorous imprisonment of seven years along with fine
of Rs. 1,000/-; in default, further rigorous imprisonment of six months 366 IPC
Rigorous imprisonment of ten years along with fine of Rs. 2,000/-; in default, further
rigorous imprisonment of one year 376(2)(g) IPC Rigorous imprisonment of ten
years along with fine of Rs. 2,000/-; in default, further rigorous imprisonment of one
year A3 Raju 376(2)(g) IPC Rigorous imprisonment of ten years along with fine of Rs.
2,000/-; in default, further rigorous imprisonment of one year A4 Suresh 363 IPC
Rigorous imprisonment of seven years along with fine of Rs. 1,000/-; in default,
further rigorous imprisonment of six months 366 IPC Rigorous imprisonment of ten
years along with fine of Rs. 2,000/-; in default, further rigorous imprisonment of one
year 376(2)(g) IPC Rigorous imprisonment of ten years along with fine of Rs.
2,000/-; in default, further rigorous imprisonment of one year A5 363 IPC Rigorous
imprisonment Surendra of seven years along with fine of Rs. 1,000/-; in default,
further rigorous imprisonment of six months 366 IPC Rigorous imprisonment of ten
years along with fine of Rs. 2,000/-; in default, further rigorous imprisonment of one
year 376(2)(g) IPC Rigorous imprisonment of ten years along with fine of Rs.
2,000/-; in default, further rigorous imprisonment of one year The sentence terms
awarded to accused Suresh, Indrapal and Surendra were to run concurrently.

11. All the five accused persons preferred appeals against the conviction before the
High Court. The High Court re-examined the grounds of defence put forth by the
accused persons as well as the contentions supporting the prosecution’s case and held
that the ingredients of the offences punishable under Sections 363, 366 and 376(2)(g)
of the IPC were made out beyond all reasonable doubt. However, for want of charge,
it was not possible to hold A3 Raju guilty of the offence of kidnapping. Further,
double punishment awarded to A2 Indrapal, A4 Suresh and A5 Surendra for the
offences punishable under Sections 363 and 366 was held to be in violation of Section
71 of the IPC and accordingly, separate sentences for the offence under Section 363 of
the IPC awarded to A2 Indrapal, A4 Suresh and A5 Surendra was set aside. It was
also observed that A1 Sheshmani ought to have been charged and convicted for the
offence under Section 376(2)(g) of the IPC. Accordingly, the appeals were dismissed

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/165147907/

3

Raju @ Nirpendra Singh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 27 February, 2025

and the convictions and the consequent sentences for the offences under Sections
366 and 376(2)(g) of the IPC were affirmed.

12. Aggrieved by the impugned order, all the accused persons except A5 Surendra had
approached this Court. While granting leave in this matter, vide order dated
09.05.2014, suspension of sentence was granted to the appellants subject to them
furnishing respective bail bonds in a sum of Rs. 25,000/- along with two sureties
each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the Trial Court concerned.

Consequently, since the appellant Sheshmani had since expired in the year 2016, his appeal stood
dismissed as abated, as noted vide order dated 23.01.2025.

13. We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the material on record.

14. The chief contention of the counsel for the appellants hinged on the argument that the
prosecutrix had given her consent to the act. The appellants attempted to derive such consent from
the fact that she had left her home with the appellants willingly without informing her guardian and
that the prosecutrix remained in the company of the appellants for a period of two months and
during this period, she visited many places like Siddhi, Rewa, Allahabad and Delhi using public
transport where she could have easily raised call or alarm for help, but she did not do so, which
clearly showed that prosecutrix was a consenting party. Further, it was submitted that the medical
report suggested that the prosecutrix was accustomed to sexual intercourse and there were no
injuries on her body, thereby supplementing the argument that there was no forcible sexual
intercourse, the prosecutrix had consented to the act throughout and there was no offence of rape as
alleged.

15. It was also submitted by the appellants that there was a delay of about 2 months in lodging the
FIR and such a delay was completely unjustified and unexplained. Lastly, a challenge was also raised
as to the age of the prosecutrix, as was also done before both the Courts below, arguing that the
prosecutrix had attained the age of majority at the time of the incident and therefore, on account of
her being a consenting adult party, no offence of kidnapping or rape was made out.

16. On the other hand, the counsel for the respondent State submitted that the testimony of the
prosecutrix is reliable and without any contradictions which inspires complete confidence of the
Court. Since it is well settled law that conviction for the offence of rape could be safely recorded on
the sole testimony of the prosecutrix provided that her evidence does not suffer from any basic
infirmity and probabilities factor2 and the Trial Court as well as the High Court had found
prosecutrix testimony to be reliable without any infirmities, therefore, the appeal deserves to be
dismissed on this ground alone.

17. Further, it was submitted that the delay in lodging the FIR was on account of prosecutrix being
held captive/kidnapped by the accused persons for a period of two months. With regard to the issue
of consent, it was submitted that even if in arguendo, it is assumed that the prosecutrix came with
A1 Sheshmani out of her own will, considering that the Courts below have conclusively found the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/165147907/

4

Raju @ Nirpendra Singh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 27 February, 2025

prosecutrix to be below 17 years of age and therefore, the accused persons would be liable for
offences under Sections 366 and 376(2)(g) of the IPC.

18. Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, the statements of the witnesses on record
and the findings of the Courts below, we Bharwada Bhoginbhai Hiribhai v. State of Gujarat, AIR
1983 SC 753 find that the appellants have not made any good ground on the basis of which the
concurrent findings of the two Courts below could be interfered with.

19. Firstly, the most relevant point for consideration is the age of the prosecutrix. The dental
examination of the prosecutrix was conducted and the dental surgeon (PW-8) had opined the age of
the prosecutrix to be less than seventeen years. There was further evidence produced to prove that
the prosecutrix was minor at the relevant point of time, such as photocopies of school register,
transfer certificate, which were further corroborated by the statement of the Principal of school. In
all such documents, the date of the prosecutrix was shown as 10.08.1988 and the date of the
incident was 06.07.2005, therefore the prosecutrix was aged less than seventeen years of age at the
starting date of the continuing offence. To further strengthen the finding of the prosecutrix’s age, it
must be noted that the guardian of the prosecutrix, Premwati (PW-13), had also stated the age of the
prosecutrix to be less than 18 years of age in the missing person’s report as well as in her deposition
before the Trial Court.

20. Once the age of the prosecutrix at the time of the incident is established to be that of minority,
the question of consent per se becomes irrelevant and the act shall qualify as statutory rape
nevertheless. However, even if the argument of consent is to be considered, we cannot lose sight of
the fact that the accused- appellants were men who had held the prosecutrix, who was of a tender
age, captive for a prolonged period of time by threatening her life. It would be illogical to rule out
the role played by constant fear that the prosecutrix was operating under as she was being subjected
to rape by the accused persons over the period of two months. Such a subjection to sexual
intercourse under fear of accused persons can in no way be understood to mean as consent on part
of the prosecutrix.

21. Further, the reliance of the appellants on the medical report which suggested that the
prosecutrix was accustomed to sexual intercourse shall not further their contention of the sexual act
to be consensual in nature. This is simply for the reason that such an expression as “being
accustomed to sexual intercourse” is nothing but an archaic notion of sexual purity which intends to
morally shame the victim and downplay the role of consent, or the lack thereof, in an offence of
rape. Moreover, the lack of injuries on the body of the prosecutrix shall also not be an important
factor in the facts of the case since the offence continued for a period of two months and the medical
investigation was conducted much after the first incidence of rape was committed.

22. The issue of delay shall also be inconsequential to the case since firstly, the normal rule of delay
does not apply to rape cases and further, the prosecutrix was held captive by the appellants for a
period of two months and had no means to register the FIR earlier.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/165147907/

5

Raju @ Nirpendra Singh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 27 February, 2025

23. Further, we find it of utmost importance to note here that the statement of the prosecutrix made
in the chief-examination regarding sexual assaults committed by the accused persons remained
totally unimpeached even after being subjected to a lengthy cross-examination. It is to be noted that
none of the so-called discrepancies in the evidence of the prosecutrix with reference to her case diary
statement shook the veracity of the prosecution case.

24. Lastly, the counsel for the appellants had argued in favour of reducing the sentence awarded to
the period already undergone considering that the accused-appellants have been enlarged on bail for
a considerable period of time now. However, we find no mitigating circumstances in the instant case
so as to reduce the punishment as lesser than the minimum statutory sentence prescribed in the
IPC. We are in no way inclined to trivialize the misery and exploitation that has been suffered by the
prosecutrix, a young girl from a village who was kidnapped on the pretext of securing her a job by
men in whom she imposed some level of trust, and then subjected to an offence as heinous as gang
rape for an elongated period of two months. The ends of justice shall be met only when the
accused-appellants have suffered the entire period of sentence that they have been awarded and
thereby, no leniency is merited in the facts of the case.

2 5 .   A c c o r d i n g l y ,   t h e   a p p e a l s   a r e   d i s m i s s e d   a n d   t h e   i m p u g n e d   o r d e r   i s   u p h e l d .   T h e
accused-appellants, who are currently enlarged on bail, are hereby directed to serve the remaining
period of sentence, as awarded by the High Court. As such, eight weeks’ time is granted to the
appellants to surrender before the concerned Trial Court.

26. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.

………………………..J. [VIKRAM NATH] …………………………..J. [SANJAY KAROL] NEW DELHI;

FEBRUARY 27, 2025

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/165147907/

6

