Rakesh Kumar Raghuvanshi vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 16 January, 2025

Rakesh Kumar Raghuvanshi vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh
on 16 January, 2025

2025 INSC 96
                                                                                                REPORTABLE

                                             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                            CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                           CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1953 OF 2014

                         RAKESH KUMAR RAGHUVANSHI                                      APPELLANT(S)

                                                                  VERSUS

                         THE STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH                                   RESPONDENT(S)

                                                        O R D E R

1. This appeal arises from the judgment and order dated 7th May, 2013 passed by the High Court of
Madhya Pradesh, Jabalpur Bench at Indore in Crl.A.No.1213 of 1997 by which the High Court
dismissed the appeal filed by the appellant herein and thereby affirmed the judgment and order of
conviction passed by the Trial Court for the offence punishable under Section 8 read with Section 15
of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (For short “the NDPS Act”).

2. The case of the prosecution may be summarized as under:

(i) An ASI officer by name Musharraf Beg lodged an FIR No.713/96 dated 30.12.1996
with the S.H.O., Police Station, G.R.P. Ujjain which reads thus:

”Regarding registration of the crime, it is submitted that I, ASI M.Beg received
information from the informer while attending the duty on 29.12.96 at 22.15 o'clock
that a dark complexioned person is traveling in Bhopal Rajkot 1270 up train in the
gallery of the bathroom at the last compartment of General Coach, carrying three
separate cartoon packets. He is sitting on one of them. This information was entered
in General Diary no. 2381 on 29.12.96 and to confirm the information constable Braj
Mohan was sent to summon witnesses Rakesh and Prakash and they were made
aware of the information received from the informer. The panchnama of the
information of the information was prepared. Headquarter of senior officials of
Railway Region Indore is in Indore. As per the Information, on the possibility of the
alteration of article and for the confirmation of the said information being necessary
and looking at the circumstances, the search warrant could not be received whose
panchnama has been prepared. Two copies of the panchnama of the information of

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188015792/

1

Rakesh Kumar Raghuvanshi vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 16 January, 2025

the informer, in the situation of not receiving the search warrant the copy of the
panchnama under section 42 of NDPS Act was sent to Superintendent of Police
Railway, Indore through constable Dispatch rider no. 6735 of police station on
29.12.96. As per the information mentioned in General Diary No., reached along with
Head Constable Bharat Pandey, Head Constable Pradeep Singh, Constable Brij
Mohan Singh with the summoned witnesses, necessary materials Tarazu, baant, seal,
shellac etc to the spot at Platform no.1 of railway station, near parcel office, near ver
bridge. On the arrival of the train, deputed accompanied force near to the coach and
train guard constable 405 Umashankar and 610 Rajendra Singh. Searched the
suspect along with the witnesses in the coach No. 91105 and on confirming the
features of the suspect before the witnesses and in his sudden attempt to leave the
coach, he was stopped with the assistance of accompanying force. He was summoned
along with three cartoons he possessed, out of the coach.

Since, it will take time on the confirmation of the information and the train stays for the less time.
The moment he came out with the luggage out of the train, was asked name and address. He told his
name Rakesh son of Shankar Lal resident of Sanwal Kheda, Tehsil and District Hoshangabad.
Subsequently also stated that at present he is living in Chhola Naka House No.44, in the house of
Kallu at Bhopal and paying the rent of Rs 300/- per month. So, he was informed that he is having
the opium poppy husk in three cartoons which he possessed and he is smuggling to sell them. I have
to take the search of all three cartoons possessed by you. You could give your search before
Magistrate or Gazetted officer or even could be . given before me. You could give your search to
anyone. On this, appearing Rakesh gave his consent to give the search to me of which the
panchnama of the consent was prepared before the witnesses. Rakesh took the body search of the
force accompanying me and the witnesses. Nothing suspected object could be found. Thereafter, the
search of the body of Rakesh was conducted. The three cartoons were searched then opium poppy
husk was found which was smelt and tasted to witnesses who revealed to be opium poppy husk.
Then, after this the panchnama of possessing the suspected article, panchnama of being smelt and
tasted and panchnama of the measurement were prepared, it was measured in parcel office which
was carried by Mithu Lal son of Satya Narayan, Begumpura. all three cartoons and kept on the
measurement scale of parcel officer M.K.Jaiswal, measured the cartoons measured 17 kg, 17 kg and
16 kg respectively making a total of 50 kg of poppy husk, having the value of Rs 3500/- thus he was
found possessing these articles Illegally and on stating of not finding in written or by any proof, the
seizure memo was prepared. The copy of the panchnama was made. Since I was not having the seal
with my name so the action done at the place of occurrence was affixed with the seal of police
station. The samples from the packets of the seized Opium poppy husk where article A - 1 A - 2 B - 1
B

- 2 C - 1 and C-2 were marked and to send them to the Forensic Science Laboratory for examination;
a sample comprising of 250 grams each were taken out from each of the cartoons. The criminal case
under section 8/15 of NDPS Act is found on the aforesaid action made against Rakesh at the place of
occurrence. Due to this reason, panchnama was prepared. Thus on panchnama of the action
conducted at the aforesaid place of occurrence and as per the details of the seizure articles of the
case along with the accused Rakesh are being produced to police station for further action. Please do

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188015792/

2

Rakesh Kumar Raghuvanshi vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 16 January, 2025

the further action.

On the basis of the aforesaid written information and the seizure made at the place of occurrence
and from other documents, a criminal case under section 8/15 of NDPS Act is registered and took
for the investigation.

Action taken: Since the above report reveals commission of offence(s) u/s 8/15 of NDPS Act-----
Registered the case and took up the investigation or, Directed/entrusted (Name of I.O.)-ASI Beg to
take up the investigation.

13.F.I.R. read over to complainant/informant, admitted to be correctly recorded and a copy given to
the complainant/informant, free of cost. ”

(ii) Thus it appears from the aforesaid that the appellant was travelling on 29.12.1996 by Train
No.1270, Bhopal Rajkot Express. There was information with the Department that a young boy was
travelling with three packets of poppy husk and was sitting in the general coach. The information
was to the extent that he was sitting near bath room alongwith three cartons of poppy husk. It was
also specified that he was sitting on one of the packets containing contraband and the other two
were next to him. When the train, referred to above, arrived at the platform, the raiding party
identified the boy and asked him to come out of the coach alongwith the three cartons. The
appellant herein disembarked the coach with three cartons. He was searched and was found to be in
conscious possession of poppy husk weighing around 50 Kgs.

3. On FIR being registered the investigation commenced. At the end of the investigation Police filed
charge sheet in the Special Court. The Special Court proceeded to frame charge for the offence
enumerated above to which the appellant pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried.

4. In the Course of the trial, the prosecution examined eleven witnesses. The prosecution also relied
upon few pieces of documentary evidence.

5. Upon closure of the recording of the evidence by the prosecution the further statement of the
appellant was recorded under section 313 of the CrPC. In his further statement, he stated that he
was falsely implicated in the alleged offence. He further stated that he was travelling with a valid
ticket. He was to visit his relative residing in Maninagar (Gujarat). He was detained at Ujjain
Railway Police Station (M.P.).

6. The Trial Court upon appreciation of the oral as well as documentary evidence on record held the
appellant guilty of the alleged offence and sentenced him to undergo 10 years rigorous
imprisonment with fine of Rs.1,00,000/-. The appellant went in appeal before the High Court. His
appeal also came to be dismissed.

7. In such circumstances referred to above, the appellant is here before this Court with the present
appeal.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188015792/

3

Rakesh Kumar Raghuvanshi vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 16 January, 2025

8. Ms. Pragati Neekhra, the learned counsel appearing for the appellant vehemently submitted that
the Trial Court as well as the High Court committed a serious error in holding the appellant guilty of
the offence under the NDPS Act. The principal argument of the learned counsel for the appellant is
that there is nothing on record to indicate that the appellant was in conscious possession of the
contraband. According to the learned counsel, when the officers asked him to come out of the coach
with the three cartons he was left with no option but to abide by the directions of the officers and
that is how he got down from the coach with the three cartons. According to the learned counsel
otherwise he had nothing to do with the three cartons. The Learned counsel would submit that the
search was carried out at a public place like a railway platform. There were many passengers in the
train and the three cartons could have belonged to any one of the passengers. In such circumstances,
according to the learned counsel the appellant deserves to be given a benefit of doubt.

9. Learned counsel prayed that there being merit in her appeal, the same may be allowed and the
appellant be acquitted of the charge enumerated above.

10. On the other hand, Mr. Bhupendra Pratap Singh, the learned counsel appearing for the State
submitted that no error not to speak of any error of law could be said to have been committed by the
two Courts below in holding the appellant guilty of the alleged offence. He would submit that there
is cogent and reliable evidence on record to indicate that the appellant was in conscious possession
of the three cartons containing poppy husk. He further pointed out that there was a specific
information which was reduced into writing in accordance with law that a young boy was travelling
in train referred to above and had in his possession contraband in the form of poppy husk.
Accordingly, search was undertaken and the appellant was found to be in possession. He would
submit that there being no merit in this appeal. The same may be dismissed.

11. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having gone through the
materials on record, the only question that falls for our consideration is whether the Courts below
committed any error in holding the appellant guilty of the alleged offence.

12. Learned counsel appearing for the appellant invited our attention to a decision of this Court in
the case of Avtar Singh v. State of Punjab reported in (2002) 7 SCC 419. Although the learned
counsel seeks to rely upon this judgment for the benefit of her client yet unfortunately the ratio of
the judgment or rather the dictum laid therein goes against the appellant. The relevant observations
are as under:

“The word 'possession' no doubt has different shades of meaning and it is quite
elastic in its connotation. Possession and ownership need not always go together but
the minimum requisite element which has to be satisfied is custody or control over
the goods. Can it be said, on the basis of the evidence available on record, that the
three appellants one of whom was driving the vehicle and other two sitting on the
bags, were having such custody or control? It is difficult to reach such conclusion
beyond reasonable doubt. It transpires from evidence that the appellants were not
the only occupants of the vehicle. One of the persons who was sitting in the cabin and
another person sitting at the back of the truck made themselves scarce after seeing

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188015792/

4

Rakesh Kumar Raghuvanshi vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 16 January, 2025

the police and the prosecution could not establish their identity. It is quite probable
that one of them could be the custodian of goods whether or not he was the
proprietor. The persons who were merely sitting on the bags, in the absence of proof
of anything more, cannot be presumed to be in possession of the goods. For instance,
if they are labourers engaged merely for loading and unloading purposes and there is
nothing to show that the goods were at least in their temporary custody, conviction
under Section 15 may not be warranted. At best, they may be abettors, but, there is no
such charge here. True, their silence and failure to explain the circumstances in
which they were traveling in the vehicle at the odd hours, is one strong circumstance
that can be put against them. A case of drawing presumption under Section 114 of the
Evidence Act could perhaps be made out then to prove the possession of the accused,
but, the fact remains that in the course of examination under Section 313 Cr.P.C, not
even a question was asked that they were the persons in possession of poppy husk
placed in the vehicle. The only question put to them was that as per the prosecution
evidence, they were sitting on the bags of poppy husk. Strangely enough, even the
driver was questioned on the same lines. The object of examination under S. 313, it is
well known, is to afford an opportunity to the accused to explain the circumstances
appearing in the evidence against him. It is unfortunate that no question was asked
about the possession of goods. Having regard to the charge of which appellants were
accused, the failure to elicit their answer on such a crucial aspect as possession, is
quite significant. In this state of things, it is not proper to raise a presumption under
Section 114 of Evidence Act nor is it safe to conclude that the prosecution established
beyond reasonable doubt that the appellants were in possession of poppy husk which
was being carried by the vehicle. The High Court resorted to the presumption under
Section 35 which relates to culpable state of mind, without considering the aspect of
possession. The trial court invoked the presumption under S. 54 of the Act without
addressing itself to the question of possession. The approach of both the courts is
erroneous in law. Both the courts rested their conclusion on the fact that the accused
failed to give satisfactory explanation for travelling in the vehicle containing poppy
husk at an odd hour. But, the other relevant aspects pointed out above were neither
adverted to nor taken into account by the trial court and the High Court. Non-
application of mind to the material factors has thus vitiated the judgment under
appeal.” (Emphasis supplied)

13. In Avtar Singh (supra), some of the occupants who were travelling in the car on being
intercepted were in a position to escape. In such circumstances, the prosecution was unable to
identify them during the course of investigation. This Court observed that anyone of those who
made good their escape could be the actual custodian of the contraband seized from the vehicle. This
Court further observed that the persons who were merely sitting on the bags, in the absence of proof
of anything more, cannot also be presumed to be in possession of the contraband seized from the
vehicle. Further, this Court held that for failure of the Trial Court to examine the accused under
Section 313(1)(b) CrPC with respect to their possession which is the main and foremost
incriminating element to attract the offence alleged against the accused, the prosecution could not
have claimed to have established the guilt of the accused under Section 15 of the NDPs Act beyond

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188015792/

5

Rakesh Kumar Raghuvanshi vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 16 January, 2025

the reasonable doubt. In such circumstances, the judgment of the Trial Court convicting the accused
for the offence under Section 15 NDPS Act was reversed by this Court.

14. Thus, before the Court holds the accused guilty of the offence under the NDPS Act, possession is
something that the prosecution needs to establish with cogent evidence. If the accused is found to be
in possession of any contraband which is a narcotic drug, it is for the accused to account for such
possession satisfactorily, if not, the presumption under Section 54 comes into place.

15. Section 54 of the NDPS Act being relevant in the context on hand is extracted hereunder for
convenient reference:

“54. Presumption from possession of illicit articles.

—In trials under this Act, it may be presumed, unless and until the contrary is
proved, that the accused has committed an offence under this Act in respect of —

(a) any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance or controlled substance;

(b) any opium poppy, cannabis plant or coca plant growing on any land which he has
cultivated;

(c) any apparatus specially designed or any group of utensils specially adopted for the
manufacture of any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance or controlled substance;
or

(d) any materials which have undergone any process towards the manufacture of a
narcotic drug or psychotropic substance or controlled substance, or any residue left
of the materials from which any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance or
controlled substance has been manufactured, for the possession of which he fails to
account satisfactorily.”

16. Therefore, as envisaged by the provision itself, unless and until the contrary is proved in trials of
cases involving offences coming within the purview of the NDPS Act, it may be presumed that the
accused has committed an offence under the Act in respect of any articles prohibited to be possessed
by him and for the possession of which, he failed to account satisfactorily. Therefore, it is the burden
of the prosecution to establish that the contraband was seized from the conscious possession of the
accused. Only when that aspect has been successfully proved by the prosecution, the onus will shift
to the accused to account for the possession legally and satisfactorily.

17. We looked into the evidence as regards possession and are convinced that the appellant was
found to be in conscious possession of the three cartons containing poppy husk. The defence put
forward by the appellant that he had no idea about the three cartons and that he got down from the
coach alongwith the three cartons only because the officers asked him to come out of the coach is
something which is not palatable to us.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188015792/

6

Rakesh Kumar Raghuvanshi vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 16 January, 2025

18. We have looked into the further statement of the accused. We do not find any satisfactory reply
or explanation as to how come he was sitting on one of the cartons and the other two cartons were
closely placed next to him.

19. In such circumstances, Section 54 referred to above, comes into play and the court would be
justified in drawing the presumption that the accused was in conscious possession.

20. Section 35 of the NDPS Act deals with the presumption of culpable mental state. It states that in
any prosecution under the NDPS Act, the court shall presume that the accused had the requisite
mental state, including intention, knowledge, and motive, unless the accused can prove otherwise.
This shifts the burden of proof onto the accused to demonstrate that they lacked knowledge or intent
regarding the possession of the drugs.

21. Conscious possession refers to a scenario where an individual not only physically possesses a
narcotic drug or psychotropic substance but is also aware of its presence and nature. In other words,
it requires both physical control and mental awareness. This concept has evolved primarily through
judicial interpretation since the term “conscious possession” is not explicitly defined in the NDPS
Act. This Court through various of its decisions has repeatedly underscored that possession under
the NDPS Act should not only be physical but also conscious. Conscious possession implies that the
person knew that he had the illicit drug or psychotropic substance in his control and had the intent
or knowledge of its illegal nature.

22. In Abdul Rashid Ibrahim Mansuri v. State of Gujarat reported in 2000 (2) SCC 513, this Court
highlighted that once the prosecution proves physical possession, the burden shifts to the accused to
explain how he came into possession of the contraband and prove that he was not aware of its
presence or nature. The Court ruled that a person who admits that drugs were found in his
possession must prove that he had no knowledge of the illicit nature of the substance.

23. In Madan Lal v. State of Himachal Pradesh reported in (2003) 7 SCC 465, this Court was dealing
with a case where all the accused persons were travelling in a vehicle when they were nabbed and
recoveries were made from them. The relevant extracts from the said judgment are set out below:

“19. Whether there was conscious possession has to be determined with reference to
the factual backdrop. The facts which can be culled out from the evidence on record
are that all the accused persons were travelling in a vehicle and as noted by the trial
court they were known to each other and it has not been explained or shown as to
how they travelled together from the same destination in a vehicle which was not a
public vehicle.

20. Section 20(b) makes possession of contraband articles an offence. Section 20
appears in Chapter IV of the Act which relates to offences for possession of such
articles. It is submitted that in order to make the possession illicit, there must be a
conscious possession.”

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188015792/

7

Rakesh Kumar Raghuvanshi vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 16 January, 2025

24. In the overall view of the matter, we are convinced that the High Court committed no error in
dismissing the appeal and thereby affirming the judgment and order of conviction passed by the
Trial Court.

25. In view of the aforesaid, the appeal fails and is hereby dismissed.

26. The appellant is on bail. He shall surrender within a period of eight weeks to serve out the
remaining part of the sentence.

………………………………………………J. [J.B. PARDIWALA] ………………………………………………J. [R.
MAHADEVAN] NEW DELHI.

JANUARY 16, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188015792/

8

