Ramesh A. Naika vs The Registrar General High Court Of ... on 13 February, 2025

Ramesh A. Naika vs The Registrar General High Court Of ... on
13 February, 2025

Author: Sanjay Karol

Bench: Sanjay Karol, Vikram Nath

2025 INSC 303

                                                                         REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS.877-878 OF 2020

                            RAMESH A. NAIKA                          …     APPELLANT(S)

                                                         VERSUS

                            THE REGISTRAR GENERAL, HIGH
                            COURT OF KARNATAKA ETC. … RESPONDENT(S)

                                                        ORDER

SANJAY KAROL, J.

1. A child’s parents are their reason for existence and form an indispensable part of their lives, even
more so, in the early years of life. Parents are expected to be loving, nurturing and sometimes
disciplining guides in life. Abraham Lincoln is said parents1”. In the classical traditions of India,
however, parents are placed on a higher pedestal, at an exalted position, as their word equals the
word of God. While it is true that in modern times, we refrain from making such comparisons,
nonetheless, it cannot be said that the irreplaceability, essentiality, importance, and desirousness of
the love, affection, and stewardship of parents, has been watered down in any way. One is forced to
wonder, in the facts of this case, how these cherished ideals could have been entirely absent.

THE APPEALS

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144587164/

1

Ramesh A. Naika vs The Registrar General High Court Of ... on 13 February, 2025

2. These appeals challenge judgment dated 22nd September 2017, passed by the High Court of
Karnataka at Bengaluru in Criminal Referred Case No.2 of 2014 and Criminal Appeal No.196 of
2014 confirming the conviction and death sentence awarded to the appellant under Section 366(1),
Code of Criminal Procedure, 19732. Also, by the accused seeking setting aside the conviction under
Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 3 and sentence of death, respectively imposed by
judgment and order dated 26th November 2013 and 3rd December 2013 by the V Additional District
a n d   S e s s i o n s   J u d g e ,
  D a k s h i n   K a n n a d a ,
https://home.nps.gov/liho/learn/historyculture/alincolnbio.htm Hereafter ‘Cr.P.C.’ Hereafter
‘I.P.C.’ Mangaluru sitting at Puttur4 in Sessions Case No.28 of 2011.

FACTS

3. The facts, as can be understood from the record are that :

The appellant-convict was a respectable member of society working as a Manager at
the Solapur Branch of the Punjab National Bank. He was married to Smt. Sundari
(PW-2) who was herself an employee of the State Bank of Mysore, Mangalore Branch.
They had two children – 10-year-old Bhuvanraj and 3½- year-old Krithika5. It is
alleged that the appellant-convict was dissatisfied with the behaviour and life choices
of his sister-in- law, Ms. Savitha whom he had gotten a job at the Provident Fund
office, who fell in love with her co-worker Mr. P. Mohan (PW-

19) and wanted to pursue matrimonial life with him. Further, the appellant-accused
first tried to get his wife to dissuade Ms. Savitha from going down her chosen path
but was persuaded to refrain from interfering therein. Subsequently, while visiting
Tumkur (residence of Ms. Savitha, and Mrs. Saraswathi, mother-

in-law, and ancestral village of the appellant-accused) and Mangalore (where Smt. Sundari resided
with the deceased children), from Solapur where he was posted, when this issue again came up, he
once again found Smt. Sundari not to be Hereafter ‘Trial Court’ Hereafter ‘deceased children’
supporting his stand. As such, to teach her and his sister-in-law a lesson, he decided to end the lives
of the latter, his own children, Smt. Saraswathi, and then to get his wife to commit suicide.

In furtherance of this design, he killed, it is alleged by the prosecution, Ms. Savitha and Ms.
Saraswathi at Tumkur Village, by dumping their bodies in the sump tank of his house there on 16th
June 2010 and then came to Mangalore the next day. Here, having gotten in touch with PW-3, his
nephew, he secured the locker keys from his wife, met PW-1, her brother, and gave him
Rs.17,00,000/-. He then returned home and then, on the pretext of showing them around the city,
took his children in the cab of PW-9, Firoze, to the gardens situated on the property of PW-7, Mr.
Sathyanarayana Prasad, where he was seen arriving by Mr. Mahalinga Naika PW-4 and there
drowned them in the tank. Having done so, he sent a message to his wife, informing her that the
said persons were no longer in the land of the living, and she too should follow suit by ending her
life in a well. Concerned by this, she informed her relatives, who advised approaching the
authorities.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144587164/

2

Ramesh A. Naika vs The Registrar General High Court Of ... on 13 February, 2025

Eventually, with the assistance of various persons, the bodies of the deceased children were found in
the water tank in the gardens of PW-7. PW-1 set the law in motion by registering the FIR in Crime
No.56/2010 on 17th June, 2010. The appellant- convict was apprehended at Rama Lodge in Puttur.
Chargesheet was filed on 20th August, 2010. Here only it is clarified that the present appeals deals
only with the murder of the two children and, in relation to the other deceased, the accused already
stands tried separately.

PREVIOUS PROCEEDINGS

4. The prosecution examined 19 witnesses and exhibited 19 documents and 10 material objects in
evidence. On behalf of the defence, no other evidence apart from the exhibition of one document,
during the course of the cross-examination of PW-16, was led. The Trial Court framed five issues
which are extracted hereinunder:

“1. Whether the prosecution is able to prove the homicidal death of the children of the
accused Bhuvanraj and Krithika?

2. Whether the prosecution is able to prove the motive against the accused?

3. Whether the prosecution is able to prove that, on 16-06-2010 in he afternoon the
accused picked his children Bhuvanraj and Krithika from his house at Mangalore
with a soleintention of committing their murder, brough them to Ardamoole of
Panaje Village of Puttur Taluk drowned them in water tank situated in the areca
garden of PW7 Mr. SatyanarayanaPrasad, resulting their death?

4. Whether the prosecution is able to prove the offence U/Sec.302 of IPC against the
accused?

5. What Order or relief?” On the first issue, reliance is placed on the testimonies of
PW1-Mr. P. Aithappa Naika, PW2-Smt. Sundari, PW3-Mr. Dayananda, PW4-Mr.
Mahalinga Naika, PW5-Panch witness, PW6-Mr. Kripashankar, PW7-Mr. A.R.
Sathyanarayana Prasad, PW8-Mr. Keshava Moorthy, PW9-Mr. P.S. Firoze,
PW10-Mr. Ramesh K., PW11-Dr. Geethalaxmi, PW12-Dr. Deepak Rai. It is recorded
that, while searching for the deceased children, PWs 1 to 3 and 9 arrived at Ardamole.
They got in touch with PW-4 and, ultimately, along with PW-7, found the bodies
floating in water.

PW-12, Dr. Deepak Rai, concluded that the death of the children was due to drowning in water. Such
a conclusion was supported by the evidence of PW-11 Dr Geethalaxmi. It was further established by
the evidence of PW-4 that the appellant- convict was originally a resident of Ardamole. These
circumstances along with the consideration of his statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C., the
homicidal death was proved.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144587164/

3

Ramesh A. Naika vs The Registrar General High Court Of ... on 13 February, 2025

4.1. The next question was that of motive. In determining the same, reference is made to the
statements of Smt. Sundari (PW-2), Mr. P. Mohan (PW-19). The conclusion of the Trial Court is as
below: -

“39. Now the totality of the evidence did not point out that for the reason of Ms.
Savitha fell in love with PW19 which was not acceptable to the accused, who expected
Ms.Savitha to respect him properly by obliging his words and in doing so she was
compelled with disassociate with PW19 by braking her relationship with him – and to
take brake her proposal to marry PW19. When he has expected the assistance of his
wife PW2 to mend the ways of Ms. Savitha which did not give any positive result as
the accused was padfied and he was asked to keep quite from the affairs of Ms.
Savitha, the accused himself intervened with the affairs of Ms. Savitha in the indirect
manner by calling PW19 expressing dissatisfaction about their marriage proposal and
accused made attempts to see that the relationship between Ms. Savitha and PW19
breaks away by means of transfer of PW19. The accused though successful in getting
transfer of PW19 from one section to another Section, as Ms. Savitha and PW19
decided to go ahead with their proposed marriage, as a last resort the accused meddle
with PW2 compelled her to convince Ms. Savitha to take brake from the proposed
marriage as PW2 did advise her husband that the parents and brothers of Ms, Savitha
will take care of her affairs and asking him to keep quite, accused used the life of the
children and himself as weapon of offence against PW2 and for this background
leading to death of the children explained clear version of the prosecution. There are
no other hypothesis which can be possible to take out from the evidence as well the
defence from the ocular evidence on record. Hence the motive for the incident has
been explained by the prosecution is in the manner proposed. In the result point
No.2 is answered in the Affirmative.” 4.2. The question next to be considered was
whether, when the appellant-convict picked up the deceased children from his house
in Mangalore, the sole intention was of committing their murders. It was noted that
the case rests on circumstantial evidence. The circumstances, listed by the
prosecution as pointing cumulatively to the guilt of the appellant-convict, are -

“78. Now the prosecution has proposed several chains of circumstances which are

1. Arrival of the accused to Mangalore on 16-06-2010;

2) Accused moving with the children from Mangaldore to Ardamoole in a taxi belongs to PW9;

3) The accused was seen together with the children at Ardamoole and he was seen alone at
Ardamoole moving towards Puttur;

4) The accused sending SMS messages to PW2 indicating the fate of himself as well as the children
and directing her to do certain act as her fate,

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144587164/

4

Ramesh A. Naika vs The Registrar General High Court Of ... on 13 February, 2025

5) PW2 meeting PW9, who taking them to Ardamoole where with the assistance of PW4, 6, 7 the
dead bodies of the children was found in the pond of PW7,

6) thereafter the accused was found stayed at Hotel Rama at Puttur and he has been apprehended
on 17-06-

       2010,

       7)    homicidal death of the children,

       8)    motive for the incident and

       9)     failure on the part of the accused to offer explanation

for the incriminating evidence appeared against him:” 4.3. It was held that the circumstances did
indeed point to the guilt of the appellant and that the defence could not point to any alternative
hypothesis to establish his innocence. He was in the company of the deceased children and none
else, hence the application of the last seen theory - he had to explain that since they were with him,
and a short time later they were found to be deceased, it was incumbent upon him to furnish an
explanation. Since none is forthcoming, all circumstances considered, the chain is completed.

4.4. Qua the fourth question it is held that none of the exceptions mentioned in Section 300 I.P.C.
are attracted in this case, and as such, essential ingredients of Section 302 I.P.C. were met,
warranting his conviction thereunder.

4.5. As such, it was held that the prosecution had proved its case beyond reasonable doubt.
Thereafter, vide order of sentencing dated 3rd December 2013, the Court balanced the aggravating
and mitigating circumstances, to conclude that the act of the appellant-convict did indeed fall into
the rarest category, deserving the harshest penalty known to the criminal justice system, i.e., the
penalty of death.

5. As per the requirement of law, the matter traveled to the High Court in confirmation proceedings.
The appellant-convict also filed an appeal. The High Court, having heard the parties, held that his
arrival at Mangalore, taking his kids around the city and eventually to the gardens of PW-7, and the
short time gap between when the children and the appellant-convict were seen together and the
discovery of the deceased children’s bodies, i.e., three circumstances taken together are sufficient to
drive home the guilt of the accused. In doing so, the testimonies of PW-1, PW-2, PW-3, PW-4, PW-7
and PW-9 have been relied upon. Having observed thus, the Court then went on to make certain
observations regarding the messages and call records produced. An objection to the effect that the
same are inadmissible in Court, and the Trial Court ought not to have considered the same in the
absence of a certificate under Section 65-B of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, was raised, however,
the same was cast aside, holding that their production was not as a piece of substantive evidence,
and instead, was used to corroborate the evidence of PW-1 and PW-2, and also to establish the
movements of the appellant-convict. It was held as under – “31. With regard to the contents of SMS
are concerned, we fully approve the procedure adopted by the learned Sessions Judge in bringing on

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144587164/

5

Ramesh A. Naika vs The Registrar General High Court Of ... on 13 February, 2025

record the contents of these SMS. We have perused the lower court records. It is seen that the
learned Sessions Judge has passed a detailed order on the applications made by the prosecution
under Sections 3, 62 and 65B of the Evidence Act and Sections 230 and 311 Cr.P.C. on 19.4.2013.
Further, the proceedings dated 22.10.2013 reveal that M.Os 1 and 4 viz., the mobiles which were
seized by the Investigating agency, were opened in the open court. These mobile phones were
charged and SMS therein were transcribed by the court in the open court. These transcriptions were
very much available to the accused at the time of cross-examination of the witnesses. Therefore, it
does not like in the mouth of the accused now to contend that reliance on this material is illegal or
contrary to the procedure prescribed under the Evidence Act. Even otherwise the law is well settled
that objection regarding the proof of documents if not taken at the time when the document is
produced before the court, the party cannot be permitted to raise the said objection at the appeal
stage. In SONU@ AMAR vs. STATE OF HARYANA (2017 SCC ONLINE SC 765), the Hon’ble
Supreme Court had an occasion to consider such an issue…” “32. The accused had full and ample
opportunity to explain the circumstance of SMS sent by him. The accused having not offered any
explanation, the trial court was justified in placing reliance on the contents of these messages. The
Trial Court has reproduced the contents of these messages in the impugned judgment in verbatim
and we do not find it necessary to burden the record of reproducing them over again. Suffice it to
note that the author of these SMS and call records have been proved and these SMS lend suitable
corroboration to the testimony of PW-2 that accused sent a false message through the Mobile
(M.O.6) of deceased Savitha, after her death misleading PW-2 that she was admitted in Manipal
Hospital and further that after drowning the children in the tank, he sent her the message through
his mobile M.O.4 that he had already sent his mother-in-law, sister-in-law and children to heaven.”
On motive, it was observed that the differences stemmed from the opposing stands taken by PW-2
and other members of her family regarding Ms. Savitha’s relationship with Mr. P. Mohan (PW-19).
The appellant-convict was of the view that the said relationship should be disapproved of, and as a
result broken off, but this position did not get any support from others and as such, he resolved to
eliminate the members of PW-2’s family and his own children.

As such, it was concluded as under :

“Thus, on ultimate analysis of all of the above facts and circumstances, the gravity
and the magnitude of the offences, committed by the accused, the depraved manner
in which he committed four murders including that of his minor children, the utter
lack of remorse on part of the accused , his determination to annihilate almost all
members of the immediate family of PW.2 and the threats issued to her and the
surviving members of her family and also in the larger interest of the society, the
Trial Court was justified in awarding death sentence to the accused. We do not find
any good reason to commute the death sentence to life imprisonment with or without
remission. We do not find any mitigating circumstance warranting commutation or
to take any lenient view in the matter. On thorough and careful consideration of the
entirematerial on record and on appraisal of all the attending facts and circumstances
as discussed above, we are of the firm view that in the fact situation of the present
case, death penalty is the only just and appropriate punishment that requires to be
imposed on the accused. The reference made by the Trial Court deserves to be

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144587164/

6

Ramesh A. Naika vs The Registrar General High Court Of ... on 13 February, 2025

accepted.”

6. It is clearly a case of circumstantial evidence. What needs to be examined in such a
case, no longer needs reiteration. The principles to be applied in consideration of the
evidence have been christened the ‘Panchsheel Principles’ detailed in the Sharad
Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra6 judgment, delivered by three learned
Judges of this Court. Here itself, it may be emphasized that both the Courts below
have found the circumstances to be established against the appellant-convict. We
have already discussed the same in the preceding paragraphs.

Having heard the learned counsel for the parties, and perused the record, we have not been
persuaded that there is any error in the findings recorded by both the Courts qua the guilt of the
convict- appellant and the judgment on conviction. Hence, we need not burden the record by
referring to the same.

7. On the aspect of sentence, nonetheless, we are of the view that some interference is warranted. As
is well known, the final punishment to be awarded to an accused after a conclusion of guilt being
arrived at, at trial, is to be determined after having (1984) 4 SCC 116 heard the parties on sentence,
and after an analysis of the aggravating and mitigating circumstances. Which is why, to enable
parties to adequately prepare, it is desirable that there be some gap between the pronouncement of
judgment, and the hearing on sentencing. It has, however, been held that the point of focus in a
sentencing hearing is quality and reliability of assistance and closeness of time, itself would not
render the sentence handed down, susceptible to doubt. In other words, there exists a conflict
between judgments rendered by Benches of co-equal strength – one, suggesting that a bifurcated
hearing on sentence is necessary (as was done in the present facts); and the other, suggesting that a
same-day hearing would not fall foul of Section 235(2), Cr.P.C. so long as quality and reliability of
the assistance on sentencing can be ensured. This conflict has been discussed at length in Framing
Guidelines Regarding Potential Mitigating Circumstances to be Considered while Imposing Death
Sentences, In re7. Here, the time aspect is undoubtedly met. Be that as it may, considering the
importance of the issue, we reiterate the reference to the larger Bench in the said decision, for
certainty on this issue is essential for proper and just adjudication in trials.

8. At this juncture, it is important to take note of the circumstances taken into account by the Trial
Court – 2022 SCC OnLine SC 1246 S.No. Mitigating Aggravating Circumstances Circumstances

1. Appellant-convict was Manner of murder of sister in employed as bank manager law and mother
in law and and could have been a role destruction of evidence model for society thereof.

2. Pre-meditated, unprovoked murder of his minor children of tender years

3. He meddled with the witnesses, showing criminal intent, and wanting to save himself from
punishment.

OUR CONSIDERATION

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144587164/

7

Ramesh A. Naika vs The Registrar General High Court Of ... on 13 February, 2025

9. A perusal of the order of sentencing reveals that the learned counsel for the appellant-convict had
presented other circumstances, which, in his submission, were mitigating in nature, but the same
were not taken into consideration by the Trial Court. They are :

a) lack of criminal antecedents;

b) his behaviour, good relations with family have been testified to by prosecution
witnesses;

(c) as a form of repentance for his actions, he desires to serve the elderly- this
commitment is used to show possibility of reformation;

(d) he had no ill intentions towards the family of PW-2 since he was the one who
arranged for a job for Ms. Savitha;

(e) it is a case resting entirely on circumstantial evidence.

10. The absence of criminal intent as a mitigating circumstance was negated by the Court observing
that during Trial, he had tried to meddle with the witnesses and influence them - this shows the
presence of criminal intent, leading to the registration of case in C.C No.3080 of 2012, under Section
506 I.P.C., which on the said date was pending on the file of 3 rd Additional Civil Judge and JMFC,
Tumkur (for attempting to intimidate PW-2) and another under Section 195A and Section 507 I.P.C.
in SC No.136 of 2013 (for attempting to intimidate PW-6) before the Court that dealt with the trial
for Section 302 I.P.C. We find this argument difficult to accept. The word antecedent, as is obvious,
means “a preceding event, condition or cause8”. Therefore, to use something that did not exist at a
prior point in time, to deny him the benefit of the consideration of lack of criminal antecedents as a
mitigating circumstance, was not justified. Antecedents are of two types : one is pretrial and the
other is during or post-trial. The appellant convict has no antecedents, however, during trial he
attempted to intimidate witnesses, as we have already discussed.

http:// www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/antecedent

11. The behaviour, which has been testified to be good by the prosecution witnesses themselves, is
also a factor which ought to have been given due consideration. That, along with the fact that he was
the one who got Ms. Savitha the job, cumulatively points to decent behavior by the
convict-appellant. Insofar as the point of the desire to serve people of advanced age, we are of the
view that the Trial Court was correct in rejecting that as a mitigating circumstance. Such a
determination can also be an afterthought- a mere plea without any foundation or substance cannot
accrue to any benefit. Had the Courts below through appreciation of testimony found that the
appellant-convict was so inclined and, thereafter, such a plea had been made, positive consideration
thereof would be warranted. It was not so.

12. The ground of the case being based on circumstantial evidence, although, addressed in the main
judgment, is amiss in the order of sentencing. A Three-Judge Bench in Shatrughna Baban Meshram

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144587164/

8

Ramesh A. Naika vs The Registrar General High Court Of ... on 13 February, 2025

v. State of Maharashtra9, considered this question in detail. It was concluded as hereinbelow :

“49. These cases discussed in preceding paragraphs show that though it is accepted
that the observations in Swamy Shraddananda (2) [Swamy Shraddananda (2) v. State
of Karnataka, (2008) 13 SCC 767 : (2009) 3 SCC (Cri) 113] did not lay down any firm
principle that in a case involving circumstantial evidence, imposition of death penalty
would not be permissible, a definite line of thought that where the sentence of death
is to be imposed on the basis of (2021) 1 SCC 596 circumstantial evidence, the
circumstantial evidence must be such which leads to an exceptional case was
accepted by a Bench of three Judges of this Court in Kalu Khan [Kalu Khan v. State of
Rajasthan, (2015) 16 SCC 492 : (2015) 4 SCC (Cri) 871] . As a matter of fact, it
accepted the caution expressed by Sinha, J. in Swamy Shraddananda v. State of
Karnataka [Swamy Shraddananda v. State of Karnataka, (2007) 12 SCC 288, para 87
: (2008) 2 SCC (Cri) 322] and the conclusions in Santosh Kumar Satishbhushan
Bariyar [Santosh Kumar Satishbhushan Bariyar v. State of Maharashtra, (2009) 6
SCC 498 : (2009) 2 SCC (Cri) 1150] to restate the principles with clarity in its
decision.

50. It can therefore be summed up:

50.1. It is not as if imposition of death penalty is impermissible to be awarded in
circumstantial evidence cases.

50.2. If the circumstantial evidence is of an unimpeachable character in establishing
the guilt of the accused and leads to an exceptional case or the evidence sufficiently
convinces the judicial mind that the option of a sentence lesser than death penalty is
foreclosed, the death penalty can be imposed.

51. It must therefore be held that merely because the instant case is based on
circumstantial evidence there is no reason to commute the death sentence. However,
the matter must be considered in the light of the aforestated principles and see
whether the circumstantial evidence is of unimpeachable character and the option of
a lesser sentence is foreclosed.” (Emphasis supplied)

13. As is clear from the above, the award of death penalty is not precluded. The rule
only is that the circumstantial evidence ought to be unimpeachable, and the matter at
hand be an exceptional case, or the evidence be so convincing that the option of
imposition of any other penalty stands foreclosed in the judicial mind. Therefore,
non-consideration of this ground cannot be said to be damaging to the sanctity of the
sentencing order.

14. It has been said in Swamy Shraddananda (2) v. State of Karnataka10 that “The
absolute irrevocability of the death penalty renders it completely incompatible to the
slightest hesitation on the part of the Court.” Given that recently, this Bench in Deen

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144587164/

9

Ramesh A. Naika vs The Registrar General High Court Of ... on 13 February, 2025

Dayal Tiwari v. State of U.P.11 considered that multiple factors, including the absence
of criminal antecedents, may be a ground to commute the sentence of the accused.

15. To appreciate the factors that can be considered in commutation of sentence, let
us undertake an analysis of cases where a similar approach has been taken by this
Court, i.e., the sentence of death stands commuted to imprisonment for life till the
last breath -

Part-I WHEREIN DEATH PENALTY WAS COMMUTED TO LIFE SENTENCE WITHOUT
REMISSION FOR THE REMAINDER OF THE CONVICT’S LIFE S. Case JJ. Brief Facts Reasons for
No. Details Commuting Sentence (2008) 13 SCC 767 2025 SCC OnLine 237

1. Swamy Appellant killed • The manner of Shraddana wife who was the committing murder nda (2)
granddaughter of a did not cause any v. Dewan. mental or physical State of 3 Subsequently, he pain
to the victim.

     Karnataka           sold     off     her •   Appellant confessed
      (2008)13           properties and was       his guilt before the
      SCC 767            absconding.              High Court. @54
2.    Sebastian          Appellant            •   Appellant was 24-
          v.             kidnapped a 2-           years-old at the time
       State of          years-old girl from      of the incident.
        Kerala           her          house,
       (2010) 1    2     committed rape on
       SCC 58            her    and      then
                         murdered her.
3.    B. Kumar           Appellant worked •       Appellant’s motive
           v.            as a mason in the        was not to commit
      Inspector          house    of   the        murder but to commit
       of Police         victims.                 rape      on       the
       (2015) 2                                   prosecutrix. @18
       SCC 346           He committed rape •      No possibility of him
                   3     on     a    woman,       having committed any
                         murdered a boy           another offence since
                         whom he had tied;        he was apprehended 6
                         being an eyewitness      years     after    the
                         to the act of rape,      incident. @21
                         and further injured
                         an eyewitness to the
                         murder.

4.      ‘X’              Appellant           Appellant suffering from
         v.              murdered       two  severe mental illness
      State of           minor girls after   since 1994, i.e., post-
     Maharasht           committing rape on  conviction, during his
         ra        3     them.               long incarceration as a
      (2019) 7                               death row convict, i.e., 17
                         The        deceased years. @74
       SCC 1
                         victims were the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144587164/

10

Ramesh A. Naika vs The Registrar General High Court Of ... on 13 February, 2025

                         Appellant’s
                         neighbour.

e.     Sudam             Petitioner murdered •    Nature                of
          v.             his wife, his two        circumstantial
      State of           children and the         evidence       is      a
     Maharasht           two children from        mitigating factor in
         ra,       3     his           wife’s     the instant case. @21
      (2019) 9           extramarital affair. •   No medical evidence
      SCC 388                                     to      show        that
                                                  Petitioner had crushed
                                                  the face of deceased
                                                  to                avoid
                                                  identification. @16

6.    Ravishank          Appellant           •    Key witness made
          ar             kidnapped a 13-          contradictory
          v.             year-old      girl.      statement
       State of          Thereafter,     he
         M.P.            committed rape on
       (2019) 9          her and murdered
       SCC 689           her by throttling.
                         Subsequently, he
                         destroyed evidence
                   3     by throwing her
                         half-naked body in
                         a dry well.

7.      Vijay            Appellant           •    No           criminal
       Kumar             murdered 3 minor         antecedents.
          v.             children and caused •    Not a professional
       State of          injury to the            killer. @12
        J&K              remaining minor
      (2019) 12   3      child and their
      SCC 791            father.

8.    Rajendra           Appellant             Prosecution failed to
     Pralhadrao          committed rape and    produce available DNA
       Wasnik            murder of a 3-year-   evidence     and    other
          v.             old girl.             material evidence before
       State of                                the Trial Court. @57
     Maharasht 3
          ra                                   Possibility of reformation
      (2019) 12                                and rehabilitation not
      SCC 460                                  considered by lower

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144587164/

11

Ramesh A. Naika vs The Registrar General High Court Of ... on 13 February, 2025

(cid:12)                                             courts. @79
9.     Mohd.             Petitioner-accused •     Legal aid provided to
      Mannan             was     a     mason      him was inadequate.
          v.             working at the           @ 38
       State of          house of an 8-year- •    No opportunity given
        Bihar            old     girl.    He      to the Petitioner to
      (2019) 16          kidnapped, raped         illustrate mitigating
      SCC 584            and murdered the         factors. @ 39
                         child.              •    No evidence showing
                                                  murder            was
                   3     Case is based on         premeditated. @47
                         circumstantial       •   No DNA analysis of
                         evidence        and      the sperm found on
                         alleged       extra-     the victim’s body
                         judicial confession      conducted by the
                         made      by     the     prosecution. @53
                         Petitioner. @57      •   Psychiatrist    report
                                                  shows possibility of
                                                  neurological and/or
                                                  mental health issues.
                                                  @68
                                             •    Post        conviction
                                                  mental health of the
                                                  Petitioner a relevant
                                                  consideration. @84

10.   Dattatraya         Appellant is a 50- •     No evidence to show
          v.             year-old man who         that Appellant took
       State of          committed rape on        victim     to      his
      Maharasht          a 5-year-old girl        residence. @114
          ra             which resulted in •      No evidence to show
                         her death.               that murder was
      (2020) 14    3                              intended             or
      SCC 290                                     premeditated.
                                                  Appellant did not
                                                  carry any weapon.
                                             •    Possibility of the
                                                  Appellant        being
                                                  unaware that sexual
                                                  assault would result in

(cid:12)                                                  death cannot be ruled
                                                  out. @123
                                             •    Legal assistance to
                                                  the          Appellant
                                                  ineffective. @129
                                             •    Question of reform
                                                  not considered by the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144587164/

12

Ramesh A. Naika vs The Registrar General High Court Of ... on 13 February, 2025

                                                  Trial Court. @130

11.     Jagdish          Petitioner murdered •    Petitioner in custody
           v.            his wife and five        since 14 years.
        State of         children.           •    Unexplained delay of
         M.P.,     3                              4 years in forwarding
       (2020) 14                                  the mercy petition by
       SCC 156                                    State. @12

12.    Rabbu             Appellant            •   Appellant brought up
          v.             committed rape on        by single father,
       State of          a minor girl and set     comes      from      a
        M.P.,            her on fire, thereby     backward        socio-
      2024 SCC     3     killing her.             economic stratum of
      OnLine SC                                   society, was 22-year-
        2933                                      old at the time of
                                                  incident,   has    no
                                                  criminal antecedents
                                                  and possibility of
                                                  reform cannot be
                                                  ruled out.
                                                  @15-16
13.   Deen Dayal         Appellant         •      Absence of previous
        Tiwari           murdered his wife        criminal antecedents.
          v.             and four minor •         Appellant's behavior
       State of          daughters with an        in custody has been
         U.P.            axe.                     “satisfactory”    and
                   3                              “normal,” noting that
      2025 SCC                                    he       has     been
      OnLine SC                                   performing assigned
         237                                      duties without any
                                                  adverse conduct.
                                             •    Nothing on record
                                                  suggests that the

(cid:12)                                                          Appellant is incapable
                                                          of rehabilitation. @20

                                    PART – II

CASES WHEREIN LIFE SENTENCE HAS BEEN IMPOSED TILL THE END OF THE CONVICT’S
NATURAL LIFE SUBJECT TO REMISSION S. Case Details JJ. Brief Facts Reasons for Commuting
No. Sentence

1. Mulla Appellants abducted • One of the Appellants is 65-

              v.               and murdered five         years-old and in custody

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144587164/

13

Ramesh A. Naika vs The Registrar General High Court Of ... on 13 February, 2025

        State of U.P.          persons.                  since 14 years. @79
        (2010) 3 SCC                               •     Appellants belong to an
            508         2                                extremely poor background.
                                                     •   Possibility of reformation
                                                         not ruled out. @81

2.      Rameshbhai             Appellant murdered •      Appellant was 27-years-old
        Chandubhai             and committed rape        at the time of the incident.
         Rathod (2)            on a minor girl who •     Possibility of reformation
              v.               belonged to the           not ruled out.
           State of     3      apartment of which •      Appellant not granted
          Gujarat              he was a watchman.        adequate opportunity to
        (2011) 2 SCC                                     plead on the question of
             764                                         sentence. @7
3.       Sandesh               Appellant             •   Appellant was 23-years-old
             v.                committed robbery         at the time of incident.
          State of             during which he       •   Murder not premeditated.
        Maharashtra            fatally injured a     •   Appellant not a hardened
                        2      pregnant    woman         criminal.
        (2013) 2 SCC           and her mother-in-    •   Good conduct in jail.
            479                law. Subsequently,
                               he murdered another
                               relative  of    the
                               victims during the
                               commission of the
                               robbery.

d.       Mohinder             Appellant murdered •      Appellant did not harm his
           Singh              his     wife     and      other     daughter    while
             v.               daughter because of       committing the crime.
      State of Punjab         a previous case filed •   Appellant is a poor man
       (2013) 3 SCC           by his wife against       unable to sustain himself.
            294         2     the Appellant for •       Probability of reformation
                              committing rape on        not foreclosed. @28
                              his minor daughter.
5.     Deepak Rai             3 accused             •   Death sentence commuted
            v.                committed murder          only in respect of A-3, i.e.,
      State of Bihar          of informant’s wife       Bacha Babu Rai.
      (2013) 10 SCC     3     and five children.    •   No overt act attributed to A-
           421                                          3.
6.      Vyas Ram              Appellants killed 35 •    Only 1 witness has
            v.                persons and injured       attributed the role of slitting
      State of Bihar          7 belonging to the a      throats to the Appellant.
      (2013) 12 SCC     2     particular           •    Incident took place in 1992
           349                community.                – charges framed in 2004.
7.    Sunil Damodar           Appellant murdered •      Appellant suffered from
         Gaikwad              his wife and two          economic and psychic
             v.               sons. He attempted        compulsions.
          State of  2         to    murder   his •      Possibility of reformation

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144587164/

14

Ramesh A. Naika vs The Registrar General High Court Of ... on 13 February, 2025

       Maharashtra            daughter but she          cannot be ruled out.
       (2014) 1 SCC           survived.          •      No criminal antecedents.
            129                                  •      Appellant was living in
                                                        abject poverty.

8.       Mahesh               Appellants          •     Appellants were 23-29-
      Dhanaji Shinde          murdered       two        years-old at the time of
             v.               minors and seven          incident.
          State of   3        persons after which •     Appellants lived in acute
       Maharashtra            the      Appellants       poverty.
       (2014) 4 SCC           robbed them         •     Appellants have pursued
            292                                         further   education    and
                                                        meaningful      endeavours
                                                        during custody. @38

(cid:12)9.     Sushil Sharma            Appellant murdered •        No criminal antecedents.
              v.                his wife with a •           No evidence to show
       State (NCT of            firearm and burnt           absence of possibility of
           Delhi)               the body in a               reformation.
        (2014) 4 SCC    3       tandoor.           •        Appellant has spent 10
            317                                             years in death cell.
                                                        •   Appellant is the only son of
                                                            his parents who are old and
                                                            infirm. @105
10.         Mohd.               The incident            •   The acts committed were
          Jamiludin             pertains to attack on       not directed against the
            Nasir               police personnel            sovereignty of the State.
              v.                wherein 5 police            Hence, it could not be
        State of West           officials were killed       equated with precedents
           Bengal               and 13 others were          such as Navjot Sandhu,
        (2014) 7 SCC    2       injured along with          Ajmal Kasab or Mohd. Arif.
             443                other civilians.        •   Aftab was the mastermind
                                                            behind the entire operation
                                Death penalty of            – did not commit the act
                                accused         Aftab       himself. He made the other
                                commuted to life            accused     commit      the
                                imprisonment       till     murders through.
                                the end of his life.
11.    Arvind Singh             Appellant               •   Appellants were 19-years-
             v.                 kidnapped an 8-             old at the time of the
          State of              years-old boy to            incident.
        Maharashtra     3       demand       ransom. •      No criminal antecedents.
       (2021) 11 SCC            Subsequently,        he     A-1 surrendered at the first
             1                  murdered the boy.           opportunity. @98

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144587164/

15

Ramesh A. Naika vs The Registrar General High Court Of ... on 13 February, 2025

16. Considering the above exposition on instances, where this Court has found it fit to commute the
death sentence into imprisonment for the remainder of natural life, and keeping in view the factors
that :

a) the appellant- convict had no criminal antecedents;

b) good relations with the deceased persons;

c) all mitigating circumstances were not considered by the Trial Court, We direct that
the hangman’s noose be taken off the appellant-convict’s neck, and instead that he
remains in prison till the end of his days given by God Almighty.

17. We should not even for a moment be taken to understand that the barbarity of the crime, the
helplessness of the two children who met the most unfortunate of ends, and that too at the hands of
the very person who bore half the responsibility of bringing them into the world, has escaped us, or
we, in any way have condoned such a hideous act, done by the appellant-convict. Ms. Savitha and
Ms. Saraswathi, too, were killed for no fault of theirs either (for which the accused already stands
tried and convicted separately). Whom a person falls in love with, is not within the human sphere of
control - the former fell in love with her colleague, Mr. P. Mohan (PW-19) who was her co-worker,
and who incidentally was of a different caste. When told to break off her relationship with him for
that reason, she couldn’t. Her sister, Smt. Sundari and her mother, the latter, both supported their
n e a r   a n d   d e a r   o n e s   i n   p u r s u i n g   t h e i r   d e s i r e s .   W e   s e e   n o t h i n g   w r o n g   w i t h   t h a t .   T h e
appellant-convict, getting his sister-in-law a job is out of love and affection for the family members
of his wife, which, of course, is by extension, his family, and so, for him to expect that his word be
taken as the gospel truth which everyone is bound to follow, is unquestionably a case of unjustified
high-handedness. It is sad that such a restrictive world-view on part of the appellant-convict became
the reason for these senseless acts of violence and depravity. Had he heeded the advice of PW-2,
when she told him not to interfere in Ms. Savitha’s personal matters, he could have gone on to live a
perfectly happy life. After all, it is not without reason that the well-known proverb goes - “live and let
live” which is said to mean that people should accept the way other people live and behave,
particularly, if their way of doing things is different than one’s own. But be that as it may, when the
sentence of death is imposed, it should only be imposed if the same is possible, even after an
objective consideration of all the factors in favour of the person accused of having committed the
offence, which as discussed supra, was not done properly.

CONCLUSION

18. The appeals are, therefore, partly allowed to the extent of the sentence modification. In the
result, the appellant-convict’s conviction for the murders of Master Bhuvanraj, and Miss Krithika, is
maintained, but he shall now await his natural end, without remission, in the confines of a
penitentiary.

Pending applications, if any, shall stand closed.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144587164/

16

Ramesh A. Naika vs The Registrar General High Court Of ... on 13 February, 2025

…….............………J. (VIKRAM NATH) ..………..….............J. (SANJAY KAROL) .……….…............….J.
(SANDEEP MEHTA) New Delhi;

February 13, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144587164/

17

