Ramesh Kumaran vs State Through The Inspector Of Police on 27 March, 2025

Ramesh Kumaran vs State Through The Inspector Of Police on
27 March, 2025

Author: Abhay S. Oka

Bench: Abhay S Oka

2025 INSC 405

                                                                               Reportable

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1318 OF 2025

                            Ramesh Kumaran & Anr.                           … Appellants

                                                         versus

                            State
                            through the Inspector of Police & Anr. … Respondents

                                                   J U D G M E N T

ABHAY S. OKA, J.

FACTUAL ASPECTS

1. This appeal arises out of a dispute between the first appellant and the second respondent who are
both members of the Bar and practise before the Courts in Kodaikanal. The second appellant is the
father of the first appellant. Two First Information Reports (for short, ‘FIR’) were registered as a
result of a dispute between the first appellant and the second respondent. According to the
appellants, on 18th December 2017, the second respondent and two other persons assaulted the
Date: 2025.03.27 appellants. Therefore, FIR No.499 of 2017, which was the 16:52:55 IST Reason:

first FIR, was registered at the instance of the first appellant. It is alleged in the said
FIR that at 4.45 pm on 18th December 2017, while the first appellant was walking
near Kodaikanal Lake, the second respondent and two unidentified persons were
drinking alcohol in a car. The allegation is that the said three persons assaulted the
first appellant. Thereafter, the second respondent punched the first appellant on the
nose with his right hand. The nose started bleeding. The first appellant has alleged in

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/69546608/

1

Ramesh Kumaran vs State Through The Inspector Of Police on 27 March, 2025

the FIR that the fight arose from past animosity, as he had a verbal altercation with
the second respondent in the Kodaikanal Court three years back. Accordingly, FIR
No. 499 of 2017 was registered on 21st December 2017 at 8.30 pm alleging the
commission of offences under Sections 294(b), 323 and 506(1) of the Indian Penal
Code, 1860 (for short, ‘IPC’) against the second respondent and two other persons.
According to the appellants, charge sheet has already been filed in the said case.

2. The present appeal relates to the second FIR, which is FIR No.500 of 2017, registered at the
instance of the second respondent against the appellants. It related to the same incident and was
also registered on 21 st December 2017, half an hour after FIR No.449 of 2017 was registered. The
allegation made by the second respondent is that on 18th December 2017, while he was standing
near Sterling Resort near the Kodaikanal Lake, the first appellant came there and abused him with
filthy words and started verbally arguing with him. Thereafter, he called the second appellant on the
phone, and both of them abused him with foul language. They also threatened him, stating that
since he belonged to another city, he should leave this city or they would kill him. Therefore, FIR
No. 500 of 2017 was registered at the instance of the second respondent for the offences punishable
under Sections 294(b), 323 and 506(1) of the IPC. It appears that a closure report was filed by the
police. Thereafter, the second respondent filed a protest petition on which cognizance was taken by
the Judicial Magistrate at Kodaikanal on 1st October, 2019. Therefore, the appellants filed a petition
before the High Court for quashing the criminal proceedings before the Judicial Magistrate at
Kodaikanal. By the impugned judgment dated 29th September, 2023, the High Court has dismissed
the petition.

3. When the SLP against the impugned judgment came up for hearing on 9th July 2024, this Court
issued notice and stayed the criminal proceedings pending before the Judicial Magistrate,
Kodaikanal. On 21 st October 2024, this Court passed the following order:

“None appears for the petitioners.

List on 29th November, 2024. We are of the view that as the prosecution arises out of
a dispute between the two members of the Bar, it will be in the interest of both to
settle the same amicably.

Interim relief granted earlier by this Court shall continue to operate.

Counter affidavit to be filed within a period of three weeks.”

4. Thereafter, on 18th December 2024, this Court passed an order directing the first appellant and
second respondent to remain present before this Court through video conference on 27th January
2025. The order passed by this Court on 27th January 2025 reads thus:

“Learned counsel appearing for the second respondent, without prejudice to the
rights of the said respondent, stated that the second respondent is willing to tender
apology to the petitioners if the petitioners are willing to put an end to the entire

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/69546608/

2

Ramesh Kumaran vs State Through The Inspector Of Police on 27 March, 2025

controversy in both criminal proceedings. Though learned counsel appearing for the
petitioners has stated that petitioners are not willing, we are of the view that it is in
their interests whether matter can be put to an end by way of amicable settlement. It
will be appropriate if the petitioners have rethinking on the issue of settlement. The
first petitioner is a member of the Bar. With a view to give the petitioners one more
opportunity to rethink, list the petition on 17th February, 2025. If there is no
possibility of the settlement, we take up the petition for hearing.”

5. In terms of the said order, the second respondent filed an affidavit of apology dated 27 th
February 2025. On 3rd March 2025, when this Court suggested to the appellants, and in particular,
the first appellant, who was present before this Court through video conference that both the FIRs
can be quashed so that quietus can be given to the dispute between two members of the Bar, the first
appellant was bold enough to threaten this Court that if the FIR filed by the appellants against the
second respondent is quashed, he would commit suicide. The order dated 3rd March 2025 reads
thus:

“Today in the morning when the Petition was called out, the first petitioner, who is a
member of the Bar, appeared through video conference and stated that while
quashing the offence against him, if the Court quashes the FIR registered by him
against the second respondent, he will commit suicide. We are shocked to record
such conduct on the part of a member of the Bar. Now, in the afternoon, the first
petitioner appears and apologizes. However, the first petitioner must tender a written
apology and an undertaking not to repeat such threats/submissions. We are not
forcing the first petitioner to tender an apology in writing and to give assurance as
stated above. But we make it clear that on his failure to do so, necessary
consequences in accordance with law will follow. List the Petition on 7th March,
2025.”

6. Pursuant to the said order, the first appellant filed an affidavit of apology-cum-undertaking dated
6th March 2025.

SUBMISSIONS

7. The submission of the learned counsel appearing for the appellants is that the FIR registered at
the instance of the second respondent, which is the subject matter of this appeal, is a counterblast to
the FIR registered at the instance of the appellants against the second respondent. He submitted
that apart from the second respondent, there were two other persons involved in the incident of
assault on the first appellant. They attacked the first appellant causing him to suffer an injury. As a
result, there was a bleeding from his nose. He submitted that considering the serious allegations
made in the FIR registered against the second respondent and two other persons, the same cannot
be quashed in this appeal as the second respondent has not applied for quashing. He submitted that
the proceeding initiated by the second respondent is nothing but an abuse of the process of law, and
therefore, the same deserves to be quashed.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/69546608/

3

Ramesh Kumaran vs State Through The Inspector Of Police on 27 March, 2025

8. The learned counsel for the second respondent urged that both the FIRs be quashed. He pointed
out that the second respondent has taken a fair stand and has tendered an apology to the appellants
on oath.

CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS

9. Both the first appellant and the second respondent are practising in the Courts at Kodaikanal and
are members of the same Bar. The first appellant is a young lawyer. The cases based on cross FIRs
are pending from the year 2017. A perusal of the FIR registered at the instance of the first appellant
shows that it was registered at 8.30 pm on 21st December 2017 for the offences punishable under
Sections 294(b), 323 and 506(1) of IPC. The FIR registered at the instance of the second respondent
was registered at 9 pm on the same day. Therefore, the FIR registered at the instance of the first
appellant is prior in point of time by 30 minutes. The offences alleged are the same in both the FIRs.
There are allegations and counter-allegations by both parties.

Pursuant to the orders of this Court, the second respondent has filed an affidavit dated 27 th
February 2025. The material portion of the affidavit (paragraphs 4 to 8) reads thus:

“4. That upon deep reflection and introspection, I deeply regret the unfortunate
incident that occurred between myself and the complainant advocate, which led to
the registration of the aforementioned FIRs.

5. That I hereby tender my sincere and unconditional apology to this Hon'ble Court,
the Bar Council of Tamil Nadu, the Kodaikanal Bar Association, and the Petitioner
advocate for my conduct.

6. That I acknowledge that as members of the legal fraternity, we are expected to
uphold the highest standards of professional ethics and conduct, and to resolve our
differences through civilized dialogue and legal means rather than through
confrontation.

7. That I solemnly undertake to maintain cordial and professional relations with all
members of the Bar, including the complainant advocate, and shall never engage in
any behaviour that brings disrepute to the noble profession of law.

8. That this apology 1s being tendered voluntarily, unconditionally, and without any
reservations whatsoever, with a genuine desire to amicably resolve the matter and- to
ensure that the dignity and decorum of the legal profession is maintained.” (emphasis
added)

10. Thus, the second respondent has tendered a sincere and unconditional apology not only to this
Court, but also to the first appellant, the Bar Council of Tamil Nadu, and the Kodaikanal Bar
Association.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/69546608/

4

Ramesh Kumaran vs State Through The Inspector Of Police on 27 March, 2025

11. We thought that the first appellant would reciprocate by showing grace and accept the apology
tendered by the second respondent, who is his colleague in the legal profession. However, the first
appellant did not do so and went to the extent of giving a threat to this Court that in case this Court
quashes the FIR registered against the second respondent, he would commit suicide. This conduct
amounts to interference with the administration of justice. It is contemptuous and unbecoming of a
member of the Bar. However, the first appellant has filed an affidavit dated 6th March 2025 and in
paragraphs 3 to 5 the first appellant has stated thus:

“3. In the above-mentioned case I was called on 3.03.2025 and I appear virtually and
said "I will commit suicide if the lordships quashes the case against respondent" that
upon deep reflection and rethinking, I deeply regret the choice of words used by me. I
tender my sincere and unconditional apology to this Hon'ble Court for my conduct, I
was emotional and with all sincerity had no intention to threaten the judges of
suicide. I with all my heart beg to apologize me for this conduct. The lordships may
with all greatness graciously accept my apology.

4. That I solemnly undertake to not to repeat this behavior anywhere before any
court.

5. That I humbly request this Hon'ble Court to kindly accept my unconditional
apology and to graciously pass the suitable order.” (emphasis added)

12. An attempt made all along by this Court was to bring about a settlement between the first
appellant and the second respondent who are members of the Bar practising before the same
Courts. The reason was that this Court felt that both of them, instead of fighting cases against each
other, should contribute to the legal system by representing litigants before the Court. We felt that
the pending cases may adversely affect the professional prospects of both the first appellant and the
second respondent.

13. As this Court was willing to take a broad view and put an end to the dispute, which has been
pending for more than seven years, the second respondent responded by tendering an unconditional
apology to the first appellant. This Court was of the view that if ultimately both the cases go for trial,
it will lead to more animosity between the first appellant and the second respondent. Pursuant to
the appeal made by this Court, the second respondent took a reasonable stand and tendered an
unconditional apology. However, notwithstanding the best efforts made by the first appellant's own
learned counsel, the first appellant did not understand the importance of settling the dispute rather
than aggravating it. He went to the extent of giving a threat to this Court. In normal course, such
threats must be taken very seriously by the Courts. Action for criminal contempt against the person
giving such a threat must be initiated, which should be taken to its logical end, especially when the
first appellant is a member of the Bar.

14. However, we believe that if magnanimity is to be shown by someone, the same should be done by
the persons holding the highest constitutional office. Moreover, the first appellant has shown some
repentance by tendering an unconditional apology and by giving an undertaking not to repeat such

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/69546608/

5

Ramesh Kumaran vs State Through The Inspector Of Police on 27 March, 2025

misconduct. In view of this apology and in the peculiar facts of this case, we deem it proper not to
initiate any action against the first appellant.

15. There are cases and cases which come before the courts where we find that the litigants are not in
a position to understand what is in their best interest. Even if the litigants do not understand what is
in their best interest, it is the duty of the Court to deliver substantial justice.

16. It appears that the incident arose due to some history of animosity between the second
respondent and the first appellant. Even assuming that the first appellant has sustained an injury to
his nose, the second respondent, for his alleged acts, has tendered an unconditional apology on oath
and undertaken to maintain a cordial relationship with the appellant. The second respondent has
expressed that he has no objection to quashing the FIR registered by him. Considering these
peculiar facts, we are of the view that it is in the personal and professional interests of both parties
that the proceedings based on the FIRs should be quashed. We hope and trust that with this order,
the past animosity between the first appellant and the second respondent will come to a happy end.

17. Therefore, in the exercise of our jurisdiction under Article 142 of the Constitution of India, we
pass the following order:

a. FIR No. 500 of 2017 registered at the Kodaikanal Police Station at the instance of
the second respondent and proceedings of the case bearing STC No 607 of 2019 on
the file of the learned District Munsif cum Judicial Magistrate, Kodaikanal are hereby
quashed;

b. FIR No.499 of 2017, registered at Police Station Kodaikanal, is hereby quashed
only as against the second respondent. Consequently, the proceedings of C.C.No.106
of 2022 pending before the Judicial Magistrate Court No.II, Kodaikanal is hereby
quashed only as against the second respondent;

c. The apology and undertakings of both the first appellant and the second
respondent which we have referred to above are taken on record; and, d. The appeal
is allowed on the above terms.

………………………….J. (Abhay S Oka) ………………………….J. (Ujjal Bhuyan) New Delhi;

March 27, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/69546608/

6

