Ramu Appa Mahapatar vs The State Of Maharashtra on 4 February, 2025

Ramu Appa Mahapatar vs The State Of Maharashtra on 4
February, 2025

Author: Abhay S. Oka

Bench: Abhay S. Oka

2025 INSC 147                                            REPORTABLE
                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                   CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 608 OF 2013

      RAMU APPA MAHAPATAR                            APPELLANT(S)

                                  VERSUS

      THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA                       RESPONDENT(S)

                              JUDGMENT

UJJAL BHUYAN, J.

This appeal by special leave is directed against the judgment and order dated 02.12.2010 passed by
the High Court of Bombay at Bombay (High Court) in Criminal Appeal No. 252 of 2005 (Ramu
Appa Mahapatar Vs. State of Maharashtra) whereby the High Court dismissed Criminal Appeal No.
252 of 2005 filed by the appellant.

2. Be it stated that the aforesaid criminal appeal was preferred against the judgment and order dated
15.10.2004 passed by the First Ad-hoc Additional District and Sessions Judge, Thane (Sessions
Judge) in Sessions Case No. 52 of 2004 whereby and whereunder appellant was convicted under
Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code, 1861 (IPC) and sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment
(RI) for life and to pay fine of Rs. 1,000/-, in default to suffer RI for 3 months.

3. Prosecution case in brief is that appellant lived with deceased Manda; it was a live-in relationship.
Both of them were living in a chawl of PW-1 Ravinder Gopal Jadhav, who was the landlord.
Appellant informed PW-1 that his wife had expired and that he was going to her parents’ house at
Dipchale village to inform them. Thereafter, appellant alongwith his son went to Dipchale village
where appellant met the brother of the deceased, Bhagwan i.e. PW-3. Appellant told PW-3 in the
presence of Shankar PW-6, Pandhari PW-5 and Chanda Bai PW-4 that there was a quarrel between

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24533762/

1

Ramu Appa Mahapatar vs The State Of Maharashtra on 4 February, 2025

him and Manda following which he had assaulted Manda who succumbed to the injuries. 3.1. Before
the appellant could come back to his village Kudus alongwith the relatives of the deceased, PW-1 had
already opened the door of the house which was bolted from outside. On opening of the door PW-1
noticed that Manda was lying dead with multiple bleeding injuries. Her mangalsutra and glass
bangles were broken; some of the household articles were strewn around on the ground. When
appellant reached the place of incident alongwith the relatives of the deceased Manda, PW-1
enquired from him about the incident. At that stage, appellant told PW-1 that deceased Manda had
suspected that he (appellant) was having illicit relation with some other woman. This resulted in a
quarrel in the course of which appellant had assaulted Manda with the help of a grinding stone and
a stick.

3.2. PW-1 then lodged First Information Report (FIR) before the police station whereafter offence
under Section 302 IPC was registered against the appellant.

3.3. Investigating officer carried out the investigation in the course of which he drew inquest
panchanama, spot panchanama and made seizure of various articles from the place of incident.
Appellant was arrested. The weapon of assault was seized. On completion of investigation,
chargesheet was filed against the appellant charging him for committing an offence punishable
under Section 302 IPC.

4. Learned Sessions Judge read over and explained the charge to the appellant to which he pleaded
not guilty and claimed to be tried. To prove its case, prosecution examined 10 witnesses. It was a
case of circumstantial evidence. Prosecution relied upon the extra-judicial confession of the
appellant made before PW-1 Ravindra, PW-3 Bhagwan, PW-4 Chandabai and PW-6 Shankar. After
considering the evidence on record, learned Sessions Judge vide the judgment and order dated
15.10.2004 convicted the appellant under Section 302 IPC and sentenced him to undergo RI for life
and also to pay fine of Rs. 1,000/-, in default to suffer RI for another 3 months.

5. Aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, appellant preferred appeal before the High
Court being Criminal Appeal No. 252 of 2005. By the judgment and order dated 02.12.2010
(impugned judgment), High Court dismissed the appeal of the appellant. Consequently, conviction
and sentence of the appellant have been affirmed.

6. This Court by order dated 21.09.2012 had issued notice in the related petition for special leave to
appeal (criminal). Leave was granted vide the order dated 15.04.2013. Hence, the present appeal.

7. Learned counsel for the appellant has taken us to the evidence of PW-1, PW-3, PW-4 and PW-6
and submits that the extra-judicial confession allegedly made by the appellant before the above
witnesses could not be accepted as a valid piece of evidence. Extra-judicial confession itself is a weak
piece of circumstantial evidence. From the testimony of the above witnesses, it is clearly evident that
no credence could be given to the theory of extra-judicial confession. Such confession does not
inspire any confidence. Beyond the extra-judicial confession, there was no material on record to link
the appellant with the death of the deceased. Learned trial court as well as the High Court had erred
in placing reliance on the so-called extra-judicial confessions and basing the conviction of the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24533762/

2

Ramu Appa Mahapatar vs The State Of Maharashtra on 4 February, 2025

appellant on such evidence. He, therefore, submits that conviction of the appellant is wholly
unsustainable and liable to be set aside. Resultantly, the appeal should be allowed.

8. Per contra, learned counsel for the respondent supports the impugned judgment of the High
Court. According to him, there is no reason to disbelieve the evidence of PWs 1, 3, 4 and 6.
Therefore, the trial court was justified in convicting the appellant on the basis of confessional
statement made by the appellant before the above witnesses. High Court had rightly affirmed such
conviction and sentence of the learned Sessions Judge. He submits that there is no case for
interference with the concurrent findings. Therefore, the criminal appeal is liable to be dismissed.

9. Submissions made by learned counsel for the parties have received the due consideration of the
Court.

10. PW-1 is the informant Ravindra; he is the owner of the chawl in which accused used to stay as
the tenant alongwith his ‘wife’ and son. On 21.03.2003 at about 06:15 AM, accused came to the
residence of PW-1 alongwith his son and informed PW-1 that his wife had expired. Thereafter, the
accused went to the house of the parents of his wife to call her relatives. PW-1 stated that he had
gone to the house of the accused alongwith his brother and found that it was bolted from outside.
Alongwith his brother Shyam Rao Gopal Jadhav, PW-1 opened the door and saw that wife of the
accused was lying dead on the floor in a pool of blood. 10.1. Accused brought the brother of the
deceased and 4/5 persons. They also saw the dead body. At that stage, PW-1 and his brother
enquired with the accused who told them that he had assaulted the deceased with a grinding stone.

10.2. According to PW-1, he went to the police station and lodged the first information which he
proved in the court alongwith its contents.

10.3. In cross-examination, he stated that the accused had only told him that his wife had expired.
He had talked with the accused for about five minutes. Accused told him that he was going to call
her relatives.

10.4. PW-1 denied the suggestion that accused was in a confused state of mind. He stated that he did
not feel it necessary to inform the police immediately. He lodged the information between 12 noon
to 12:15 PM. He also denied the suggestion that the accused had told him that some people had
come in the night and had assaulted him and his wife whereafter they ran away. He further denied
the suggestion that accused had told him that somebody had killed his wife and had also assaulted
him.

11. PW-3 is Bhagwan. He is the brother of the deceased Manda. On 21.09.2003 at 07:30 AM, he was
sitting alongwith Maruti, Pandu Ram Thorat and Shankar Rama Bhoye in front of his house. At that
time, accused came alongwith his son Kiran. He told them that there was a quarrel between him and
deceased Manda because of which he had assaulted Manda. As a result of the injuries sustained, she
died. Hearing this, PW-3 alongwith Maruti, Pandu Ram Thorat and Shankar Rama Bhoye went with
the accused to his village.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24533762/

3

Ramu Appa Mahapatar vs The State Of Maharashtra on 4 February, 2025

11.1. When they reached the house of the accused, they found that the landlord (PW-1) was present
there. They saw Manda lying dead in a pool of blood. She had injuries on her head, forehead and
face. Her saree was soaked in blood and food was strewn around. Accused told them that he had
assaulted the deceased with a grinding stone and a wooden stick. Thereafter, they alongwith the
landlord (PW-1) went to the police station.

11.2. In his cross-examination, he stated that the accused and the deceased were not married but
were staying together. The deceased used to complain to him that accused was beating her. 11.3.
Accused told PW-3 and the others that Manda had expired whereupon he was asked as to how she
had expired. Though Manda was the younger sister of PW-3, he did not ask the accused whether any
complaint was lodged with the police. Maruti Thorat and Pandu Ram Thorat, who are the maternal
uncles of PW-3, were present when PW-3 made enquiries with the accused. He had told his
maternal uncles Maruti and Pandu Ram to handover the accused to the police.

11.4. PW-3 denied the suggestion that he was not sure as to whether the accused was speaking lies.
Since he was to verify as to whether Manda had died, therefore they did not handover the accused to
the police. PW-3 clearly stated that when the accused came, he was in a confused state of mind and
he did not take tea. His clothes were not torn or blood stained. Accused had brought one mini door
rickshaw and in that, PW-3 and the others went to his house. According to PW-3, he had stated
before the police that accused had told him that he had assaulted Manda with a grinding stone and
had killed her but did not know why it was not written. 11.5. PW-3 stated that they reached the
house of the accused around 10:00 AM and thereafter they alongwith the landlord went to the police
station to lodge complaint. He denied the suggestion that the accused had never told him about his
quarrel with his wife and that he had assaulted her because of which she died. He also denied the
suggestion that accused had told him that in the night, some thieves had come and that they had
assaulted him and Manda.

12. Chandabai is PW-4. She is the wife of PW-3. According to her, on 21.09.2003 in the morning, her
husband was chatting with Shankar, Maruti and Pandu Ram. Meanwhile, the accused came there
alongwith his son Kiran and told them that he had quarrelled with Manda because of which he had
assaulted her and she died. Leaving behind his son Kiran with PW-4, accused alongwith husband of
PW-4 i.e. PW-3 and others went to Kudus i.e. the village of the accused.

12.1. In her cross-examination, she stated that she was residing alongwith her husband PW-3, their
three children and now with Kiran, son of the accused. On the day of the incident, her husband
PW-3 was sitting outside their home after his breakfast. She stated that she did not directly talk with
the accused but came to know about the incident. She denied the suggestion that she only came to
know about the incident when her husband PW-3 told her that Manda was assaulted. She denied the
suggestion that accused had told her that on that fateful night, 3/4 persons entered their house and
had assaulted Manda when the accused ran away alongwith his son from the house. She further
denied the suggestion that in the morning, accused had come and found that Manda had died and
therefore he informed the landlord and thereafter to PW-4 and others.

12.2. She denied the suggestion that the accused also had injuries and that his clothes were torn.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24533762/

4

Ramu Appa Mahapatar vs The State Of Maharashtra on 4 February, 2025

13. PW-6 Shankar was sitting on the steps of the house of Bhagwan i.e. PW-3 in the morning of
21.09.2003 alongwith Bhagwan, Maruti and Pandu Ram. Accused came there at about 07:30 AM.
He had come in a rickshaw alongwith his son. Accused told Bhagwan that he had quarrelled with
Manda during which he had assaulted her and that she had died.

13.1. PW-6 stated that son of the accused was kept with the wife of Bhagwan whereafter they all went
to the residence of the accused at Kudus. In the house of the accused, they saw that Manda had
already expired. She had injuries on her forehead, head and back. They also saw that bangles and
mangal sutra were broken and that there was splattering of blood. 13.2. In his cross-examination, he
stated that accused was with them for about half an hour to 45 minutes. He did not know the
accused prior to that date. He denied the suggestion that the clothes of the accused were torn and
that the accused was in a confused state of mind.

13.3. PW-6 further deposed that he had told the police that accused had told Bhagwan in their
presence that he had a quarrel with Manda in the night but he did not know why it was not written
that accused had told so to Bhagwan in his statement by the police.

13.4. PW-6 denied the suggestion that the accused had told them that in the night, 3/4 drunk
persons had entered their house whereafter they had assaulted him and when they were about to
assault his son, he ran away with his son.

14. The above four are the witnesses who had deposed that the accused had stated before the
informant (PW-1) and PW-3 that he had a quarrel with Manda because of which he assaulted her
with a grinding stone and a stick following which she died. There is no dispute about the multiple
injuries seen on the body of the deceased or the homicidal nature of the death of the deceased.
Question for consideration is whether on the strength of the evidence of the above four witnesses,
the accused can be linked with the offence and as to whether it can be said that the charge against
the accused of committing murder of the deceased stood conclusively proved beyond all reasonable
doubt?

15. Before we analyse the evidence of the above witnesses, it is necessary to briefly examine the law
relating to extra-judicial confession as the present is a case of extra-judicial confession allegedly
made by the accused before PW-1 and PW-3 which were endorsed by PW-4 and PW-6.

16. Extra-judicial confession of an offence made by the accused before a witness is one of the several
instances of circumstantial evidence; there are other circumstances, such as, the theory of last seen
together; conduct of the accused before or immediately after the incident; human blood being found
on the clothes or person of the accused which matches with that of the accused; leading to discovery,
recovery of weapon etc. As we know, circumstantial evidence is not direct to the point in issue but
consists of evidence of various other facts which are so closely associated with the fact in issue that
taken together, they form a chain of circumstances from which the existence of the principal fact can
be legally inferred or presumed. The chain must be complete and each fact forming part of the chain
must be proved. It has been consistently laid down by this Court that where a case rests squarely on
circumstantial evidence, inference of guilt can be justified only when all the incriminating facts and

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24533762/

5

Ramu Appa Mahapatar vs The State Of Maharashtra on 4 February, 2025

circumstances are found to be incompatible with the innocence of the accused or the guilt of any
other person. The circumstances would not only have to be proved beyond reasonable doubt, those
would also have to be shown to be closely connected with the principal fact sought to be inferred
from those circumstances. All these circumstances should be complete and there should be no gap
left in the chain of evidence. The proved circumstances must be consistent only with the hypothesis
of the guilt of the accused and totally inconsistent with his innocence. The circumstances taken
cumulatively must be so complete that there is no escape from the conclusion that within all human
probability the crime was committed by the accused and none else. While there is no doubt that
conviction can be based solely on circumstantial evidence but great care must be taken in evaluating
circumstantial evidence. If the evidence relied upon is reasonably capable of two inferences, the one
in favour of the accused must be accepted.

17. In State of Rajasthan Vs. Raja Ram1, this Court explained the concept of extra-judicial
confession. Confession may be divided into two classes i.e. judicial and extra-judicial. Judicial
confessions are those which are made before a magistrate or a court in the course of judicial
proceedings. Extra-judicial confessions are those which are made by the party elsewhere than before
a magistrate or a court. Extra-judicial confessions are (2003) 8 SCC 180 generally those that are
made by a party before a private individual who may be a judicial officer also in his private capacity.
As to extra-judicial confessions, two questions arise: firstly, whether they are made voluntarily and
secondly, are they true? If the court is of the opinion that the confession was not made voluntarily
but was a result of an inducement, threat or promise, it would not be acted upon. It follows that a
confession would be voluntary if it is made by the accused in a fit state of mind and if it is not caused
by any inducement, threat or promise having reference to the charge against him proceeding from a
person in authority. Whether or not the confession was voluntary would depend upon the facts and
circumstances of each case judged in the light of Section 24 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (briefly
‘the Evidence Act’ hereinafter). The law is clear that a confession cannot be used against an accused
person unless the court is satisfied that it was voluntary. At that stage, the question whether it is true
or false does not arise. If the facts and circumstances surrounding the making of a confession appear
to cast a doubt on the veracity and voluntariness of the confession, the court may refuse to act upon
the confession even if it is admissible in evidence. The question whether a confession is voluntary or
not is always a question of fact. A free and voluntary confession is deserving of the highest credit
because it is presumed to flow from the highest sense of guilt.

17.1. An extra-judicial confession, if voluntary and true and made in a fit state of mind, can be relied
upon by the court. The confession will have to be proved like any other fact. The value of the
evidence as to confession like any other evidence depends upon the reliability of the witness to
whom it is made and who gives the evidence. Extra-judicial confession can be relied upon and
conviction can be based thereon if the evidence about the confession comes from a witness who
appear to be unbiased, not even remotely inimical to the accused, and in respect of whom nothing is
brought out which may tend to indicate that he may have a motive of attributing an untruthful
statement to the accused. The words spoken by the witness should be clear, unambiguous and
unmistakenly convey that the accused is the perpetrator of the crime and that nothing is omitted by
the witness which may militate against it. After subjecting the evidence of the witness to a rigorous
test on the touchstone of credibility, the extra-judicial confession can be accepted and can be the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24533762/

6

Ramu Appa Mahapatar vs The State Of Maharashtra on 4 February, 2025

basis of a conviction if it passes the test of credibility. 17.2. If the evidence relating to extra-judicial
confession is found credible after being tested on the touchstone of credibility and acceptability, it
can solely form the basis of conviction. The requirement of corroboration is a matter of prudence
and not an invariable rule of law.

18. In Sansar Chand Vs. State of Rajasthan2, this Court accepted the admissibility of extra-judicial
confession and held that there is no absolute rule that an extra-judicial confession can never be the
basis of a conviction although ordinarily an extra- judicial confession should be corroborated by
some other material.

19. Evidentiary value of an extra-judicial confession was again examined in detail by this Court in
Sahadevan Vs. State of Tamil Nadu3. That was also a case where conviction was based on
extra-judicial confession. This Court held that in a case based on circumstantial evidence, the onus
lies upon the prosecution to prove the complete chain of events which shall undoubtedly point
towards the guilt of the accused. That apart, in a case of circumstantial evidence where the
prosecution relies upon an extra-judicial confession, the court has to examine the same with (2010)
10 SCC 604 (2012) 6 SCC 403 a greater degree of care and caution. An extra-judicial confession, if
voluntary and true and made in a fit state of mind can be relied upon by the court. However, the
confession will have to be proved like any other fact. The value of the evidence as to confession like
any other evidence depends upon the veracity of the witness to whom it has been made.

19.1. This Court acknowledged that extra-judicial confession is a weak piece of evidence. Wherever
the court intends to base a conviction on an extra-judicial confession, it must ensure that the same
inspires confidence and is corroborated by other prosecution evidence. If the extra-judicial
confession suffers from material discrepancies or inherent improbabilities and does not appear to be
cogent, such evidence should not be considered. This Court held as follows:-

14. It is a settled principle of criminal jurisprudence that extra-judicial confession is a
weak piece of evidence.

Wherever the court, upon due appreciation of the entire prosecution evidence, intends to base a
conviction on an extra-judicial confession, it must ensure that the same inspires confidence and is
corroborated by other prosecution evidence. If, however, the extra-judicial confession suffers from
material discrepancies or inherent improbabilities and does not appear to be cogent as per the
prosecution version, it may be difficult for the court to base a conviction on such a confession. In
such circumstances, the court would be fully justified in ruling such evidence out of consideration.

19.2. Upon an indepth analysis of judicial precedents, this Court in Sahadevan (supra) summed up
the principles which would make an extra-judicial confession an admissible piece of evidence
capable of forming the basis of conviction of an accused:

(i) The extra-judicial confession is a weak evidence by itself. It has to be examined by
the court with greater care and caution.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24533762/

7

Ramu Appa Mahapatar vs The State Of Maharashtra on 4 February, 2025

(ii) It should be made voluntarily and should be truthful.

      (iii)     It should inspire confidence.
      (iv)      An extra-judicial confession attains greater credibility

and evidentiary value if it is supported by a chain of cogent circumstances and is
further corroborated by other prosecution evidence.

(v) For an extra-judicial confession to be the basis of conviction, it should not suffer
from any material discrepancies and inherent improbabilities.

(vi) Such statement essentially has to be proved like any other fact and in accordance
with law.

20. Having surveyed the principles governing the acceptability and evidentiary value of an
extra-judicial confession, we may now advert to such confession made by the accused before PW-1,
PW-3, PW-4 and PW-6. It is on record that PW-3 in his cross- examination was quite categorical in
deposing that he found the accused to be in a confused state of mind. This factum has also come on
record in the testimony of the other witnesses before whom such confession was made. In other
words, the accused was not in a fit state of mind when he made the extra-judicial confession before
PW-3. That apart, there were no blood stains on the clothes worn by the accused; not to speak of any
such blood samples matching with the blood of the deceased. While various articles were seized
from the place of occurrence, there was no recovery of any blood-stained clothes. There is no
evidence on record that the grinding stone was recovered or that there were any blood stains on the
recovered stick, not to speak of such blood stains matching the blood of the deceased. Moreover, we
find the conduct of the accused to be quite strange; instead of confessing his guilt before the police
or any other authority, he first goes to PW-1, the landlord, and tells him about the death of Manda;
further telling him that he was on his way to the residence of the brother of Manda (PW-3) to inform
him about the development. He goes to the residence of PW-3 alongwith his son in a rickshaw and
tells PW-3 about the death of Manda following assault on her by him. This he stated to PW-3 before
PW-4 and PW-6. What is more strange is the reaction or non-reaction of PW-3 when the accused
confessed before him that he had killed his sister Manda. This is not at all a normal behaviour of a
brother. He would have certainly reacted strongly when he heard the accused saying that he had
killed his sister. Instead of any such reaction, as per the prosecution case, PW-3 accompanied the
accused back to his residence. Further, PW-4 stated in her cross-examination that she did not talk
with the accused directly but came to know about the incident. This clearly puts her testimony under
a cloud.

21. There is one more aspect which we would like to flag off. From the evidence on record, we find
that there is a clear material omission in the cross-examination of PW-3. According to the testimony
of PW-3, he had stated before the police that the accused had told him that he had assaulted Manda
with a grinding stone and had killed her but the same was not recorded by the police in his
statement under Section 161 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Cr.P.C.). Similarly, PW-6 in
his deposition stated that he had told the police that the accused had told Bhagwan (PW-3) in his
presence that he had a quarrel with Manda in the night but the police did not record in his

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24533762/

8

statement under Section 161 Cr.P.C.

Ramu Appa Mahapatar vs The State Of Maharashtra on 4 February, 2025

22. From the above, it is evident that not only the extra- judicial confession of the accused lacks
credibility as PW-3 is clearly on record stating that the accused was in a confused state of mind
when he confessed before him, the testimonies of PW-3 and PW-6 suffer from material omission.
Their statements made under Section 161 Cr.P.C. are at variance with their evidence in court
regarding the confession made by the accused before PW-3. This Court in Alauddin Vs. State of
Assam4 explained the context in which an omission occurs and when such an omission amounts to a
contradiction. In the light of the Explanation to Section 162 of the Cr.P.C., this Court held as follows:

7. When the two statements cannot stand together, they become contradictory
statements. When a witness makes a statement in his evidence before the court which
is inconsistent with what he has stated in his statement recorded by the police, there
is a contradiction. When a prosecution witness whose statement under Section 161(1)
or Section 164 of CrPC has been recorded states factual aspects before the court
which he has not stated in his prior statement recorded under Section 161(1) or
Section 164 of CrPC, it is said that there is an omission. There will be an omission if
the witness has omitted to state a fact in his statement recorded by the police, which
he states before the court in his (2024) SCC Online SC 760 evidence. The Explanation
to Section 162 CrPC indicates that an omission may amount to a contradiction when
it is significant and relevant. Thus, every omission is not a contradiction. It becomes a
contradiction provided it satisfies the test laid down in the Explanation under Section
162. Therefore, when an omission becomes a contradiction, the procedure provided
in the proviso to sub-Section (1) of Section 162 must be followed for contradicting
witnesses in the cross-examination.

23. As observed above, the testimony of the prosecution witnesses suffers from serious lack of
credibility and also hit by contradictions which strike at the very root of the prosecution case. No
corroborating circumstances have been brought on record by the prosecution.

24. No doubt there is a strong suspicion against the appellant and the needle of suspicion qua the
death of Manda points towards him but as is the settled jurisprudence of this country, suspicion
howsoever strong cannot take the place of hard evidence. The evidence on the basis of which the
prosecution seeks conviction of the accused i.e. extra-judicial confession made before the above
witnesses lack credibility and hence cannot be relied upon. Besides, the evidence suffers from
material contradiction. Therefore, it would be wholly unsafe to sustain the conviction of the
appellant based on such weak circumstantial evidence which on the top of it lack credibility.

25. For the aforesaid reasons, we are of the view that the appellant must get the benefit of doubt. In
view of the above, the conviction and sentence of the appellant vide the judgment and order dated
15.10.2004 passed by the Sessions Judge in Sessions Case No. 52 of 2004 as affirmed by the High
Court vide the judgment and order dated 02.12.2010 passed in Criminal Appeal No. 252 of 2005,
are hereby set aside and quashed. Since the appellant is in detention, he shall be released from
custody forthwith if not required in any other case.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24533762/

9

26. Criminal appeal is accordingly allowed.

Ramu Appa Mahapatar vs The State Of Maharashtra on 4 February, 2025

………………………………J [ABHAY S. OKA] ………………………………J [UJJAL BHUYAN] NEW DELHI;

February 04, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24533762/

10

