S Shobha vs Muthoot Finance Ltd on 24 January, 2025

S Shobha vs Muthoot Finance Ltd on 24 January, 2025

                                                                                   REPORTABLE
                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
2025 INSC 117                         EXTRAORDINARY APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION(C) NOS.2625-2627 OF 2025
                                     (Arising out of Diary No(s). 1061/2025)

        S SHOBHA                                                             Petitioner(s)

                                                        VERSUS

        MUTHOOT FINANCE LTD.                                                 Respondent(s)

                                                     O R D E R

1. Delay condoned.

2. The High Court in its impugned order has observed in para 5 as under:-

“5. While the Court examined the appeals and considered the controversy raised in
the petitions, a conspicuous aspect surfaced that the petitions were filed against the
Company named Muthoot Finance Limited. Admittedly, the respondent – Company
is a Company registered under the Companies Act, 1956. It does not answer the
definition of “State” within meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution. Nor the
transaction of loan by pledging gold between the petitioner and the respondent could
be said to be involving any public function or could be said to be in the public realm.
Also the Company is not discharging any function which has the trapping of
sovereign function. Respondent – Company is a Private Company registered under
the law. It is not a “State”.

5.1 Once the above position is clear, the writ petitions would not lie against the
respondent – Company. Learned Single Judge could not have, therefore, entertained
the CHANDRESH Date: 2025.01.29 11:24:37 IST Reason:

petitions on that ground alone.

5.2 Noticeably, learned Single Judge was aware of the said aspect that the respondent

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143784833/

1

S Shobha vs Muthoot Finance Ltd on 24 January, 2025

– Company did not have the status of the “State” under Article 12 of the Constitution.
What was reasoned by the learned Single Judge to entertain the petitions
notwithstanding the aforesaid aspect was that, since the financier had acted contrary
to some interim order, the petitions merited entertainment. The Court does not
endorse to the said view and to make the petitions maintainable on the said ground
5.3 The following was observed by learned Single Judge, “Since on this fact the
financier has acted contrary to the interim order, the petition merited entertainment
notwithstanding the fact that the respondent is a private financier and would not
completely answer its status as being a State under Article 12 of the Constitution of
India who performs public functions and loan is granted under the statutory
requirement, as enunciated by Reserve Bank of India.

On all these factors, the petitions are entertained. The amount of Rs.24,39,085/- is in deposit before
this Court.” 5.4 Thus, it is clear that though the learned Single Judge was well aware that the
respondent – Company did not fall within the purview of the ‘state’ or its instrumentality under
Article 12 of the Constitution, he proceeded to entertain the petitions and passed the order. The
party-in-person submitted that it was a COVID-19 time when she approached the High Court by way
of petitions, therefore, they ought to have been entertained. The Court is not impressed with the
submission.

5.5 The remedy for the petitioner may be to institute the civil suit and to seek appropriate relief. It
was further pointed out by learned advocate for the appellant that the loan agreement between the
Company and the petitioner contains an arbitration clause. The loan agreement figures on record
(page No.88 onwards) which is found to be containing arbitration clause. Paragraph No.6 (page
No.100) of the loan agreement is the arbitration clause.”

3. The Division Bench of the High Court is right in taking the view that Muthoot Finance Ltd. is not
a “State” within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution and therefore not amenable to writ
jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226 of Constitution.

4. The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner would submit that although the Finance
Company may not be strictly falling within the ambit of State yet being a non-banking financial
institution is governed by the rules and regulations framed by the RBI and if the statutory rules and
regulations framed by the RBI are breached by a non-finance banking company then as a statutory
authority such finance company is amenable to writ jurisdiction.

5. We are afraid the position of law is otherwise.

6. In the case of LIC of India v. Escorts Ltd. reported in AIR 1986 SC 1370, it was contended before
this Court that the Life Insurance Corporation was an instrumentality of the State and was debarred
by Article 14 from acting arbitrarily. It was also contended that it was obligatory upon the
Corporation to disclose the reasons for its action complained of, namely, its requisition to call an
extra-ordinary general meeting of the company for the purpose of moving a Resolution to remove
some Directors and appoint others in their place. Such argument was opposed by the State,

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143784833/

2

S Shobha vs Muthoot Finance Ltd on 24 January, 2025

contending that the actions of the State or an instrumentality of the State, which do not properly
belong to the field of public law but belong to the field of private law, were not subject to judicial
review. Dealing with the said contentions, this Court observed:-

“ W h i l e   w e   d o   f i n d   c o n s i d e r a b l e   f o r c e   i n   t h e   c o n t e n t i o n   o f   t h e   l e a r n e d
Attorney-General it may not be necessary for us to enter into any lengthy discussion
of the topic, as we shall presently see. We also desire to warn ourselves against
readily referring to English cases on questions of Constitutional law’ Administrative
Law and Public Law as the law in India in these branches has forced ahead of the law
in England, guided as we are by our Constitution and uninhibited as we are by the
technical rules which have hampered the development of the English law. While we
do not for a moment doubt that every action of the State or an instrumentality of the
State must be informed by reason and that, in appropriate cases actions uninformed
by reason may be questioned as arbitrary in proceedings under Art.226 or Art.32 of
the Constitution, we do not construe Art.14 as a charter for judicial review of State
actions and to call upon the State to account for its actions in its manifold activities
by stating reason; for such actions. For example, if the action of the State is political
or sovereign in character, the Court will keep away from it ‘the Court will not debate
academic matters or concern itself with the intricacies of trade and commerce. If the
action of the State is related to contractual obligation or obligations arising out of the
contract, the Court may not ordinarily examine it unless the action has some public
law character attached to it. Broadly speaking, the Court will examine actions of State
if they pertain to the public law domain and refrain from examining them if they
pertain to the private law field. The difficulty will lie in demarcating the frontier
between the public law domain and the private law field. It is impossible to draw the
line with precision and we do not want to attempt it. The question must be decided in
each case with reference to the particular action, the activity in which the State or the
instrumentality of the State is engaged when performing the action, the public law or
private law character of then action and a host of other relevant circumstances. When
the State or an instrumentality of the State ventures into the corporate world and
purchases the shares of a company, it assumes to itself the ordinary role of a share
holder, and dons the robes of a share-holder, with all the rights available to such a
share-holder there is no reason why the State as a share-holder should be expected to
state its reasons when it seeks to change the management, by a resolution of the
Company, like any other shareholder..” Distinction between ‘public law’ and ‘private
law’:

Difficult as this distinction is and incapable of precise demarcation, it is yet necessary
to keep the broad distinction in mind. Lord Denning in his book “The Closing
Chapter” has this to say on the subject: “The first thing to notice is that public law is
confined to ‘public authorities’. What are ‘public authorities’? There is only one
avenue of Approach. It is by asking, in the words of Section 31(2)(b) of the Supreme
Court Act 1981:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143784833/

3

S Shobha vs Muthoot Finance Ltd on 24 January, 2025

What is the ‘nature of the persons and bodies against whom relief may be granted by
such orders’, that is, by mandamus, prohibition or certiorari?

These are divided into two main categories: First, the persons or bodies who have
legal authority to determine questions affecting the common law or statutory rights
or obligations of other persons as individuals. That is the formula stated by Lord
Justice Atkin in R. v. Electricity Commissioners, ex parte London Electricity Joint
Committee Co., (1920) Ltd, (1924) 1 KB 171/205 as broadened by Lord Diplock in
O'Reilly v. Mackman (1982) 3, WLR 1096/1104). Second, the persons or bodies who
are entrusted by Parliament with functions, powers and duties which involve the
making of decisions of a public nature….To which I would add the words of Lord
Goddard, C.J. in R. v. National Joint Council for Dental Technicians, ex parte Neate
(1953) 1 QB 704/707):

“The bodies to which in modern times the remedies of these prerogative writs have
been applied have all been statutory bodies on whom Parliament has conferred
statutory powers and duties which, when exercised, may lead to the detriment of
subjects who may have to submit to their jurisdiction”.

But those categories are not exhaustive. The courts can extend them to any other
person or body of a public nature exercising public duties which it is desirable to
control by the remedy of judicial review. There are many cases which give guidance,
but I will just give some illustrations.

Every body which is created by statute and whose powers and duties are defined by
statute is a ‘public authority’. So Government departments, local authorities, police
authorities, and statutory undertakings and corporations, are all ‘public authorities’.
So are members of a statutory tribunal or inquiry, and the board of visitors of a
prison. The Criminal Injuries Compensation Board is a public authority. So also, I
suggest, is a university incorporated by Royal charter; and the managers of a State
School. So is the Boundary Commission: and the Committee of Lloyd's.

But a limited liability company incorporated under the Companies Acts is not a
‘public authority’; (see Tozer v. National Greyhound Racing Club Ltd. (1983) Times,
16 May). Nor is an unincorporated association like the Jockey Club…”. (see pp. 122,
123, 124)

38. Sir Harry Woolf, a Lord Justice of Court of Appeal, points out the distinction in
the following words:-

“I regard public law as being the system which enforces the proper performance by
public bodies of the duties which they owe to the public. I regard private law as being
the system which protects the private rights of private individuals or the private
rights of public bodies.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143784833/

4

S Shobha vs Muthoot Finance Ltd on 24 January, 2025

The critical distinction arises out of the fact that it is the public as a whole, or in the
case of local government the public in the locality, who are the beneficiaries of what is
protected by public law and it is the individuals or bodies entitled to the rights who
are the beneficiaries of the protection provided by private law “. (see page 221 of his
Article “Public Law Private Law: Why the Divide? A personal View (published in
“Public Law” Summer (1986)”).

The learned Law Lord stated further in the same Article, at page 223:

“While public law deals only with public bodies, this does not mean that the activities
of public bodies are never governed by private law. Like public figures, at least in
theory, public bodies are entitled to have a private life. There have been suggestions
that in the commercial field public bodies should adopt different and higher ethical
standards than private individuals, but this is not yet required as a matter of law and
in relation to purely commercial transactions the same law is applicable, whether or
not a public duty is involved. Prima facie, the same is true in relation to employment.
The servant employed by a public body ordinarily has the same private rights as any
other servant “.

The position may, however, be different pointed out the learned Law Lord if such
relationship is circumscribed by a statutory provision.

39. In this context, it would be appropriate to refer to two important English
decisions, where a public duty was implied even in the absence of a statutory
provisions.

They are R. v. Criminal Injuries Compensation Board, ex parte Lain (1967) 2 All ER 770, and R. v.
Panel on take- overs (1987) 1 All ER 564. In Criminal Injuries Compensation Board, the relevant
facts are the following: In the year 1964 the Government of Great Britian announced a Scheme in
both Houses of Parliament providing for compensation to victims of violence and persons injured
while assisting the police. It was a non-statutory scheme under which compensation was to be paid
ex gratia. The scheme was to be administered by a Board, who were to be provided with money
through a grant-in-aid, out of which payment would be made when the Board was satisfied that the
compensation was justified. The widow of a Police Constable who was shot in the face by a suspect
whom he was about to question, and who subsequently shot himself, applied to the Board for
compensation. The Board awarded compensation, but made certain deductions, which was
questioned by way of certiorari. The first question before the Court was “whether the Board are a
body of persons amenable to the supervisory jurisdiction of this Court?”. For the Board reliance was
placed upon the well-known words of Atkin, L.J., in’ R. v. Electricity Commissioners (1924) 1 KB 171,
at p. 205 to the effect that the body of persons to be amenable to writ jurisdiction must have the
legal authority to determine questions affecting the rights of subjects and who are under a duty to
act judicially. The Court held that the said words of Atkin. L. J., were not supposed to be exhaustive
of the situation where a certiorari may issue, and pointed out that the Board, though not set up
under a statute, is set up by the executive Government, i.e., under the prerogative, and that its acts

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143784833/

5

are no less lawful on that account. The Court observed:

S Shobha vs Muthoot Finance Ltd on 24 January, 2025

“Indeed, the writ of certiorari has been issued not only to courts set up by statutes but
also to courts whose authority was derived, inter alia, from the prerogative. Once the
jurisdiction is extended, as it clearly has been, to tribunals as opposed to courts, there
is no reason why the remedy by way of certiorari cannot be invoked to a body of
persons set up under the prerogative. Moreover, the Board, though set up under the
prerogative and not by statute, had in fact the recognition of Parliament in debate
and Parliament provided the money to satisfy the Board's awards….”. It was further
observed:

“We have, as it seems to me, reached the position when the ambit of certiorari can be
said to cover every case in which a body of persons, of a public as opposed to a purely
private or domestic character, has to determine matters affecting subjects provided
always that it has a duty to act judicially. Looked at in this way, the Board in my
judgment comes fairly and squarely within the jurisdiction of this Court. The Board
are, as counsel for the Board said, “a servant of the Crown, charged by the Crown, by
executive instructions, with the duty of distributing the bounty of the Crown”. The
Board are clearly, therefore, performing public duties. Moreover, the Board are quite
clearly under a duty to act judicially”.

The same idea was put forward by Diplock, L.J., in his separate opinion, where he
said:

“If new tribunals are established by acts of Government, the supervisory jurisdiction
of the High Court extends to them if they possess the essential characteristics on
which the subjection of inferior tribunals to the supervisory control of the High Court
is based…”. Ashworth, J., justified the issue of certiorari in that case on the following
basis:

“They (Board) were set up by the executive after the proposal to set them up had been
debated in both Houses of Parliament, and the money needed to satisfy their awards
is drawn from sums provided by Parliament. It can therefore be said that their
existence and their functions have at least been recognized by Parliament, which to
my mind has a twofold consequence: in the first place it negatives any notion that the
Board are a private tribunal, and secondly it confers on the Board what I may call a
public or official character. The number of applications for compensation and the
amounts awarded by the Board alike show how greatly the general public are affected
by the functioning of the Board ….”.

40. This decision has since been followed and applied in several English decisions. It
would suffice to refer to R. v. Panel on Takeovers and Mergers, Ex Parte Datafin
(1987) 1 All ER 564. The Panel on Take-overs and Mergers was a self-regulating
unincorporated association which devised and operated the City Code on Take-overs

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143784833/

6

S Shobha vs Muthoot Finance Ltd on 24 January, 2025

and Mergers prescribing a Code of Conduct to be observed in the take-overs of listed
public companies. The panel had no direct statutory, prerogative or common law
powers, nor were its powers based solely on consensus; its acts were supported and
sustained by certain statutory powers and penalties introduced after the inception of
the Panel. A decision of the panel was sought to be questioned by way of certiorari.
One of the objections of the respondents was that the supervisory jurisdiction of the
Court was confined to bodies whose power was derived solely from legislation or the
exercise of the prerogative, and that the power of judicial review did not extend to a
body such as the Panel on Takeovers.

Overruling this objection, it was held that in determining whether the decisions of a particular body
were subject to judicial review, the Court was not confined to considering the source of that body's
powers and duties, but could also look to their nature. Accordingly, if the duty imposed on a body,
whether expressly or by implication, was a public duty and the body was exercising public law
functions, the Court had jurisdiction to entertain an application for judicial review of that body's
decisions. It was held that, having regard to the wide-ranging nature and importance of the matters
covered by the City Code on Take-overs and Mergers and to the public consequences of
noncompliance with the Code, the Panel on Takeovers and Mergers was performing a public duty
when prescribing and administering the Code and its rules and was subject to public law remedies.
Accordingly, it was held that an application for judicial review would lie in an appropriate case. The
approach to be adopted in such cases, it was stated by Sir John Donaldson, M.R., is “to recognize the
realities of executive power”. This is what the learned Master of Rolls stated:-

“In fact, given its novelty, the panel fits surprisingly well into the format which this
court had in mind in R. v. Criminal Injuries Compensation Board (1967-2 QB

867). It is without doubt performing a public duty and an important one. This is clear
from the expressed willingness of the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry to
limit legislation in the field of take-overs and mergers and to use the panel as the
centerpiece of his regulation of that market. The rights of citizens are indirectly
affected by its decisions, some, but by no means all of whom, may in a technical sense
be said to have assented to this situation, e.g., the members of the Stock Exchange. At
least in its determination of whether there has been a breach of the Code, it has a
duty to act judicially and it asserts that its raison d'etre is to do equity between one
shareholder and another. Its source of power is only partly based on moral
persuasion and the assent of institutions and their members, the bottom line being
the statutory powers exercised by the Department of Trade and Industries and the
Bank of England. In this context I should be very disappointed if the courts could not
recognize the realities of executive power and allowed their vision to be clouded by
the subtlety and sometimes complexity of the way in which it can be exerted…”.

This rule was reiterated in yet another decision of the Court of Appeal in R. v. Panel on Take-overs
and Mergers, ex parte Guinness, (1989) 1 All ER 509. This was indeed the approach indicated by
Mathew, J. in Sukhdev v. Bhagatram, AIR 1975 SC 1331, when the learned Judge spoke of “the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143784833/

7

S Shobha vs Muthoot Finance Ltd on 24 January, 2025

governing power, wherever located” being subjected to “fundamental constitutional limitations”.
The learned Judge felt that “the need to subject the power centres to the control of the Constitution
requires an expansion of the concept of State action”. (see para 93 at p. 1352).

7. Applying the above test, the respondent herein cannot be called a public body. It has no duty
towards the public. It's duty is towards its account holders, which may include the borrowers having
availed of the loan facility. It has no power to take any action, or pass any order affecting the rights
of the members of the public. The binding nature of its orders and actions is confined to its account
holders and borrowers and to its employees.

Its functions are also not akin to Governmental functions.

8. A body, public or private, should not be categorized as “amenable” or “not amenable” to writ
jurisdiction. The most important and vital consideration should be the “function” test as regards the
maintainability of a writ application. If a public duty or public function is involved, any body, public
or private, concerned or connection with that duty or function, and limited to that, would be subject
to judicial scrutiny under the extraordinary writ jurisdiction of Article 226 of the Constitution of
India.

9. We may sum up thus:

(1) For issuing writ against a legal entity, it would have to be an instrumentality or
agency of a State or should have been entrusted with such functions as are
Governmental or closely associated therewith by being of public importance or being
fundamental to the life of the people and hence Governmental.

(2) A writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India may be maintainable
against (i) the State Government;

(ii) Authority; (iii) a statutory body; (iv) an instrumentality or agency of the State; (v)
a company which is financed and owned by the State; (vi) a private body run
substantially on State funding; (vii) a private body discharging public duty or positive
obligation of public nature; and (viii) a person or a body under liability to discharge
any function under any Statute, to compel it to perform such a statutory function.

(3) Although a non-banking finance company like the Muthoot Finance Ltd. with
which we are concerned is duty bound to follow and abide by the guidelines provided
by the Reserve Bank of India for smooth conduct of its affairs in carrying on its
business, yet those are of regulatory measures to keep a check and provide guideline
and not a participatory dominance or control over the affairs of the company.

(4) A private company carrying on banking business as a Scheduled bank cannot be
termed as a company carrying on any public function or public duty.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143784833/

8

S Shobha vs Muthoot Finance Ltd on 24 January, 2025

(5) Normally, mandamus is issued to a public body or authority to compel it to
perform some public duty cast upon it by some statute or statutory rule. In
exceptional cases a writ of mandamus or a writ in the nature of mandamus may issue
to a private body, but only where a public duty is cast upon such private body by a
statute or statutory rule and only to compel such body to perform its public duty.

(6) Merely because a statue or a rule having the force of a statute requires a company
or some other body to do a particular thing, it does not possess the attribute of a
statutory body.

(7) If a private body is discharging a public function and the denial of any rights is in
connection with the public duty imposed on such body, the public law remedy can be
enforced. The duty cast on the public body may be either statutory or otherwise and
the source of such power is immaterial but, nevertheless, there must be the public law
element in such action.

(8) According to Halsbury's Laws of England, 3rd Ed. Vol.30, p.682, “a public
authority is a body not necessarily a county council, municipal corporation or other
local authority which has public statutory duties to perform, and which perform the
duties and carries out its transactions for the benefit of the public and not for private
profit”. There cannot be any general definition of public authority or public action.
The facts of each case decide the point.

10. Even while rejecting the writ petition on the ground of its maintainability, the High Court has
protected the interest of the parties by observing in paras 6.1 as under:-

“6.1 Following order shall govern,

(i) It would be open for the respondent – original petitioner to have recourse to civil
remedy before the appropriate Court in relation to the claim and grievance which she
agitated by filing the writ petitions.

(ii) The appellant-Company is not precluded from taking any recourse in law, if it is
of the view that it has any claim against the respondent – party-in-person.

(iii) It is also open to either side to invoke arbitration clause and engage in the
process of arbitration to resolve the disputes.

(iv) The amount of Rs.24,39,085/-, which has been realized from sale of the gold
pursuant to the auction conducted by the appellant-Company, shall remain deposited
with the Registry of this Court.

(v) The Registry shall invest the said amount in a Fixed Deposit in a Nationalized
Bank initially for a period of one year and renewable.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143784833/

9

(vi) Such Fixed Deposit shall continue to renew for a maximum period of three years.

S Shobha vs Muthoot Finance Ltd on 24 January, 2025

(vii) The amount of interest which may accrue on such deposit shall be receivable by
the respondent– petitioner.

(viii) However, the petitioner shall not be entitled to raise any loan on the Fixed
Deposit.

(ix) The Fixed Deposit kept shall remain in custody of the Registry of this Court.

(x) It would be open for either party to take recourse of civil remedy or before the
arbitration within a period of three months from today.”

11. No case is made out for interference.

12. The petitions are dismissed. However, if the petitioner has any grievance to redress against the
finance company it shall be open for the petitioner to avail appropriate legal remedy before the
appropriate forum in accordance with law including approaching the Ombudsman of the RBI.

13. Pending application(s), if any, stands disposed of.

………………………………………………J. (J.B. PARDIWALA) ………………………………………………J. (R.
MAHADEVAN) NEW DELHI.

24th JANUARY, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143784833/

10

