Sahakarmaharshi Bhausaheb Thorat ... vs Thyssen Krupp Industries India P.Ltd on 14 February, 2025

Sahakarmaharshi Bhausaheb Thorat ... vs Thyssen Krupp
Industries India P.Ltd on 14 February, 2025

Author: Abhay S. Oka

Bench: Abhay S. Oka

2025 INSC 219                                                            NON-REPORTABLE

                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3194 OF 2014

            SAHAKARMAHARSHI BHAUSAHEB THORAT
            SAHAKARI SAKHAR KARKHANA LTD .                                   … APPELLANT

                                                      versus

            THYSSEN KRUPP INDUSTRIES INDIA
            PVT.LTD.                                                       … RESPONDENT

                                                 JUDGMENT

ABHAY S. OKA, J.

FACTUAL ASPECTS

1. The issues involved in this appeal are limited, but the litigation has a chequered history. An
agreement was executed on 17th November 1992 by and between the appellant and the respondent.
Under the said agreement, the respondent agreed to design, procure, manufacture and supply to the
appellant machinery and equipment for a continuous fermentation process based on the Encillium
process, patented by the National Chemical Laboratory, Pune (for short, ‘the NCL’). The agreement
contained an arbitration clause. The total consideration was of Rs. 93,20,000/-. One of the clauses
in the agreement was that the fermentation plant that was to be supplied by the respondent must
have a guaranteed minimum yield of 280 litres of alcohol per metric tonne of Molasses. According
to the appellant's case, when the agreement was entered into, the existing yield in their factory was
245 litres per metric tonne of Molasses. Under the agreement, the plant and machinery were to be
supplied within a period of five and half months from the effective date of the agreement, i.e., by
15th May 1993, for a total consideration of Rs.93.20 lakhs.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90338172/

1

Sahakarmaharshi Bhausaheb Thorat ... vs Thyssen Krupp Industries India P.Ltd on 14 February, 2025

2. According to the appellant, there was a delay of about 24 weeks in the delivery of the machinery.
The appellant's case was that four trial runs were conducted on the machinery supplied by the
respondent. The yield was much less than the guaranteed yield of 280 litres per metric tonne of
Molasses. The maximum yield in trial runs was 237.68 litres per metric tonne of Molasses.
Therefore, on 19th October 1994, the appellant issued a legal notice to the respondent claiming a
sum of Rs. 237.83 lakhs as damages. As expected, the respondent disputed the said claim. That is
how the appellant invoked the arbitration clause by appointing its nominee arbitrator.

3. According to the appellant's case, a memorandum of understanding dated 24th July 1995 (for
short, ‘the MOU’) was executed by and between the parties without prejudice to their rights and
contentions. It provided for conducting one more trial run for 15 days after necessary modifications
were made in the machine as suggested by the NCL. The modifications were to be made by the
respondent at its own cost. By the MOU, the quantum of liquidated damages under clause 15 of the
agreement was increased to 20% of the contract value, i.e. Rs. 18.64 lakhs, which would be payable if
the machine failed to give guaranteed performance. According to the appellant's case, the fifth trial
run conducted in August 1995 generated a yield of 224.54 litres per metric tonne of Molasses.

4. The appellant filed a statement of claim before the Arbitral Tribunal, claiming damages of
Rs.233.75 lakhs. Broadly, the following claims were made:-

a) For a delay of 24 weeks in the supply of plant and machinery

- Rs.4.66 lakhs, which is 5% of the contract price

b) Liquidated damages equivalent to 20% of the contract value – Rs.18.64 lakhs;

c) On account of the failure of guaranteed performance of steam and power
consumption - Rs. 9.30 lakhs at 10% of the contract value;

d) Loss caused due to short production – Rs. 48.45 lakhs;

e) The amount spent by the appellant on payment of the price to the respondent, civil
work, and supervision – Rs. 107.54 lakhs; and,

(f) Interest at the rate of 18% on the claim amount of Rs. 107.54 lakhs from May 1993
till 31st August 1995 – Rs.45.16 lakhs --

Total 233.75 lakhs.

5. The Arbitral Tribunal, by an award dated 20th June 1999, granted the following amounts to the
appellant:

a) Liquidated damages for delay in delivery of the plant and machinery – Rs.2.09
lakhs

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90338172/

2

Sahakarmaharshi Bhausaheb Thorat ... vs Thyssen Krupp Industries India P.Ltd on 14 February, 2025

b) Refund of the price paid and incidental amount spent over the plant – Rs. 107.54
lakhs

c) Past interest – Rs.28.74 lakhs

d) Compensation for actual loss suffered in the yield of alcohol -

Rs. 21.42 lakhs -- Total Rs.159.79 lakhs.

e) Costs of Rs.1.50 lakhs

6. Both parties challenged the award by filing objections under Section 30 of the Arbitration Act,
1940 (for short, ‘the 1940 Act’). By a judgment dated 6th May 2000, the learned Civil Judge set
aside the Award and remanded the same for fresh adjudication by the Arbitral Tribunal. Both the
parties challenged the order of the Civil Judge before the High Court. By judgment dated 20th
October 2000, the High Court held that the claim of Rs.107.54 lakhs was beyond the jurisdiction of
the Arbitral Tribunal. However, the High Court upheld the claim for liquidated damages for the
delay in delivery of Rs.2.09 lakhs, compensation for actual loss suffered in the yield of alcohol of
Rs.21.42 lakhs, and arbitration cost of Rs.1.5 lakhs.

7. The appellant filed an appeal before this Court against the judgment of the High Court. By a
judgment and order dated 7th May 2002, this Court set aside the order of the High Court and
restored the order of the Civil Court. This Court held that the claim of Rs.107.54 lakhs and interest
raised by the appellant was certainly arbitrable before the Arbitral Tribunal and was not beyond the
scope of reference. In short, the order of remand passed by the Civil Court was restored by this
Court.

8. The award after remand (for short, ‘the second award’) was made on 24th November 2002 by the
Arbitral Tribunal. The second award accepted the following claims:

a) Rs.2.09 lakhs as liquidated damages for delay in supply of machinery;

b) Rs.18.64 lakhs as damages for actual loss suffered in the yield of alcohol during
five performance trials;

c) Rs.68.15 lakhs as damages for loss suffered due to non-

performing machinery and equipment; and

d) Rs.10.63 lakhs being the past interest leviable on damages of Rs.68.15 lakhs.

9. Again, both the parties filed objections under Section 30 of the 1940 Act. By a judgment dated 6th
November 2004, the Civil Court substantially upheld the second award except for the direction to
pay interest of Rs.10.63 lakhs on the ground that interest cannot be made payable on the amount of

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90338172/

3

Sahakarmaharshi Bhausaheb Thorat ... vs Thyssen Krupp Industries India P.Ltd on 14 February, 2025

damages till it is quantified.

10. Being aggrieved by the judgment of the Trial Court, the respondent preferred an appeal in which
the appellant filed cross- objections. By the impugned judgment dated 6th February 2012, the High
Court allowed the appeal and dismissed the cross-objections of the appellant. The High Court set
aside the second award to the extent of a claim of Rs.68.15 lakhs. It was held that this claim was
based on speculative and imaginary calculations. As regards the claim of Rs.2.09 lakhs and Rs.18.64
lakhs, the High Court recorded that the respondent has accepted the liability. On 13th April 2012,
this Court issued a notice. The appellant was directed to deposit the amount involved with the High
Court Registry by way of interim relief. SUBMISSIONS

11. Shri Vijay Hansaria, learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant, stated at the outset that
the appeal is confined to the rejection of Rs.68.15 lakhs being damages for loss suffered due to non-
performance of machinery and equipment. The learned senior counsel submitted that even under
the 1940 Act, the scope of interference by the Civil Court was limited. He placed reliance on the
decision of Madnani Construction Corporation (P) Ltd. v. Union of India & Ors.1

12. The learned senior counsel invited our attention to clauses 15.2 and 15.3 of the contract. These
clauses were applicable when the plant supplied or commissioned and utilised by the purchaser
yields below the minimum guarantee of 280 litres per metric tonne. (2010) 1 SCC 549

13. The learned senior counsel has invited our attention to the findings recorded by the Arbitral
Tribunal in the second award. He submitted that the respondent never disputed the
non-commissioning of the plant but stated that the machinery and equipment supplied are complete
without any defect or fault as per the rated capacities mentioned in the parameters. The learned
senior counsel submitted that the claim of liquidated damages and breach of warranty were separate
and independent claims and were rightly granted by the Arbitral Tribunal. The learned senior
counsel, therefore, submitted that the appellant's claim, to the extent of Rs.68.15 lakhs, deserved to
be accepted.

14. Shri Chander Uday Singh, learned senior counsel appearing for the respondent, has also made
detailed submissions. The learned senior counsel appearing for the respondent submitted that the
finding on the issue of the entitlement of the appellant to the sum of Rs.68.15 lakhs has been
correctly recorded by the High Court. The learned senior counsel submitted that Section 74 of the
Indian Contract Act, 1872 (for short, ‘the Contract Act’) makes it clear that where a contract contains
a clause stipulating liquidated damages, and the contract is broken, the party complaining of the
breach is entitled to receive such sum, not exceeding the mentioned amount. The learned senior
counsel also urged that in view of Clause 21 of the agreement, the claim made by the appellant that
they were unable to use the machinery cannot be accepted. The learned senior counsel submitted
that the High Court had already concluded the issue of the grant of the claim of Rs.107.54 lakhs in
the earlier round. He stated that no interference is called for in the view taken by the High Court.

15. The appellant's submission was that they could not use the supplied machinery and that the
machinery was no better than scrap because the fermentation performance was lower than

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90338172/

4

Sahakarmaharshi Bhausaheb Thorat ... vs Thyssen Krupp Industries India P.Ltd on 14 February, 2025

promised. To deal with the said submission, the learned senior counsel for the respondent relied
upon clause 21 of the agreement. He submitted that the appellant did not call upon the respondent
to replace the machinery. At no stage is it claimed that the appellant had replaced the machinery at
the respondent's cost. He pointed out that in paragraph 16 of the claim, the appellant stated that the
agreement does not provide any specific clause for the total failure of the plant. Therefore, as per the
Contract Act, the seller is liable for the actual damages. The learned senior counsel appearing for the
respondent submitted that what was claimed by the appellant in the correspondence was a refund of
the price. He submitted that the applicability of Section 59 of the Sale of Goods Act for a refund of
the price or by way of damages is contrary to the express terms of the agreement. He would,
therefore, submit that the liability of the respondent was restricted to Rs.18.64 lakhs as damages.

OUR VIEW

16. There were three contracts between the parties. The first is the agreement dated 17th November
1992 (for short, ‘the agreement’). Under the agreement, the respondent undertook to design,
procure, manufacture and supply to the appellant machinery and equipment for modernisation with
a continuous fermentation process based on the Encillium process developed by the NCL. The total
price was Rs. 93.20 lakhs which the appellant paid. It was provided that delivery of machinery and
equipment would start from 1st December 1992 and be completed within five and half months from
the agreement's effective date. Clause 8 of the agreement incorporated the performance guarantee.
The first part of the performance guarantee was regarding the specifications of the machinery and
equipment, and the second part of clause 8 provided that all the machinery and equipment of the
continuous fermentation plant would be brand new. What is relevant is sub-clause C of clause 8,
which reads thus:

“C. That the capacity and efficiency of the machinery and equipment of continuous
fermentation plant shall be fulfilled after one month from the start of operation, all
units work to their rated capacities and efficiencies fermentation efficiency minimum
90% yielding 280 litres of alcohol/ton of molasses (47% F.S) and with performance
specified in annexure B and D.”

17. Clause 15 provided for the penalties and liquidated damages.

a. It provided that if the respondent fails to deliver the machinery and equipment within a stipulated
time, the respondent shall pay the liquidated damages equal to 0.25% of the contract price for every
completed week of delay subject to a maximum of 5% of the contract price for delay in delivery; b.
Rs.1 lakh as liquidated damages for every one litre less production of alcohol than guaranteed
figures as specified in Annexure B;

c. 1% of the contract price, which is equivalent to Rs.93,200/- for every 0.1 kg/1 litre more steam
consumption at any stage than guaranteed figures subject to a maximum of 3% of the contract price.

d. Rupees 1,39,000/- equivalent to 1.5% of the contract price will be payable as liquidated damages
for every 10 kwh more power consumption at any stage than guaranteed figures subject to a

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90338172/

5

Sahakarmaharshi Bhausaheb Thorat ... vs Thyssen Krupp Industries India P.Ltd on 14 February, 2025

maximum of 2% of the contract price.

e. The penalties/liquidated damages payable against non-

performance of fermentation section and penalties/liquidated damages payable for guaranteed
performance towards steam and power shall be limited to a maximum of 10% of the contract price.

18. At this stage, it is also important to note clause 21 of the agreement which reads thus:

“21.1 For a period of twelve months from the date of commission of the continuous
fermentation plant or eighteen months from the date of last supply whichever is
earlier called the maintenance warranty period the seller shall remain liable to rectify
/ replace any parts thereof such as may be found to be defective or below the rated.
Capacity under proper use and maintenance arising due to faulty design, materials,
or workmanship. The purchaser shall give the seller notice in writing stating the
particulars of the defects or failures and the seller shall there upon make good the
failures and the seller shall there upon make good the defective or underrated
equipments or replace the same free of cost to make it comply with the requirements
of the continuous fermentation plant. If the seller fail to do so within reasonable
times so as to require the production loss to the minimum as required by the
purchaser, the seller the whole any portion of the cost of the seller the whole or any
portion of the machinery and equipment, as the case may be, which is defective or
underrated or fail to fulfil the requirements of the agreement and may recover the
actual cost thereof from the seller adjust the same from any balance payment to be
made to the seller; or recovery by raising debit notes.

Such rectification/replacement shall be carried out by the purchase wing in a short
time as possible and at a reasonable price and under advice to the seller. In case of
such rectification/ replacement by the purchaser, the seller shall be liable to pay
purchaser the whole cost of such rectification replacement done and the defective
equipment on being replaced shall be taken away by the seller at their own cost. The
purchaser shall have the right to operate the machinery and equipment after the
commission in date of the continuous fermentation plant except that this shall not be
considered to permit operation of any equipment which may be materially damaged
by such operation before any required rectification or alteration have been carried
out.

21.2 If it becomes necessary for the seller to replace or renew any defective part of the
continuous fermentation plant and machinery under this clause the provisions of the
first paragraph of this clause shall apply to the parts of the machinery and equipment
so replaced or renewed until the expiration of one month from the date of such
replacement or renewal, or until the end of the aforesaid maintenance period of
twelve months whichever is later.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90338172/

6

Sahakarmaharshi Bhausaheb Thorat ... vs Thyssen Krupp Industries India P.Ltd on 14 February, 2025

21.3 The rectification or new parts will be delivered for purchasers distillery site. The
seller shall also bear the cost of rectification / replacement carried out on their behalf
by the purchaser as mentioned above at the continuous fermentation plant site. At
the end of the maintenance period, seller liability shall case. first paragraph of this
clause, the purchaser shall be entitled to benefit of any guarantee given to the seller
by the original supplier or the manufacturer of such plant and machinery.

21.4 The responsibility of the seller for rectification replacement under this clause
shall extend to the actual cost of rectification / replacement of the defective items of
the continuous fermentation plant and machinery and shall not in any way be
deemed to be limited to the amount of the performance guarantee.” (emphasis
added)

19. A supplementary agreement was executed on the same day in which the respondent agreed to
pay liquidated damages of Rs. 2 lakhs for every one litre less production of alcohol subject to the
maximum ceiling of 10% of the contract price.

20. The third agreement executed between the parties was styled as the MOU, under which the
respondent agreed to supervise the reaction and commissioning of the machinery.

21. Now, we come to the claim made by the appellant. Before we refer to the claim, we must note
that the real controversy remains confined to the claim granted by the Arbitral Tribunal to the sum
of Rs.68.15 lakhs towards the damages for loss suffered due to non-performing machinery and
equipment and, consequently, the interest thereon.

22. The case made out in the claim is that the respondent failed to commission the plant successfully
so as to give guaranteed performance as per the agreement. Therefore, production loss continued.
The following claims were made:

a) Delay in supply of plant and machinery beyond the period of five and a half
months from the effective date of contract – Rs.4.66 lakhs;

b) Damages on account of the failure to provide guaranteed performance of
continuous fermentation plant – Rs.18.64 lakhs;

c) Failure of guaranteed performance of steam and power consumption – Rs. 9.30
lakhs;

d) Actual loss of production – Rs. 48.45 lakhs; and

e) Amount spent by the appellant on account of acquiring the plant, including the
cost of the plant paid to the respondent, civil work and supervision charges – 107.54
lakhs.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90338172/

7

Sahakarmaharshi Bhausaheb Thorat ... vs Thyssen Krupp Industries India P.Ltd on 14 February, 2025

f) Interest at the rate of 18% on the claim amount of Rs.

107.54 lakhs from May 1993 till 31st August 1995 – Rs.45.16 lakhs.

Accordingly, a total claim of Rs.233.75 lakhs was made. However, while making the prayer, the loss
suffered during the trials was not claimed.

23. In the impugned judgment, the High Court has, in detail, considered the clauses in the
agreement. The High Court referred to the notice dated 19th October 1994 addressed by the
appellant to the respondent. In the said notice, the appellant claimed that a sum of Rs.107.54 lakhs
had been spent on the plant and that the plant was not giving the required results as agreed, even
optimum to the norms. Therefore, the sum of Rs.107.54 was a loss to the appellant. The High Court
rightly rejected the appellant's contention that the claim for damages of Rs.107.54 has been
concluded against the respondent. The High Court rightly observed that if that were so, this Court
would not have confirmed the order of remand to the Arbitral Tribunal even on the said issue.

24. We have already quoted the relevant part of the agreement, particularly clause 8, which contains
performance guarantees. Clause 15 is regarding penalties/liquidated damages. Penalties/liquidated
damages were stipulated for the delay in delivering machinery and plant, failure to give the
guaranteed performance of continuous fermentation plant, failure to provide a guaranteed
performance with respect to steam, and failure to give a guaranteed performance with respect to
power. Even the rates of liquidated damages have been laid down.

25. Then comes clause 21. Clause 21.1 provided that on the failure of the respondent to replace the
defective or underrated equipment within a reasonable time, the appellant had the option to replace
the same at the respondent's cost. Under clause 21, it was provided that the responsibility of the
seller for rectification/replacement shall extend to the actual cost of rectification/replacement of
defective items of the continuous fermentation plant and machinery.

26. Careful perusal of the claim made before the Arbitral Tribunal by the appellant shows that the
claim for the sum of Rs.107.54 lakhs was not based on clause 21 of the agreement. It is not the
appellant's case that the respondent was called upon to replace the plant and machinery, and as the
respondent failed to do so within a reasonable time, the appellant replaced the plant and machinery
by themselves. The claim was on account of a refund of the amount spent by the appellant on the
plant, as is evident from paragraph 16 of the statement of claim. Paragraph 16 reads thus:

“16. Purchaser had spent Rs. 107.54 lakh on the said plant. It is absolutely clear now
that it will not give required results as agreed and all the investment goes waste. The
agreement does not provide any specific clause for the total failure of plant.
Therefore, as per contract act, seller is liable for actual damages. Since the entire
plant goes waste seller is liable to pay for total investment of Rs. 107.54 lakhs and loss
of interest at the rate of 18% per year from 1st May 1993 onwards.” The claim was not
made in terms of Clause 21 of the Agreement. The claim was not on account of the
breach of warranty. What is claimed is virtually the refund of the amount spent.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90338172/

8

Sahakarmaharshi Bhausaheb Thorat ... vs Thyssen Krupp Industries India P.Ltd on 14 February, 2025

27. As stated earlier, there is a clause for liquidated damages under which a claim was allowed by the
Arbitral Tribunal, which the respondent accepted. Under clause 21 of the agreement, the appellant
had the choice of replacing the plant and machinery and seeking the cost of the plant and machinery
and the installation cost from the respondent. However, the said option was not availed by the
appellant. The agreement provided for liquidated damages in clause 15 on account of
non-performance of the guarantees set out in clause 8. Assuming that the entire plant and
machinery was a failure or scrap, the appellant had the right to replace the same and claim the cost
from the respondent. However, that was not done by the appellant.

28. In view of what is stated in paragraph 16 of the claim filed by the appellant, Section 74 of the
Contract Act needs to be considered, which reads thus: -

“74. Compensation for breach of contract where penalty stipulated for.— When a
contract has been broken, if a sum is named in the contract as the amount to be paid
in case of such breach, or if the contract contains any other stipulation by way of
penalty, the party complaining of the breach is entitled, whether or not actual
damage or loss is proved to have been caused thereby, to receive from the party who
has broken the contract reasonable compensation not exceeding the amount so
named or, as the case may be, the penalty stipulated for.

Explanation.—A stipulation for increased interest from the date of default may be a
stipulation by way of penalty.

Exception.—When any person enters into any bail- bond, recognizance or other
instrument of the same nature, or, under the provisions of any law, or under the
orders of the Central Government or of any State Government, gives any bond for the
performance of any public duty or act in which the public are interested, he shall be
liable, upon breach of the condition of any such instrument, to pay the whole sum
mentioned therein.

Explanation.—A person who enters into a contract with Government does not
necessarily thereby undertake any public duty, or promise to do an act in which the
public are interested.” (emphasis added)

29. The appellant got liquidated damages as provided in the agreement on account of breaches
committed by the respondent. The claim for damages of the appellant will remain confined to what
is expressly provided under the Agreement in view of Section 74 of the Contract Act. The appellant
retained the plant and machinery and did not take the benefit of clause 21. Therefore, as rightly held
by the High Court, the appellant was not entitled to the claim of Rs.68.15 lakhs as it was claimed in
the statement of claim as the refund of the amount spent by the appellant on the acquisition of plant
and machinery.

30. In the circumstances, we find absolutely no error in the view taken by the High Court, and
accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90338172/

9

Sahakarmaharshi Bhausaheb Thorat ... vs Thyssen Krupp Industries India P.Ltd on 14 February, 2025

…...…………………...J. (Abhay S. Oka) …....…………………...J. (Ujjal Bhuyan) New Delhi;

February 14, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90338172/

10

