Sajid Khan vs L Rahmatullah on 20 February, 2025

Sajid Khan vs L Rahmatullah on 20 February, 2025

Author: Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha

Bench: Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha

2025 INSC 251                                                        REPORTABLE

                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 17308 OF 2017

             SAJID KHAN                                        ...APPELLANT(S)

                                               VERSUS

             L RAHMATHULLAH & ORS.                            …RESPONDENT(S)

                                                WITH

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 17310 OF 2017

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 17309 OF 2017

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 17311 OF 2017

                                            JUDGMENT

PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA, J.

1. We are yet again seized with the common question in recruitment jurisprudence, whether the
appellants' qualifications for the post in question meet the standard prescribed in the recruitment
notification. This issue is not novel, and this Court has established clear guidelines for judicial
review and restraint in determining equivalency. Following these principles, having carefully
examined the decision of the employer (U.T. of Lakshadweep) to recognize the appellants'
qualifications as equivalent, we found it to be both justifiable and reasonable. Having considered the
governing recruitment rules, submissions of the learned counsel and relevant precedents, we allow
the appeal. Consequently, we set aside the High Court's decision, which had held that the appellants
lacked equivalent qualifications and resulted in the termination of their appointments.

2. Facts: The brief facts leading to this appeal are as follows. The Union Territory of Lakshadweep,
Department of Electricity had issued an advertisement for recruitment to the post of Junior
Engineer (Electrical), a Group ‘C’ post. The required qualification was specified to be a Degree in
Electrical Engineering from a recognized university, or a Diploma in Electrical Engineering from a
recognized institution with two years of experience in any of the fields specified under the relevant

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115975312/

1

recruitment rules.

Sajid Khan vs L Rahmatullah on 20 February, 2025

3. The appellants are all Diploma-holders in Electrical and Electronics Engineering, whereas the
respondents hold a Diploma in Electrical Engineering. The appellants and the respondents had
participated in the selection process. Pursuant to the recruitment process, the authority published a
select list on 03.09.2008 as per which the appellants were declared selected.

4. Aggrieved, the respondents, whose names did not figure in the Select List, filed Original
Applications1 before the Central Administrative Tribunal 2, contending that the appellants held a
degree other than the ones specified in the advertisement, and as such, not qualified to be appointed
to the post.

5. CAT accepted the said contention and by the common order dated 27.01.2010 allowed the original
applications and set aside the appellant’s selection. It relied on the text of the advertisement, and
held that unstated qualifications cannot be read as a part of those which are specified.

6. Hence, the appellants filed writ petitions 3 before the High Court challenging the CAT’s decision.
The Division Bench of the High Court, by the order impugned before us, dismissed the writ petitions
and upheld the decision of the CAT. The High Court was of the view that (i) the advertisement was
clear in its requirement, and that the appellants did not possess what was required; (ii) the relevant
recruitment rules, namely the Lakshadweep Electricity Dept. (Group C and D Technical Posts)
Recruitment Rules, 2002, did not provide for any equivalence between Diplomas in Electrical 1
Original Application Nos. 91 of 2009, 554 of 2008, and 638 of 2008. 2 Hereinafter referred to as
‘CAT’.

3 Writ Petition Nos. 15398 of 2010, 6014 of 2010, 14891 of 2010 and OP (CAT) No.1305 of 2010.

Engineering and Diplomas in Electrical and Electronics Engineering; (iii) the Lakshadweep
Administration had not issued any official instruction granting such equivalence; and (iv)
candidates figuring in the ranked select-list have no indefeasible right to selection.

7. In this view of the matter, the High Court directed that the select list be recast by only including
candidates who possessed the exact qualification as prescribed by the advertisement, and the
eligible candidates from the fresh list shall replace the appellants. The appellants in Civil Appeal
Nos. 17308/2017, 17310/2017, 17309/2017 and 17311/2017 are candidates whose name figured in
the select list published by the recruiting authority. Respondent nos. 6-10 in C.A. No. 17308/2017,
respondent nos. 6-10 in C.A. No. 17310/2017, respondent nos. 4-6 in C.A. No. 17309/2017 and
respondent no. 4 in 17311/2017 are employees who were not selected in the process. These
respondents were aggrieved by the appellants’ appointment contending that the degrees held by the
appellants were dissimilar to the required qualifications.

8. This Court issued notice on 09.01.2015 and the judgment of the High Court was stayed pending
disposal of the Special Leave Petition. Subsequently, leave to appeal was granted on 12.10.2017 and
we have continued this order until these civil appeals are heard. We have heard Mr. Shaji P. Chaly,

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115975312/

2

Sajid Khan vs L Rahmatullah on 20 February, 2025

Mr. Gaurav Agrawal, learned senior counsels, Mr. Rajeev Mishra, Mr. Saiby Jose Kidangoor, learned
counsels appearing for the appellants and Mr. Amarjit Singh Bedi, learned counsel appearing for the
respondents.

9. On behalf of the appellants, it was urged that the two degrees are similar in nature and no formal
declaration of their equivalence was needed. The only difference between the two is that the
Diploma held by the appellants included a diploma in an additional subject, i.e, electronics
engineering. The syllabus for a Diploma in Electrical and Electronics Engineering is the same as the
one for a Diploma in Electrical Engineering. Hence, it cannot be said that the appellants lacked the
prescribed qualification.

10. It is also submitted that the recruiting authority was of the view that the appellants possessed the
prescribed qualification and the diplomas of the appellants were treated at par with the prescribed
qualifications after the Department had received a clarification from the Directorate of Technical
Education, Thiruvananthapuram, Government of Kerala. While the employer took an informed
decision after a technical assessment of the concerned qualifications, the respondents without
establishing how the appellants’ diplomas fall foul of the required qualifications approached the
CAT after the process was complete. They have submitted that the tribunal and the High Court have
committed an error in both fact and law.

11. Mr. Amarjit Singh Bedi, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents, fervently and
persuasively submitted that equivalence between degrees is to be found in the rules or are to be
specified by the recruiting authority. In the absence of the same, selections must and should be
made strictly in light of the specified qualifications. Mr. Bedi submitted that the advertisement does
not include a diploma in Electrical and Electronics Engineering, thereby barring the appellants’
qualification.

12. He relied on the decision of this Court in Guru Nanak Dev University v. Sanjay Kumar Katwal4,
wherein it was stated that the qualifications have to be taken as exactly as specified, and that any
equivalency cannot be implied or assumed. He would submit that deviating from the advertisement
and accepting candidates with different qualifications amounts to a fraud on the public, as held in
District Collector & Chairman, Vizianagaram v. M. 4 (2009) 1 SCC 610.

Tripura Sundari Devi.5 Relying on Ashok Kumar Sharma v. Chander Shekhar,6 it was submitted
that a public authority shall be strictly held to what it represented. He concluded his submission by
arguing that if equivalent degrees are to be included, many candidates who did not participate in the
process would have applied.

13. Analysis: We have given our anxious consideration to the arguments advanced. The relevant
rules for the concerned post, namely, the Lakshadweep Electricity Department (Group ‘C’ and ‘D’
Technical Posts) Recruitment Rules, 2002 prescribe the requirements in its Schedule, indicating the
name of the post, scale of pay, age, and the qualifications required. As against Column no. 8 of the
schedule, the Rules prescribe the “educational and other qualifications for direct recruits” as
follows:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115975312/

3

THE SCHEDULE […]

Sajid Khan vs L Rahmatullah on 20 February, 2025

1. Name of the Post Junior Engineer […] […] […]

8. Educational and other 1. Degree in Electrical qualifications required Engineering
of a for direct recruits recognized University OR Diploma in Electrical Engineering of
a 5 (1990) 3 SCC 655.

6 (1997) 4 SCC 18.

(cid:12)                                             recognized       institution
                                             with 2 years Experience
                                             in any one of the following
                                             field.

                                          (1) Running                 and
                                              maintenance of DG Sets
                                          (2) Generation, Transmission
                                              &       Distribution      of
                                              Electricity
                                          (3) Internal electrification of
                                              building
        […]
        14.   […]                            […]

14. Soon after these rules, which came into force in 2002, the administration sought a
clarification from the Director, Technical Education, Kerala regarding the
equivalence of the Diploma in Electrical and Electronics Engineering of the Board of
Technical Education, Tamil Nadu with the Diploma in Electrical Engineering issued
by the Board in Kerala. The relevant portion from the letter dated 11.02.2003 seeking
clarification stated as follows:

“[…] The prospectus showing the syllabus and marks statements for all the semesters
for the three year diploma in Electrical and Electronics Engineering issued by the
Department of Technical Education, Govt of Tamil Nadu, obtained from one of the
contestant are forwarded herewith as desired. It is requested to kindly clarify whether
the three year Diploma in Electrical and Electronics Engineering conducted by the
Department of Technical Education, Govt of Tamil Nadu can be considered
equivalent to the qualification of three year diploma in Electrical Engineering
conducted by the Department of Technical Education, Govt of Kerala so as to adjudge
the suitability of the candidature of certain contestants. […] ”

15. The Department of Technical Education, Govt of Kerala issued a response to the
said clarification on 26.02.2003 stating that both the qualifications are treated to be

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115975312/

4

Sajid Khan vs L Rahmatullah on 20 February, 2025

equivalent in the State of Kerala. The relevant portion of this clarification is
reproduced as follows:

“[…] I am to inform you that the Diploma Certificate issued by the Board of Technical
Education, Tamil Nadu is recognized by the Government of Kerala in the respective
branches as per G.O. (MS)-526/Public Services Department dt. 17.7.1965. […]”

16. Hence, in the year 2003 itself, the Lakshadweep administration had sought a
clarification from another state government’s department of education about the
equivalence which is the basis of the dispute before us. This position continued
without any dispute. On 03.08.2006, the administration issued an advertisement for
the post of Junior Engineer (Electrical). The stipulation of qualifications in the
advertisement has to be read in this context, and the relevant portion of the
advertisement is reproduced as follows:

“[…] F. No. 36/1/2006-Estt/Ele(1) Dated 03.08.2006 NOTICE Applications are
invited for the appointment to the post of the Junior Engineer (Electrical) in the scale
of pay of Rs. 5000-150- 8000 under the Lakshadweep Electricity Department from
the qualified local candidates from Lakshadweep Island. Qualifications required as
per the existing recruitment Rules for the appointment to the above said post are
given below.

      i.    No. of post                2 (Two)
      […] […]                          […]
      iii.  Educational                Degree in Electrical Engineering
            Qualification              of a recognized University OR
                                       Diploma         in        Electrical
                                       Engineering of a recognized
                                       institution    with     2    years
                                       experience in any one of the
                                       following field.
                                   (1) Running and maintenance of
                                       Diesel Generating Sets
                                   (2) Generation, Transmission &
                                       Distribution of Electricity
                                   (3) Internal     electrification      of
                                       building.
     […]”

17. Given that the recruiting authority had sought a clarification on whether a
Diploma in Electrical and Electronics Engineering is equivalent to a Diploma in
Electrical Engineering and accepted a clarification to the effect, we do not see any
reason in denying such an equivalence for the purposes of the advertisement. Even
the respondents in filing the OA, did not lay any foundation about why such
equivalence should be denied. Pertinently, the administration had taken a categorical
stand before CAT and the High Court that the two degrees are considered equivalent

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115975312/

5

Sajid Khan vs L Rahmatullah on 20 February, 2025

for the purposes of recruitment to the said post. Both CAT and the High Court have
ignored the fact that the recruiting authority had attempted to assess similarities
between the two qualifications before issuing the advertisement.

18. In circumstances where the appointing authority has not objected to the
qualifications of the appellants and there is no apparent or glaring difference in the
qualifications, we see no reason for courts to interfere and set-aside the
appointments made after due consideration. It is the appointing authority which has
to take the decision on whether the candidate possesses what is required by the post
in cases of disputed equivalence. This Court has stated the same in categorical terms
in its decision Anand Yadav v. State of U.P.7:

“32. We may also notice another important aspect i.e. the employer ultimately being
the best judge of who should be appointed. The choice was of Respondent 2 who
sought the assistance of an expert committee in view of the representation of some of
the appellants. The eminence of the expert committee is apparent from its
composition. That committee, after examination, opined in favour of the stand taken
by the appellants, and Respondent 2 as employer decided to concur with the same
and accepted the committee's opinion. It is really not for the appellants or the
contesting respondent to contend how and in what manner a degree should be
obtained, which would make them eligible for appointment by Respondent 2.”
(emphasis supplied) 7 (2021) 12 SCC 390.

19. The recruiting authority has scrutinised the qualifications before deciding that
they satisfy what is enumerated in the advertisement. It is not the case of the
respondents that the authority in the present case has not applied its mind in
scrutinising the appellants’ diplomas. In Mukul Kumar Tyagi v.

State of U.P.,8 this Court had an occasion to consider the approach to be adopted by the recruiting
agency/employer while considering the issue of equivalence of qualifications and directed as under:

“59. The equivalence of qualification as claimed by a candidate is matter of scrutiny
by the recruiting agency/employer. It is the recruiting agency which has to be
satisfied as to whether the claim of equivalence of qualification by a candidate is
sustainable or not. The purpose and object of qualification is fixed by employer to
suit or fulfil the objective of recruiting the best candidates for the job. It is the
recruiting agency who is under obligation to scrutinise the qualifications of a
candidate as to whether a candidate is eligible and entitled to participate in the
selection. More so when the advertisement clearly contemplates that certificate
concerning the qualification shall be scrutinised, it was the duty and obligation of the
recruiting agency to scrutinise the qualification to find out the eligibility of the
candidates. The self-certification or self-declaration by a candidate that his computer
qualification is equivalent to CCC has neither been envisaged in the advertisement
nor can be said to be fulfilling the eligibility condition.” (emphasis supplied) 8 (2020)

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115975312/

6

4 SCC 86.

Sajid Khan vs L Rahmatullah on 20 February, 2025

20. Similarly, in Maharashtra Public Service Commission v.

Sandeep Shriram Warade 9 it was held that:

“9. The essential qualifications for appointment to a post are for the employer to
decide. The employer may prescribe additional or desirable qualifications, including
any grant of preference. It is the employer who is best suited to decide the
requirements a candidate must possess according to the needs of the employer and
the nature of work. The court cannot lay down the conditions of eligibility, much less
can it delve into the issue with regard to desirable qualifications being on a par with
the essential eligibility by an interpretive re-writing of the advertisement. Questions
of equivalence will also fall outside the domain of judicial review. If the language of
the advertisement and the rules are clear, the court cannot sit in judgment over the
same. If there is an ambiguity in the advertisement or it is contrary to any rules or
law the matter has to go back to the appointing authority after appropriate orders, to
proceed in accordance with law. In no case can the court, in the garb of judicial
review, sit in the chair of the appointing authority to decide what is best for the
employer and interpret the conditions of the advertisement contrary to the plain
language of the same.”

21. Though there a number of decisions on this very principle,10 we will conclude
with a recent decision of this Court in Union of India v Uzair Imran,11 emphasizing
the restraint a court must exercise while determining equivalence between
qualifications. The relevant portion is as under:

9 (2019) 6 SCC 362.

10 Mohd Shujat Ali v. Union of India, (1975) 3 SCC 76; Dr. B.L. Asawa v. State of
Rajasthan, 1982 (2) SCC 55; Zahoor Ahmad Rather v. Sheikh Imtiyaz Ahmad, (2019)
2 SCC 404.

11 2023 SCC OnLine SC 1308.

“14. Normally, it is not the function of the court to determine equivalence of two qualifications
and/or to scrutinise a particular certificate and say, on the basis of its appreciation thereof, that the
holder thereof satisfies the eligibility criteria and, thus, is qualified for appointment. It is entirely the
prerogative of the employer, after applications are received from interested candidates or names of
registered candidates are sponsored by the Employment Exchanges for public employment, to
decide whether any such candidate intending to participate in the selection process is eligible in
terms of the statutorily prescribed rules for appointment and also as to whether he ought to be
allowed to enter the zone of consideration, i.e., to participate in the selection process. It is only when
evidence of a sterling quality is produced before the court which, without much argument or deep

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115975312/

7

Sajid Khan vs L Rahmatullah on 20 February, 2025

scrutiny, tilts the balance in favour of one party that the court could decide either way based on
acceptance of such evidence.” (emphasis supplied)

22. The burden to show that the recruiting authority accepted the qualifications of the appellants
illegally or arbitrarily was on the respondents who had approached the CAT by filing OAs. There is
nothing on record to show that they had adduced any convincing material evidence to prove that the
qualifications prescribed are very different from the qualifications possessed by the appellants. On
the other hand, the employer has indicated the efforts made by it in satisfying that the qualifications
are equivalent and that Diploma in Electrical and Electronics Engineering is the same as the
qualification prescribed in the advertisement. The entire case of the respondents is based on the
difference in nomenclatures of the two diplomas which stops there and has nothing to do with the
core substance of the courses, including teaching, duration, curriculum or the pedagogy. The Court
has held that conditions of recruitment such as required qualifications for a post, have to be viewed
reasonably. 12

23. Even if some ground exists for the High Court to exercise judicial review, the standard that the
High Court would adopt, as indicated in Uma Shankar Sharma v. Union of India,13 would be to see
that, “the terms and conditions of service are [intended to be] construed reasonably, and too
technical a view can defeat the essential spirit and intent embodied in them.” In light of the law
re-iterated above and considering the fact that the employer has not objected to the appellants’
diplomas, it was not appropriate for the High Court to take a technical view of the matter and set
aside the appointments.

24. In this view of the matter the decisions of the CAT and that of the High Court are not sustainable
in law. Accordingly, we allow the present appeals by the appointed candidates and set aside the
impugned judgment and order dated 20.11.2014 passed by the 12 Punjab University v. Narinder
Kumar, (1999) 9 SCC 8.

(1980) 3 SCC 202.

High Court in Writ Petition Nos. 15398 of 2010, 6014 of 2010, 14891 of 2010 and OP (CAT) No.1305
of 2010.

………………………………....J. [PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA] ………………………………....J.
[MANOJ MISRA] NEW DELHI;

FEBRUARY 20, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115975312/

8

