Sajithabai vs The Kerala Water Authority on 18 March, 2025

Sajithabai vs The Kerala Water Authority on 18 March, 2025

Author: Dipankar Datta

Bench: Dipankar Datta

2025 INSC 354                                                                        REPORTABLE

                                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                             CIVIL APPEAL NOS.1420-1422 OF 2025
                              (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) Nos.12873-12875 of 2024)

                            SAJITHABAI AND ORS.                                     .…. APPELLANTS

                                                            VERSUS

                            THE KERALA WATER AUTHORITY
                            AND ORS.                                              ..…RESPONDENTS

                                                                 JUDGMENT

MANMOHAN, J

1. Present Appeals have been filed challenging the common impugned judgment and final order
dated 18th March, 2024 passed by the High Court of Kerala at Ernakulam in W.A. No. 2213 of 2023,
W.A. No. 2206 of 2023 and W.A. No. 66 of 2024, whereby the Division Bench of the High Court
dismissed the writ appeals filed by the Appellants herein and affirmed the judgment and order
passed by the learned Single Judge allowing the writ petition filed by the private Respondents
[original writ petitioners in WP(C) 5277/2023].

ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF APPELLANTS

2. Mr. Nikhil Goel, learned senior counsel for the Appellants stated that the present appeals have
been filed on behalf of six employees of the Kerala JATINDER KAUR Date: 2025.03.18 16:09:29 IST
Reason:

Water Authority who were inducted as Draftsmen-Grade-I. He pointed out that four
of these Appellants had joined on various dates in the year 2005, while one had
joined in the year 2001 and the sixth Appellant had joined on 13th February, 2014.
He stated that the present set of Appellants were promoted to the post of Assistant
Engineers on various dates between 2015- 16, except the sixth Appellant, who was
promoted on 22nd September, 2018.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/43951322/

1

Sajithabai vs The Kerala Water Authority on 18 March, 2025

3. He stated that the two private Respondents – Mr. Anoop VS had joined service directly as an
Assistant Engineer on 08th May, 2017, while Ms. Bindu S had joined service on 02nd March, 2005
as an Assistant Engineer, but availed leave without pay during her probation period and rejoined
only on 18th October, 2015.

4. He stated that the present dispute arises out of the seniority lists dated 20th April, 2022 and 14th
February, 2023 whereby the Appellants were shown to be senior to the Respondents.

5. He stated that the learned Single Judge allowed the writ petition no. 5277/2023 filed by Mr.
Anoop VS and Ms. Bindu S (the private Respondents) relying on an erroneous interpretation of the
Kerala Public Health Engineering Service Special Rules, 1960 (hereinafter the ‘Special Rules, 1960’)
which, according to the Appellants, do not apply up to the stage of promotion or appointment to the
post of Assistant Engineer. He submitted that appointment to the post of Assistant Engineer is
solely governed by a separate set of Rules called the Kerala Public Health Engineering Subordinate
Service Rules, 1966 (hereinafter the ‘Subordinate Service Rules, 1966’). He submitted that the
Special Rules, 1960 require employees to exercise an option, i.e. for their further promotions,
whether they want to be included in the ‘degree quota’ or the ‘diploma quota’. According to him, the
fundamental error in the impugned order was that this requirement was read into the Subordinate
Service Rules, 1966 as well, despite a similar provision not being present in the 1966 Rules. He
contended that employment in Kerala Water Authority is governed by two different sets of Rules.

6. He further stated that in accordance with the Subordinate Service Rules, 1966, an Assistant
Engineer could either be appointed through direct recruitment or promoted from the post of a
Draftsman in a 60:40 ratio. According to him, out of the 60% (sixty per cent) quota for direct
recruitment, 6% (six per cent) had been carved out for in-service Draftsmen with an engineering
degree. Further, the educational requirement for 40% (forty per cent) promotion quota was set out
in the Schedule, according to which an employee must possess a diploma. Pertinently, for a
Draftsman holding an engineering degree, there was no requirement of giving an option as to the
category in which the appointment as Assistant Engineer was sought – the 6% (six per cent)
in-service direct recruitment or the 40% (forty per cent) promotion.

7. He stated that insofar as the Appellants were concerned, it was not in dispute that they all had
obtained an engineering degree much prior to their promotion as an Assistant Engineer. However,
the Appellants had also applied for direct recruitment in the 6% (six per cent) in-service quota and
despite being included in its Select List, the Appellants had declined their appointments as they had
already been appointed in the 40% (forty per cent) promotional category before the declaration of
results of the recruitment exam in the 6% (six per cent) quota.

8. Mr. Nikhil Goel, learned senior counsel stated that the Appellants having been promoted were
governed for their future promotions to the post of Assistant Executive Engineer by the Special
Rules, 1960. He emphasised that what applied to the Appellants or any other candidate seeking
promotion to Assistant Executive Engineer was Rule 4(b) of the Special Rules, 1960. Since he laid
special emphasis on Rule 4(b) and its proviso, the same are reproduced hereinbelow: -

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/43951322/

2

Sajithabai vs The Kerala Water Authority on 18 March, 2025

“4……

(b) [Vacancies in the category of Assistant Engineers shall be filled up from among
those in categories 1 or 2 in the Kerala Public Health Engineering Subordinate
Service in the ratio of 4:1 between—] (1) Persons possessing any of the qualifications
mentioned in item (i) or in Section A in item (ii) of the Annexure, and (2) Those
possessing any of the qualifications mentioned in Section B in item (ii) of the
Annexure or those possessing the S.M.T. Overseers certificate, every 5th vacancy
being allotted to the latter and the rest to the former.

A person who while holding [any of the posts in categories 1 and 2 of the Kerala Public Health
Engineering Subordinate Service] passes Sections A and B of the A.M.I.E. (India) Examination shall
be eligible for promotion as Assistant Engineer against the quota allotted for those possessing the
qualifications mentioned in item (i) or Section A in item (ii) of the Annexure only after the claims of
all those who, on the date of his passing the A.M.I.E. (India) Examination, possessed the
qualifications mentioned in item (i) of the Annexure have been considered:

Provided that it will be left to the option of such persons to continue among [those]
possessing the qualifications mentioned in Section B in item (ii) of the Annexure and
claim promotion against the quota allotted to them.”

9. He submitted that the aforesaid proviso would apply only once the Appellants were
seeking promotion to the post of Assistant Executive Engineer. He stated that the
method by which the Appellants became Assistant Engineer was not covered by this
proviso. He pointed out that it was on this basis that the seniority list had been
correctly drawn up by the Respondent authority.

10. He submitted that the learned Single Judge while deciding the challenge to the
seniority list had held that there was a requirement of giving an option between the
Direct Recruitment Quota (degree quota) and the Promotion Quota (diploma quota)
even for the purpose of Subordinate Service Rules, 1966. According to him, this was
the solitary finding based on which the writ petition of the private Respondents had
been allowed.

11. He submitted that the learned Division Bench in the impugned order had added
one more reason while upholding the judgment of the learned Single Judge, i.e. the
Special Rules, 1960 did not permit switching by a person who had obtained
appointment as an Assistant Engineer under the diploma quota to that of degree
quota.

ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF PRIVATE RESPONDENTS

12. Per contra, Mr. V. Chitambaresh, learned senior counsel for the private respondents stated that
the Appellants herein declined the offer of appointment in the 6% (six per cent) degree qualified

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/43951322/

3

Sajithabai vs The Kerala Water Authority on 18 March, 2025

draftsmen earmarked for in service candidates though they were included in the ranked list. He
emphasised that the Appellants chose to get promoted from the category of Draftsmen as diploma
holders (promotion quota). He submitted that the Appellants who were appointed in the diploma
quota could not thereafter switch over to the degree quota for further promotion.

13. He also contended that Rule 4(b) and its proviso of the Special Rules, 1960 applies to only those
who, while holding the post of Assistant Engineer acquire a degree qualification. He stated that as
the Appellants had acquired the degree qualification even before being promoted to the post of
Assistant Engineer and had declined promotion in the degree quota, they were not entitled to the
benefit of Rule 4(b) and its proviso of the Special Rules, 1960. He contended that once a
diploma-cum-degree holder opted for diploma quota, he cannot switch over to degree quota and
thereafter revert to diploma quota depending on promotional avenues. He submitted that ‘once a
mortgage, always a mortgage’. In support of his submission, he also relied on the judgment of the
Supreme Court in Chandravathi P.K. and Others. vs. C.K. Saji and Others, (2004) 3 SCC 734,
wherein it has been held as under:-

“43. The State as an employer is entitled to fix separate quota of promotion for the
degree-holders, diploma-holders and certificate-holders separately in exercise of its
rule-making power under Article 309 of the Constitution of India. Such a rule is not
unconstitutional. The State therefore, in our opinion, cannot be said to have acted
arbitrarily by giving an option to such diploma-holders, who acquired a higher
qualification, so as to enable them to either opt for promotion in the category of
degree-holder or diploma-holder. Such option was to be exercised by the officer
concerned only. He, in a given situation, may feel that he would be promoted in the
diploma- holders' quota earlier than degree-holders' quota and vice versa but once he
opts to join the stream of the degree-holders, he would be placed at the bottom of the
seniority list.” ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENT NO.1-KERALA
WATER AUTHORITY

14. Learned senior counsel for Respondent No.1/Kerala Water Authority contended that the
interpretation given to Rule 4(b) of the Special Rules, 1960 by the Courts below was erroneous. He
submitted that Rule 4(b) cannot be interpreted to mean that individuals who obtained a degree after
being promoted to the post of Assistant Engineer are alone entitled to migrate to the degree quota.
He clarified that Rule 4(b) even allows individuals who had obtained the degree qualification before
being promoted to the post of Assistant Engineer to migrate to the degree quota. In support of his
submission, he relied on the counter affidavit filed by the Kerala Water Authority before the learned
Single Judge. The relevant portion of the same is reproduced hereinbelow:-

“18. …….Thus Ext.R1(g) Rule [Rule 4(b) of Special Rules, 1960] provide a specific
right for respondents 4 to 10 to change over their quota from diploma to graduate, if
they had occurred degree qualification subject to the condition cited above. That is
only after the claims of all those who on the date of his passing the examination,
possess a degree qualification have been considered. The diploma engineers cannot
march over the degree engineers, the date of acquisition of degree is a crucial date.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/43951322/

4

Sajithabai vs The Kerala Water Authority on 18 March, 2025

19. It is submitted that the facts and circumstances involved in Ext.P11 is factually
different. In the said case, the petitioner therein was Assistant Executive Engineer,
who opted to get his promotion under diploma quota and claiming further promotion
as Executive Engineer under degree quota, which was challenged before the Hon’ble
Court. In paragraph 2 of Ext.P11. The State as an employer is entitled to fix separate
quota of promotion for the degree holder, diploma holders and certificate holders
separately, in exercise of its rule making power under Article 309 of the Constitution
of India.

20. The employer cannot be said to have acted arbitrarily by giving an option to such
diploma holders, who acquired a higher qualification, so as to enable them to either
opt for promotion in the category of degree holder or diploma holder. Such options
are to be exercised by the employee concerned.

Therefore, in the light of aforesaid submissions, it is clear that the instant Writ Petition filed by the
Petitioner does not warrant interference by this Hon’ble Court under Article 226 of the Constitution
of India…..” REJOINDER ON BEHALF OF APPELLANTS

15. Mr. Nikhil Goel, learned senior counsel in his rejoinder submitted that the question considered
by this Court in Chandravathi P.K. (supra), as reflected in paragraph 20 of the said judgment, has no
relation to the issue at hand. He stated that while deciding that question, certain observations were
made in paragraph 43 of the said judgment which related to the validity of Subordinate Service
Rules, 1966 and in no manner could be read to mean that a proviso similar to the one which existed
along with Rule 4(b) of the Special Rules, 1960 would automatically be imported into the
Subordinate Service Rules, 1966.

REASONING SUBORDINATE SERVICE RULES, 1966 AND THE SPECIAL RULES, 1960 ARE
SEPARATE AND DISTINCT RULES THAT GOVERN TWO SEPARATE SERVICES

16. Having heard learned senior counsel for the parties and having perused the materials placed on
record, this Court is of the view that the Subordinate Service Rules, 1966 and the Special Rules, 1960
are separate and distinct rules that govern two separate services comprising different categories of
officers.

17. The Subordinate Service Rules, 1966 govern the appointment, promotion and other conditions of
service for various posts starting from Lorry Driver to Junior Engineer (re-designated as Assistant
Engineer with effect from 05th December, 1978).

18. The Special Rules, 1960 govern the appointments and promotions of four categories of posts, i.e.
Assistant Executive Engineer (called Assistant Engineer before 05th December, 1978), Executive
Engineer, Superintending Engineer and Chief Engineer.

19. Under the Subordinate Service Rules, 1966, appointment to the post of Assistant Engineer is by
two streams i.e. direct recruitment quota (60%) (sixty per cent) and promotion quota (40%) (forty

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/43951322/

5

per cent).

Sajithabai vs The Kerala Water Authority on 18 March, 2025

20. In the 60% (sixty per cent) direct recruitment quota, 54% (fifty-four per cent) recruitment is on
the basis of merit in an open exam (i.e. open market) in which candidates possessing a degree can
participate. The balance 6% (six per cent) direct recruitment is on the basis of merit in an open
exam in which a degree qualified Draftsman can participate.

21. The 40% (forty per cent) promotion quota is filled up from Draftsman/overseer on the basis of
seniority, irrespective of the fact that they hold a diploma only or both diploma and degree
qualification.

22. The Appellants before this Court who were holding the post of Draftsman/Overseer were
promoted to the post of Assistant Engineer (i.e. from Category no. IV to Category no. I) in 2015 on
the basis of seniority as draftsman in diploma quota under the Subordinate Service Rules, 1966 i.e.
prior to the declaration of result on 21st March, 2017 of the 6% (six per cent) direct recruitment
exam in which they had also participated.

23. Consequently, the Appellants, at the stage of entering the Kerala Public Health Engineering
Service, never had the opportunity to opt or choose for the diploma or degree quota. However, the
two private Respondents were appointed to the post of Assistant Engineers as they were successful
in the direct recruitment exam in the degree quota. RULE 4(B) OF SPECIAL RULES, 1960 HAS NO
APPLICABILITY TO A STAGE PRIOR TO AN OFFICER BECOMING AN ASSISTANT ENGINEER

24. This Court is further of the view that as Special Rules, 1960 deal with a separate service, its Rule
4(b) has no applicability to a stage prior to an officer becoming an Assistant Engineer i.e. to the
draftsman/overseer who are holding both degree and diploma qualification and who exercise the
option of sitting in 6% (six per cent) competitive exam for promotion to the post of Assistant
Engineer. To put it differently, the said Rule 4(b) has no relevance as to how the person was
appointed to the feeder post (i.e. the post of Assistant Engineer) in the service governed by the
Special Rules, 1960. Consequently, this Court is of the view that the learned Single Judge has
erroneously held that “directly recruited Assistant Engineers from the open market and those
promoted through the Departmental Quota are considered under separate watertight categories.
This distinction necessitates maintaining separate seniority lists for each category, with different
promotional paths…….they chose promotion under the Diploma quota and are thus ineligible for
further promotion to Assistant Executive Engineer under the Degree quota, as per the governing
rules.” ONCE A PERSON JOINS AS AN ASSISTANT ENGINEER, HE/SHE HAS THE OPTION TO
MIGRATE TO EITHER THE DEGREE OR DIPLOMA QUOTA

25. This Court is also of the view that once a person joins as an Assistant Engineer, i.e. the feeder
post under a separate service governed by Special Rules, 1960, then that person irrespective of how
he/she has been appointed to that post, has the option to migrate to either the degree or diploma
quota, provided he/she has obtained a degree or a diploma. The intent and purpose behind Rule
4(b) is to give an option to an Assistant Engineer to join either the diploma or the degree quota, as
promotion to the next higher post (i.e. Assistant Executive Engineer) is in the ratio of 4:1 between

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/43951322/

6

Sajithabai vs The Kerala Water Authority on 18 March, 2025

persons possessing any of the qualifications mentioned in item (i) or in Section A in item (ii) of the
Annexure (degree quota) and those possessing any of the qualifications mentioned in Section B in
item (ii) of the Annexure or those possessing the SM.T. Overseers certificate (diploma quota)
whereby every 5th (fifth) vacancy is allotted to the latter and the rest to the former.
INTERPRETATION PUT FORWARD BY THE PRIVATE RESPONDENTS IS ERRONEOUS

26. This Court is of the opinion that the interpretation put forward by the private Respondents that
Rule 4(b) and its proviso of the Special Rules give an option/choice to choose a diploma or degree
stream to only those who while holding the post of Assistant Engineer acquire a degree qualification
is erroneous. Proviso to Rule 4(b) is not just a proviso to the paragraph preceding it but to the entire
Rule 4(b). The first para of Rule 4(b) when it stipulates that vacancy in the category of Assistant
Engineers (to be read as Assistant Executive Engineer) shall be filled up from among those in
Categories 1 and 2 in the Subordinate Service Rules, 1966 in the ratio of 4:1, takes within its fold all
the officers serving as Assistant Engineer. Consequently, the proviso which gives the option to such
officers to choose the diploma or degree quota means and refers to all the officers holding the post of
Assistant Engineer. The paragraph preceding the proviso clarifies that the option to choose the
stream shall be available to even those Assistant Engineers who acquire the degree during their
tenure as Assistant Engineers. The proviso further clarifies as to how seniority of such Assistant
Engineers would be determined.

27. This Court is also of the view that if the interpretation put forward by the Division Bench and the
private Respondents is accepted, then it would put the meritorious candidates in a disadvantageous
position as would be apparent from the illustration where ‘X’ being a draftsman/overseer and
holding both diploma and degree gets promoted to the post of Assistant Engineer in the promotion
quota, while another person ‘Y’ being junior to ‘X’ and having only a diploma gets promoted to the
post of Assistant Engineer in the promotion quota subsequently and while holding the said post
obtains a degree and thereafter exercises his option to join the degree quota, will get an accelerated
promotion and become ‘X’s’ senior.

28. It is trite law that the more absurd a suggested conclusion of construction is, the more the court
will lean against that conclusion. That is ordinarily so whether one is construing a contract or a
statute. [See: Hatzl v. XL Insurance Co. Ltd. (2009) EWCA Civ. 223].

29. This Court in K.P. Varghese vs. Income Tax Officer, Ernakulam and Another, (1981) 4 SCC 173
has held as under: -

“6. …..It is now a well-settled rule of construction that where the plain literal
interpretation of a statutory provision produces a manifestly absurd and unjust result
which could never have been intended by the legislature, the court may modify the
language used by the legislature or even “do some violence” to it, so as to achieve the
obvious intention of the legislature and produce a rational construction (vide Luke v.
Inland Revenue Commissioner [(1963) AC 557] )…..”

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/43951322/

7

Sajithabai vs The Kerala Water Authority on 18 March, 2025

30. Further, this Court in Bishwajit Dey vs. The State of Assam, Criminal Appeal No.87 of 2025 has
recently held as under:-

‘The presumption against absurdity is found in the brief observation of Lord Saville
agreeing with his colleagues in the case of Noone [R (on the application of Noone) v.
Governor of HMP Drake Hall [2010] UKSC 30]. Lord Saville says simply:

“I would allow this appeal. For the reasons given by Lord Phillips and Lord Mance, I
have no doubt that by one route or another the legislation must be construed so as to
avoid what would otherwise produce irrational and indefensible results that
Parliament could not have intended.” THE JUDGMENT IN CHANDRAVATHI P.K.
(SUPRA) HAS NO APPLICABILITY TO THE PRESENT CASE

31. This Court is the view that the judgment in Chandravathi P.K. (supra) has no applicability to the
facts of the present case inasmuch as the issue in the said case as articulated in paragraph 20,
‘whether in terms of the scheme of the Kerala Engineering Service (General Branch) Rules,
diploma-holders are entitled to claim any weightage for the service rendered by them prior to their
acquisition of degree qualification in the matter of promotion or transfer to higher posts’, is entirely
different. Further, it is an admitted position (as per para 7 of the private Respondent’s own counter
affidavit) that the Chandravathi P.K. (supra) judgment is inapplicable to the present case.

CONCLUSION

32. Accordingly, the present appeals are allowed and consequently, the impugned judgments passed
by the learned Single Judge and the Division Bench are set aside. Pending applications, if any, also
stand disposed of.

...…...……………….J. [DIPANKAR DATTA] ……………….J. [MANMOHAN] New Delhi;

March 18, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/43951322/

8

