Sangita Sinha vs Bhawana Bhardwaj on 4 April, 2025

Sangita Sinha vs Bhawana Bhardwaj on 4 April, 2025

Author: Dipankar Datta

Bench: Dipankar Datta

2025 INSC 450
                                                                                         REPORTABLE

                                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4972 OF 2025
                                 (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) No.28460 of 2024)

                            SANGITA SINHA                                  .…. APPELLANT

                                                        VERSUS

                            BHAWANA BHARDWAJ AND ORS.                    ..…RESPONDENTS

                                                            JUDGMENT

MANMOHAN, J

1. Leave granted.

2. The primary issue that arises for consideration in the present civil appeal is whether a suit for
specific performance of an Agreement to Sell is liable to be decreed if the buyer had accepted the
refund of majority of the earnest money deposit/advance consideration, during the pendency of the
civil suit?

3. Brief facts leading to the present appeal are as under:-

3.1. Late Kushum Kumari (“original defendant” / “seller”) was allotted the subject
property by the People's Cooperative House Construction Society Limited (“Society”)
vide a registered sub-lease dated 2nd April 1968.

Date: 2025.04.04 17:03:17 IST Reason:

3.2. On 25th January 2008, an unregistered Agreement to Sell with respect to the
subject property was executed between the “Respondent No.1-buyer”-plaintiff and
the seller for a total sale consideration of Rs. 25,00,000/- (Rupees Twenty Five
Lakhs). At the time of the execution of the Agreement to Sell, the Respondent No.1-

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156623250/

1

Sangita Sinha vs Bhawana Bhardwaj on 4 April, 2025

buyer paid a sum of Rs.2,51,000/- (Rupees Two Lakh Fifty One Thousand) in cash to the seller and
issued three post-dated cheques worth Rs.7,50,000/- (Rupees Seven Lakh Fifty Thousand). 3.3. It is
the case of Respondent No.1-buyer that when she visited the subject property along with her
husband on 11 th February 2008, the tenants of the seller created a scuffle and forced them to
return. In the circumstance, the Respondent No.1-buyer issued legal notices dated 23rd February
2008 and 23rd April 2008, expressing her intention to pay the balance sale consideration and to get
the property registered in her favour.

3.4. Upon the failure of the seller to execute the sale deed, Respondent No.1-buyer filed a suit before
the Trial Court, Sub Judge-IV, Patna under the Specific Performance Act, 1963 (“Act, 1963)” seeking
specific performance of the Agreement to Sell dated 25th January 2008 and the same was registered
as Title Suit No. TS/176/2008 (“subject suit”).

3.5. The subject suit was contested by the seller by filing a written statement, stating therein that she
came to know about the Agreement to Sell dated 25th January 2008 on 5th February 2008 and
immediately thereafter, made a complaint dated 6th February 2008 with the Inspector of
Police-cum-Station House Officer, Kankarbagh Police Station, Patna stating that her signatures had
been fraudulently taken on the Agreement to Sell dated 25th January 2008. It was further stated
that the seller issued a letter dated 7th January 2008 cancelling the Agreement to Sell dated 25th
January 2008 and refunded Rs.2,11,000/- (Rupees Two Lakh Eleven Thousand) through five
demand drafts dated 7th February 2008 in lieu of the cash and returned two of the three post-dated
cheques of Rs.2,50,000/- (Rupees Two Lakh Fifty Thousand) each, which were issued by the seller.
Vide Order dated 16th December 2008, issues were framed by the Trial Court.

3.6. Upon the demise of the seller, the Respondent No.3 herein, who is the step grandson of the
seller, was impleaded as substituted defendant no. 1 and the appellant herein was impleaded as
defendant no. 3 as the subject property had been bequeathed in her favour by way of a Will dated
23rd September 2002 executed by the original owner/seller.

3.7. After consideration of the depositions of PW-1 (Respondent No.1 herein) and her husband,
PW-2, the Trial Court framed three additional issues vide order dated 21st January 2013. The issues
were framed once again on 27th April 2018, and a judgment was passed in favour of Respondent
No.1-buyer on the same date.

3.8. The judgment dated 27th April 2018 and the decree dated 10th May 2018 were challenged by
the appellant herein in First Appeal No. 83 of 2018. The said appeal was dismissed by the Patna
High Court vide the impugned Judgment dated 9th May 2024.

3.9. Upon the present Special Leave Petition being filed, this Court, while issuing notice, had
directed parties to maintain status quo with respect to the possession on 20th August 2024.

SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156623250/

2

Sangita Sinha vs Bhawana Bhardwaj on 4 April, 2025

4. Shri S.B. Upadhyay, learned senior counsel for the appellant, stated that the signatures of the
seller on the Agreement to Sell dated 25th January 2008 had been fraudulently obtained by
Respondent No.3 herein. He stated that the seller-defendant signed some blank papers believing the
same to be related to the Will that she had executed in favour of the appellant on 23 rd September
2002.

5. He stated that upon the discovery of the Agreement to Sell dated 25th January 2008 on 5th
February 2008, the seller made a criminal complaint dated 6th February 2008 with the Inspector of
Police-cum-Station House Officer, Kankarbagh, Patna that her signatures had been fraudulently
obtained on the Agreement to Sell dated 25th January 2008.

6. He stated that on 7th February 2008, the seller wrote a letter to Respondent No.1-buyer
cancelling the Agreement to Sell dated 25th January 2008 enclosing therewith five demand drafts
dated 7 th February 2008 amounting to Rs. 2,11,000/- (Rupees Two Lakh Eleven Thousand) in lieu
of the cash and two of the three post-dated cheques of Rs.2,50,000/- (Rupees Two Lakh Fifty
Thousand) each, which were issued by the Respondent No.1-buyer.

7. He pointed out that the Respondent No.1-buyer as well as her husband-PW2, in their depositions,
have admitted that they had received five demand drafts dated 7th February 2008 amounting to Rs.
2,11,000/-

(Rupees Two Lakh Eleven Thousand) in lieu of the cash and also received two of the three
post-dated cheques of Rs.2,50,000/- (Rupees Two Lakh Fifty Thousand) along with the letter
cancelling the Agreement to Sell dated 25th January 2008 in March 2008. He explained that five
demand drafts dated 7th February 2008 of Rs.2,11,000/- (Rupees Two Lakh Eleven Thousand) were
encashed by the Respondent No.1-buyer in July 2008, after institution of the subject suit on 5th
May 2008. He submitted that the encashment of the demand drafts amounted to revocation of the
Agreement to Sell dated 25th January 2008. He contended that the subject suit was filed by the
Respondent No.1-buyer after revocation of the Agreement to Sell dated 25th January 2008, without
seeking any relief against the revocation and without disclosing that she was in receipt of the
demand drafts and post- dated cheques.

8. He contended that the subject suit was filed on the basis of an Agreement to Sell which stood
cancelled and as such, the same was not maintainable. He submitted that existence of a valid
agreement is sine qua non for grant of relief of specific performance. He pointed out that, in similar
circumstances, this Court in R. Kandasamy (Since Dead) & Ors. vs. T.R.K. Sarawathy & Anr. (Civil
Appeal No. 3015 of 2013 decided on 21st November 2024), had set aside the judgment and decree
passed in favour of the Respondent No.1-buyer inter alia on the ground that a non- existent
Agreement to Sell cannot be enforced by a Court of law.

9. Even otherwise, he contended that the Respondent No.1-buyer was not ready and willing to
perform the Agreement to Sell dated 25th January 2008. He stated that a mere averment that the
Respondent No.1-buyer is ready and willing to perform the contract will not suffice as readiness and
willingness must be inferred in overall circumstances of the case, including the conduct of the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156623250/

3

Respondent No.1-buyer prior and subsequent to the filing of the suit.

Sangita Sinha vs Bhawana Bhardwaj on 4 April, 2025

10. He pointed out that the Respondent No.1-buyer in her cross- examination, had admitted that at
the time of execution of the agreement, she was not aware of the balance in her bank account and at
the time when the three post-dated cheques for Rs.2,50,000/- (Rupees Two Lakh Fifty Thousand)
were issued, there was no sufficient balance in her account. He contended that the conduct of the
Respondent No.1-buyer in encashing the demand drafts proved that she was not ready or willing to
perform the contract. In support of his contentions, he relied upon the judgments of this Court in
Mehboob-Ur-Rehman (Dead) through Legal Representatives vs. Ahsanul Ghani, (2019) 19 SCC 415
and C.S. Venkatesh vs. A.S.C. Murthy (Dead) by Legal Representatives and Ors., (2020) 3 SCC 280.

11. Per contra, Mr. Mungeshwar Sahoo, learned senior counsel for the Respondent No.1-buyer stated
that the suit had been decreed in favour of the Respondent No.1-buyer by the Trial Court after
rightly appreciating the evidence and a sale deed had been executed subsequently in favour of the
Respondent No.1-buyer upon deposit of Rs. 24,61,000/- (Rupees Twenty Four Lakh Sixty One
Thousand) before the Trial Court. He contended that the judgment and decree passed by the Trial
Court had been rightly upheld by the High Court. He stated that the entire case of the appellant in
the present proceedings is based upon reappreciation of evidence and the same cannot be permitted
at this stage.

12. He stated that the entire earnest money/advance consideration had not been refunded/returned
by the seller. He stated that the Respondent No.1-buyer had paid Rs.2,51,000/- (Rupees Two Lakh
Fifty One Thousand) in cash to the seller against which the seller had refunded Rs.2,11,000/-
(Rupees Two Lakh Eleven Thousand) through five demand drafts dated 7th February 2008.
Therefore, according to him, an amount of Rs. 40,000/- (Rupees Forty Thousand) remained with
the seller as earnest money/advance consideration. He contended that as the balance sale
consideration had been paid subsequently, the cancellation of the Agreement to Sell dated 25th
January 2008 was not valid.

13. Even otherwise, he stated that a bilateral agreement cannot be unilaterally cancelled by a party
by returning the earnest money. According to him, a (bilateral) agreement can only be cancelled by a
Court of law or by executing a subsequent agreement, cancelling the prior agreement. He stated that
in the event parties are permitted to unilaterally cancel the agreement, the purchaser will be left
remediless as any third party can intervene by offering a higher earnest money.

14. He contended that the seller passed away before she could prove her defense by leading
evidence. He stated that neither the appellant nor the Respondent No.3 herein had deposed in
support of the written statement filed by the seller. He therefore stated that the written statement of
the seller had not been proved. He also contended that the appellant did not have the locus to file
the present appeal. According to him, the appellant had no right, title or interest in the subject
property and the findings of the Trial Court or the High Court do not affect the appellant in any
manner.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156623250/

4

Sangita Sinha vs Bhawana Bhardwaj on 4 April, 2025

COURT’S REASONING RESPONDENT NO.1 WAS NOT WILLING TO PERFORM THE
AGREEMENT TO SELL

15. Having heard learned senior counsel / learned counsel for the parties and having perused the
paper book, the admitted position that emerges is that Respondent No.1-buyer had paid Rs.
2,51,000/- (Rupees Two Lakh Fifty One Thousand) in cash and handed over three post-dated
cheques of Rs.2,50,000/- (Rupees Two Lakh Fifty Thousand) each at the time of execution of the
Agreement to Sell dated 25th January 2008. It is also not disputed that the Respondent No.1-buyer
had subsequently received a letter dated 7th February 2008 cancelling the Agreement to Sell dated
25th January 2008 enclosing therewith five demand drafts dated 7th February 2008 totaling to
Rs.2,11,000/- (Rupees Two Lakh Eleven Thousand) (in lieu of the cash paid by the Respondent
No.1-buyer) along with two of the three post-dated cheques of Rs.2,50,000/- (Rupees Two Lakh
Fifty Thousand) each, which had been issued initially by the Respondent No.1-buyer. Further, the
third post-dated cheque which was not returned to the Respondent No.1-buyer had not been
encashed. The Respondent No.1- buyer has admitted that the letter dated 7th February 2008 had
been received prior to filing of the suit for specific performance and five demand drafts dated 7th
February 2008 totaling to Rs.2,11,000/- (Rupees Two Lakh Eleven Thousand) had been encashed in
July, 2008 after institution of the subject suit on 5th May 2008, without raising any objection with
respect to the difference in the cash amount and the demand drafts furnished by the seller.

16. It is settled law that under the Act, 1963, prior to the 2018 Amendment, specific performance
was a discretionary and equitable relief.

In Kamal Kumar vs. Premlata Joshi and Ors., (2019) 3 SCC 704, which has been followed in P.
Daivasigamani vs. S. Sambandan, (2022) 14 SCC 793, this Court framed material questions which
require consideration prior to grant of relief of specific performance. The relevant portion of the
judgment in Kamal Kumar (supra) is reproduced hereinbelow:

“7. It is a settled principle of law that the grant of relief of specific performance is a
discretionary and equitable relief. The material questions, which are required to be
gone into for grant of the relief of specific performance, are:

7.1. First, whether there exists a valid and concluded contract between the parties for
sale/purchase of the suit property.

7.2. Second, whether the plaintiff has been ready and willing to perform his part of
contract and whether he is still ready and willing to perform his part as mentioned in
the contract.

7.3. Third, whether the plaintiff has, in fact, performed his part of the contract and, if
so, how and to what extent and in what manner he has performed and whether such
performance was in conformity with the terms of the contract;

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156623250/

5

Sangita Sinha vs Bhawana Bhardwaj on 4 April, 2025

7.4. Fourth, whether it will be equitable to grant the relief of specific performance to
the plaintiff against the defendant in relation to suit property or it will cause any kind
of hardship to the defendant and, if so, how and in what manner and the extent if
such relief is eventually granted to the plaintiff;

7.5. Lastly, whether the plaintiff is entitled for grant of any other alternative relief,
namely, refund of earnest money, etc. and, if so, on what grounds.

8. In our opinion, the aforementioned questions are part of the statutory
requirements [See Sections 16(c), 20, 21, 22, 23 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 and
Forms 47/48 of Appendices A to C of the Code of Civil Procedure]. These
requirements have to be properly pleaded by the parties in their respective pleadings
and proved with the aid of evidence in accordance with law. It is only then the Court
is entitled to exercise its discretion and accordingly grant or refuse the relief of
specific performance depending upon the case made out by the parties on facts.”

17. It is trite law that ‘readiness’ and ‘willingness’ are not one but two separate elements. ‘Readiness’
means the capacity of the Respondent No.1- buyer to perform the contract, which would include the
financial position to pay the sale consideration. ‘Willingness’ refers to the intention of the
Respondent No.1-buyer as a purchaser to perform his part of the contract, which is inferred by
scrutinising the conduct of the Respondent No.1-buyer /purchaser, including attending
circumstances.

18. Continuous readiness and willingness on the part of the Respondent No.1-buyer /purchaser from
the date of execution of Agreement to Sell till the date of the decree, is a condition precedent for
grant of relief of specific performance. This Court in various judicial pronouncements has held that
it is not enough to show the readiness and willingness up to the date of the plaint as the conduct
must be such as to disclose readiness and willingness at all times from the date of the contract and
throughout the pendency of the suit up to the decree. A few of the said judgments are reproduced
hereinbelow:-

A. In Gomathinayagam Pillai and Ors. vs. Palaniswami Nadar, (1967) 1 SCR 227, it
has been held as under:-

“6. But the respondent has claimed a decree for specific performance and it is for him
to establish that he was, since the date of the contract, continuously ready and willing
to perform his part of the contract. If he fails to do so, his claim for specific
performance must fail. As observed by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in
Ardeshir Mama v. Flora Sassoon 1928 SCC OnLine PC 43:

“In a suit for specific performance, on the other hand, he treated and was required by
the Court to treat the contract as still subsisting. He had in that suit to allege, and if
the fact was traversed, he was required to prove a continuous readiness and
willingness, from the date of the contract to the time of the hearing, to perform the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156623250/

6

Sangita Sinha vs Bhawana Bhardwaj on 4 April, 2025

contract on his part. Failure to make good that averment brought with it the
inevitable dismissal of his suit.” The respondent must in a suit for specific
performance of an agreement plead and prove that he was ready and willing to
perform his part of the contract continuously between the date of the contract and
the date of hearing of the suit….” (emphasis supplied) B. In Vijay Kumar and Others
vs. Om Parkash, 2018 SCC OnLine SC 1913, it has been held as under:-

“6. In order to obtain a decree for specific performance, the plaintiff has to prove his
readiness and willingness to perform his part of the contract and the readiness and
willingness has to be shown throughout and has to be established by the plaintiff….”
(emphasis supplied) C. In J.P.Builders and Another vs. A. Ramadas Rao and Another,
(2011) 1 SCC 429, it has been held as under:-

“27. It is settled law that even in the absence of specific plea by the opposite party, it
is the mandate of the statute that the plaintiff has to comply with Section 16(c) of the
Specific Relief Act and when there is non-compliance with this statutory mandate,
the court is not bound to grant specific performance and is left with no other
alternative but to dismiss the suit. It is also clear that readiness to perform must be
established throughout the relevant points of time. “Readiness and willingness” to
perform the part of the contract has to be determined/ascertained from the conduct
of the parties.” (emphasis supplied) D. In Umabai and Another vs. Nilkanth
Dhondiba Chavan (Dead) By LRs. and Another, (2005) 6 SCC 243, it has been held as
under:-

“30. It is now well settled that the conduct of the parties, with a view to arrive at a
finding as to whether the plaintiff-respondents were all along and still are ready and
willing to perform their part of contract as is mandatorily required under Section 16
(c) of the Specific Relief Act must be determined having regard to the entire attending
circumstances. A bare averment in the plaint or a statement made in the
examination-in- chief would not suffice. The conduct of the plaintiff- respondents
must be judged having regard to the entirety of the pleadings as also the evidence
brought on records.” (emphasis supplied) E. In Mehboob-Ur-Rehman (Dead)
through Legal Representatives v. Ahsanul Ghani (supra), it has been held as under:-
“16. Such a requirement, of necessary averment in the plaint, that he has already
performed or has always been ready and willing to perform the essential terms of the
contract which are to be performed by him being on the plaintiff, mere want of
objection by the defendant in the written statement is hardly of any effect or
consequence. The essential question to be addressed to by the Court in such a matter
has always been as to whether, by taking the pleading and the evidence on record as a
whole, the plaintiff has established that he has performed his part of the contract or
has always been ready and willing to do so...” (emphasis supplied) F. In C.S.
Venkatesh v. A.S.C. Murthy (Dead) by Legal Representatives & Ors. (supra), it has
been held as under:- “16. The words “ready and willing” imply that the plaintiff was
prepared to carry out those parts of the contract to their logical end so far as they

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156623250/

7

Sangita Sinha vs Bhawana Bhardwaj on 4 April, 2025

depend upon his performance. The continuous readiness and willingness on the part
of the plaintiff is a condition precedent to grant the relief of performance. If the
plaintiff fails to either aver or prove the same, he must fail. To adjudge whether the
plaintiff is ready and willing to perform his part of contract, the court must take into
consideration the conduct of the plaintiff prior, and subsequent to the filing of the
suit along with other attending circumstances. The amount which he has to pay the
defendant must be of necessity to be proved to be available. Right from the date of
the execution of the contract till the date of decree, he must prove that he is ready
and willing to perform his part of the contract. The court may infer from the facts and
circumstances whether the plaintiff was ready and was always ready to perform his
contract.

17. In N.P. Thirugnanam v. R. Jagan Mohan Rao [N.P. Thirugnanam v. R. Jagan
Mohan Rao, (1995) 5 SCC 115], it was held that continuous readiness and willingness
on the part of the plaintiff is a condition precedent to grant of the relief of specific
performance. This circumstance is material and relevant and is required to be
considered by the court while granting or refusing to grant the relief. If the plaintiff
fails to either aver or prove the same, he must fail. To adjudge whether the plaintiff is
ready and willing to perform his part of the contract, the court must take into
consideration the conduct of the plaintiff prior to and subsequent to the filing of the
suit along with other attending circumstances.

The amount of consideration which he has to pay to the defendant must necessarily be proved to be
available.

18. In Pushparani S. Sundaram v. Pauline Manomani James [Pushparani S. Sundaram v. Pauline
Manomani James, (2002) 9 SCC 582], this Court has held that inference of readiness and
willingness could be drawn from the conduct of the plaintiff and the totality of circumstances in a
particular case. It was held thus:

(SCC p. 584, para 5) “5. … So far these being a plea that they were ready and willing
to perform their part of the contract is there in the pleading, we have no hesitation to
conclude, that this by itself is not sufficient to hold that the appellants were ready and
willing in terms of Section 16(c) of the Specific Relief Act. This requires not only such
plea but also proof of the same. Now examining the first of the two circumstances,
how could mere filing of this suit, after exemption was granted be a circumstance
about willingness or readiness of the plaintiff. This at the most could be the desire of
the plaintiff to have this property. It may be for such a desire this suit was filed
raising such a plea. But Section 16(c) of the said Act makes it clear that mere plea is
not sufficient, it has to be proved.” (emphasis supplied)

19. Consequently, the readiness and willingness of the buyer to go ahead with the sale of the
property at the time of the institution of the suit loses its relevance, if the Respondent No.1-buyer is
unable to establish that the readiness and willingness has continued throughout the pendency of the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156623250/

8

suit.

Sangita Sinha vs Bhawana Bhardwaj on 4 April, 2025

20. After examination of the pleadings and evidence in the present suit as well as the conduct of the
Respondent No.1-buyer, this Court is unable to agree with Respondent No.1-buyer that she was
willing to perform the Agreement to Sell dated 25th January, 2008 and go ahead with the purchase
of the property. This Court says so because admittedly, as noted above, the five demand drafts dated
7th February 2008 for Rs. 2,11,000/- (Rupees Two Lakh Eleven Thousand) were encashed by the
Respondent No.1-buyer in July, 2008. The conduct of the Respondent No.1-buyer in encashing the
demand drafts establishes beyond doubt that the Respondent No.1-buyer was not willing to perform
her part of the Agreement to Sell and proceed with execution of the sale deed; for the Respondent
No.1-buyer would not have encashed the demand drafts if she was indeed willing to perform the
contract and have a sale deed executed. Consequently, once it is established that the Respondent No.
1-buyer is not willing to perform the contract, the fact that the entire advance consideration/earnest
money had not been returned to Respondent No.1-buyer is irrelevant and immaterial.

T H E   A G R E E M E N T   T O   S E L L   D A T E D   2 5 T H   J A N U A R Y   2 0 0 8   S T O O D   C A N C E L L E D   /
TERMINATED.

21. This Court is also of the view that the act of the Respondent No.1- buyer in encashing the
demand drafts leads to an irresistible conclusion that the agreement in question stood cancelled.

22. The contention of the learned counsel for the Respondent No. 1- buyer that the Agreement to
Sell dated 25th January 2008 could not have been cancelled unilaterally is contrary to facts as the
letter dated 07th February 2008 along with the refund of the demand drafts and two post- dated
cheques was nothing but repudiation of the Agreement to Sell dated 25th January 2008 by the seller
and the encashment of the demand drafts was acceptance of such repudiation by the Respondent
No.1-buyer, leading to cancellation of the Agreement to Sell dated 25th January 2008.

23. The contention that the demand drafts were encashed under protest is misconceived on facts as
there is nothing on record to show that the demand drafts were encashed under protest. In fact,
PW-2, who is the husband of the Respondent No.1-buyer, has deposed that upon receipt of the
demand drafts and cheques, the Respondent No.1-buyer had not issued any letter to the seller
stating that the amounts received by them were less than the earnest money paid by them.

A B S E N T   A   P R A Y E R   F O R   D E C L A R A T O R Y   R E L I E F   T H A T   C A N C E L L A T I O N   O F   T H E
AGREEMENT IS BAD IN LAW, A SUIT FOR SPECIFIC PERFORMANCE IS NOT MAINTAINABLE

24. This Court further finds that the seller had admittedly issued a letter dated 7th February 2008
cancelling the Agreement to Sell dated 25th January 2008, prior to the filing of the subject suit on
5th May 2008. Even though the demand drafts enclosed with the letter dated 07th February, 2008
were subsequently encashed in July, 2008, yet this Court is of the view that it was incumbent upon
the Respondent No.1-buyer to seek a declaratory relief that the said cancellation is bad in law and
not binding on parties for the reason that existence of a valid agreement is sine qua non for the grant
of relief of specific performance.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156623250/

9

Sangita Sinha vs Bhawana Bhardwaj on 4 April, 2025

25. This Court in I.S. Sikandar (Dead) By LRs. v. K. Subramani and Others, (2013) 15 SCC 27 has
held that in absence of a prayer for a declaratory relief that the termination of the agreement is bad
in law, the suit for specific performance of that agreement is not maintainable. Though
subsequently, this Court in A. Kanthamani Vs. Nasreen Ahmed, (2017) 4 SCC 654 has held that the
declaration of law in I.S. Sikander (Dead) By LRs. v. K. Subramani (supra) regarding
non-maintainability of the suit in the absence of a challenge to letter of termination is confined to
the facts of the said case, yet the aforesaid issue has been recently considered in R. Kandasamy
(Since Dead) & Ors. v. T.R.K. Sarawathy & Anr. (supra) authored by brother Justice Dipankar Datta
and the conflict between the judgment of I.S. Sikander (Dead) By LRs. v. K. Subramani (supra) and
A. Kanthamani Vs. Nasreen Ahmed (supra) has been deliberated upon. In R. Kandasamy (Since
Dead) & Ors. v. T.R.K. Sarawathy & Anr. (supra), it has been clarified that the appellate court would
not be precluded from examining whether the jurisdictional fact exists for grant of relief of specific
performance, notwithstanding the fact that the trial Court omitted or failed to frame an issue on
maintainability of the suit. The relevant portion of the judgment in R. Kandasamy (Since Dead) &
Ors. v. T.R.K. Sarawathy & Anr. (supra) is reproduced hereinbelow:

“25. What follows from A. Kanthamani (supra) is that unless an issue as to
maintainability is framed by the Trial Court, the suit cannot be held to be not
maintainable at the appellate stage only because appropriate declaratory relief has
not been prayed.

xxx xxx xxx xxx

43. In Shrisht Dhawan (Smt) v. Shaw Bros., (1992) 1 SCC 534, an interesting
discussion on ‘jurisdictional fact’ is found in the concurring opinion of Hon’ble R. M.
Sahai, J. (as His Lordship then was). It reads:

“19. *** What, then, is an error in respect of jurisdictional fact? A jurisdictional fact is
one on existence or non-existence of which depends assumption or refusal to assume
jurisdiction by a court, tribunal or an authority. In Black’s Legal Dictionary it is
explained as a fact which must exist before a court can properly assume jurisdiction
of a particular case. Mistake of fact in relation to jurisdiction is an error of
jurisdictional fact. No statutory authority or tribunal can assume jurisdiction in
respect of subject matter which the statute does not confer on it and if by deciding
erroneously the fact on which jurisdiction depends the court or tribunal exercises the
jurisdiction then the order is vitiated. Error of jurisdictional fact renders the order
ultra vires and bad (Wade, Administrative Law. In Raza Textiles [(1973) 1 SCC 633] it
was held that a court or tribunal cannot confer jurisdiction on itself by deciding a
jurisdictional fact wrongly. *** (emphasis supplied)

44. Borrowing wisdom from the aforesaid passage, our deduction is this. An issue of
maintainability of a suit strikes at the root of the proceedings initiated by filing of the
plaint as per requirements of Order VII Rule 1, CPC. If a suit is barred by law, the
trial court has absolutely no jurisdiction to entertain and try it. However, even though

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156623250/

10

Sangita Sinha vs Bhawana Bhardwaj on 4 April, 2025

a given case might not attract the bar envisaged by section 9, CPC, it is obligatory for
a trial court seized of a suit to inquire and ascertain whether the jurisdictional fact
does, in fact, exist to enable it (the trial court) to proceed to trial and consider
granting relief to the plaintiff as claimed. No higher court, much less the Supreme
Court, should feel constrained to interfere with a decree granting relief on the
specious ground that the parties were not put specifically on notice in respect of a
particular line of attack/defence on which success/failure of the suit depends, more
particularly an issue touching the authority of the trial court to grant relief if the
‘jurisdictional fact’ imperative for granting relief had not been satisfied. It is
f u n d a m e n t a l ,   a s   h e l d   i n   S h r i s h t   D h a w a n   ( s u p r a ) ,   t h a t   a s s u m p t i o n   o f
jurisdiction/refusal to assume jurisdiction would depend on existence of the
jurisdictional fact. Irrespective of whether the parties have raised the contention, it is
for the trial court to satisfy itself that adequate evidence has been led and all facts
including the jurisdictional fact stand proved for relief to be granted and the suit to
succeed. This is a duty the trial court has to discharge in its pursuit for rendering
substantive justice to the parties, irrespective of whether any party to the lis has
raised or not. If the jurisdictional fact does not exist, at the time of settling the issues,
notice of the parties must be invited to the trial court’s prima facie opinion of non-

existent jurisdictional fact touching its jurisdiction. However, failure to determine the jurisdictional
fact, or erroneously determining it leading to conferment of jurisdiction, would amount to wrongful
assumption of jurisdiction and the resultant order liable to be branded as ultra vires and bad.

45. Should the trial court not satisfy itself that the jurisdictional fact for grant of relief does exist,
nothing prevents the court higher in the hierarchy from so satisfying itself. It is true that the point of
maintainability of a suit has to looked only through the prism of section 9, CPC, and the court can
rule on such point either upon framing of an issue or even prior thereto if Order VII Rule 11 (d)
thereof is applicable. In a fit and proper case, notwithstanding omission of the trial court to frame
an issue touching jurisdictional fact, the higher court would be justified in pronouncing its verdict
upon application of the test laid down in Shrisht Dhawan (supra).

46. In this case, even though no issue as to maintainability of the suit had been framed in course of
proceedings before the Trial Court, there was an issue as to whether the Agreement is true, valid and
enforceable which was answered against the sellers. Obviously, owing to dismissal of the suit, the
sellers did not appeal. Nevertheless, having regard to our findings on the point as to whether the
buyer was ‘ready and willing’, we do not see the necessity of proceeding with any further discussion
on the point of jurisdictional fact here.”

26. Since in the present case, the seller had issued a letter dated 07 th February, 2008 cancelling the
agreement to sell prior to the institution of the suit, the same constitutes a jurisdictional fact as till
the said cancellation is set aside, the respondent is not entitled to the relief of specific performance.

27. Consequently, this Court is of the opinion that absent a prayer for declaratory relief that
termination/cancellation of the agreement is bad in law, a suit for specific performance is not

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156623250/

11

maintainable.

Sangita Sinha vs Bhawana Bhardwaj on 4 April, 2025

APPELLANT HAS THE LOCUS STANDI TO FILE THE APPEAL

28. The preliminary objection raised by the Respondent No.1-buyer that the issue of her readiness
and willingness should not be examined by this Court as the appellant lacked the locus standi to file
the present appeal as she did not have any right, interest or title over the subject property is
misconceived on facts. The appellant was impleaded as defendant no. 3 in the subject suit as she is a
beneficiary under the Will dated 23rd September 2002 executed by the original owner/seller,
whereby the subject property has been bequeathed in her favour. Consequently, the appellant, being
a necessary and interested party to the lis, has the locus to file the present appeal. Further, the onus
to establish readiness and willingness is on the Respondent No.1-buyer and the failure to establish
the same disentitles the Respondent No.1-buyer from the equitable and discretionary relief of
specific performance.

SUPPRESSION OF MATERIAL FACTS DISENTITLES THE BUYER FROM THE EQUITABLE AND
DISCRETIONARY RELIEF OF SPECIFIC PERFORMANCE

29. A perusal of the record shows that not only did the Respondent No. 1-buyer fail to seek a
declaratory relief, but also it failed to disclose in the plaint that the seller had issued the cancellation
letter dated 7th February 2008 enclosing therewith the demand drafts dated 7 th February 2008
and two of the three post-dated cheques. The failure of the Respondent No. 1- buyer to disclose the
same in her plaint amounts to suppression of material fact, disentitling her from the discretionary
relief of specific performance. This Court in Citadel Fine Pharmaceuticals v. Ramaniyam Real
Estates Private Limited and Another, (2011) 9 SCC 147 has held as under:

“57. There is another aspect of the matter also. In the instant case by asking for
specific performance of the contract, the plaintiff purchaser is praying for a
discretionary remedy. It is axiomatic that when a discretionary remedy is prayed for
by a party, such party must come to court on proper disclosure of facts. The plaint
which it filed before the court in such cases must state all the facts with sufficient
candour and clarity. In the instant case the plaintiff purchaser made an averment in
the plaint that the defendant vendor be directed to return the advance amount of Rs
10,00,000 with interest at the rate of 24% from the date of payment of the said
amount till the realisation and an alternative prayer to that effect was also made in
the prayer clause (c).

58. However, the fact remains that prior to the filing of the suit the defendant vendor
returned the said amount of Rs 10,00,000 by its letter dated 4-9-1996 by an account
payee cheque in favour of the plaintiff and the same was sent to the plaintiff under
registered post which was refused by the plaintiff on 6-9-1996.

The plaintiff suppressed this fact in the plaint and filed the suit on 9-9-1996 with a totally contrary
representation before the court as if the amount had not been returned to it by the vendor. This is

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156623250/

12

Sangita Sinha vs Bhawana Bhardwaj on 4 April, 2025

suppression of a material fact, and disentitles the plaintiff purchaser from getting any discretionary
relief of specific performance by the court.

59. In this connection we may refer to the Principle of Equitable Remedies by I.C.F. Spry, (4th Edn.,
Sweet & Maxwell, 1990). Dealing with the question of “clean hands” the learned author opined that
where the plaintiff is shown to have materially misled the court or to have abused its process, or to
have attempted to do so, the discretionary relief of specific performance can be denied to him. In
laying down this principle, the learned author relied on a decision of the English Court in Armstrong
v. Sheppard & Short Ltd. [(1959) 2 QB 384 :

(1959) 3 WLR 84 : (1959) 2 All ER 651 (CA)] , QB at p. 397.

(See Spry, Equitable Remedies, p. 243.)

60. This Court has also taken the same view in Arunima Baruah v. Union of India [(2007) 6 SCC
120] . At p. 125, para 12 of the Report, this Court held that it is trite law that to enable the court to
refuse to exercise its discretionary jurisdiction suppression must be of a material fact. This Court, of
course, held that what is a material fact, suppression whereof would disentitle the suitor to obtain a
discretionary relief, would depend upon the facts and circumstances of each case. However, by way
of guidance this Court held that a material fact would mean that fact which is material for the
purpose of determination of the lis.

61. Following the aforesaid tests, this Court is of the opinion that the suppression of the fact that the
plaintiff refused to accept the cheque of Rs 10 lakhs sent to it by the defendant under registered post
with acknowledgment due in terms of Clause 9 of the contract is a material fact. So on that ground
the plaintiff purchaser is not entitled to any relief in its suit for specific performance.”
CONCLUSION

30. Keeping in view the aforesaid findings, this Court is of the view that the Agreement to Sell
cannot be specifically enforced. Accordingly, the present appeal is allowed and the impugned
Judgment dated 27th April, 2018 as well as decrees dated 10th May, 2018 and 09th May, 2024 are
set aside. Further, the sale deed executed in favour of Respondent No.1-buyer in pursuance of the
impugned judgments is declared as null and void and the Appellant is directed to refund the balance
sale consideration amount of Rs.24,61,000/- (Rupees Twenty Four Lakh Sixty One Thousand)
deposited by Respondent No.1-buyer in pursuance to the impugned judgment and decrees.

...…...……………….J. [DIPANKAR DATTA] ……………….J. [MANMOHAN] New Delhi;

April 04, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156623250/

13

