Satbir Singh vs Rajesh Kumar on 1 April, 2025

Satbir Singh vs Rajesh Kumar on 1 April, 2025

Author: Dipankar Datta

Bench: Dipankar Datta

                                                                               REPORTABLE
2025 INSC 416                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                CRIMINAL APPEAL No. 1487 OF 2025

     SATBIR SINGH                                                       ...APPELLANT

                                                 VERSUS

     RAJESH KUMAR AND OTHERS                                           ...RESPONDENTS

                                             JUDGMENT

DIPANKAR DATTA, J.

1. This criminal appeal arises out of Special Leave Petition (Criminal) No. 10653 of 2024, which is at
the instance of Satbir Singh1. Under challenge therein is the judgment and order dated 7th March,
20242 passed by a learned Judge of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh. Vide the
impugned order, while allowing a revisional application3 filed by Rajesh Kumar, Sagar @ Bittoo,
Niraj and Ankit (respondents in the said special leave petition), the High Court set aside an order
dated 13th September, 2021 passed by the Additional Sessions Judge, Karnal4. The Sessions Judge,
by the order impugned in the revisional application, had allowed an the appellant impugned order
CRR-1357-2021 (O&M) Sessions Judge 1 of 10 application under Section 319 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 19735 filed by the appellant, seeking to summon Rajesh Kumar, Sagar @ Bittoo, Niraj
and Ankit as additional accused for facing trial along with the principal accused6, for commission of
offences punishable under Sections 323, 324, 307 and 506 of the Indian Penal Code, 18607 read
with Section 34 thereof as well as Section 25 of the Arms Act.

2. Notice on the said special leave petition was issued on 13th August, 2024, limited to the
respondents 1 and 3 (Rajesh Kumar and Neeraj, respectively). For the reasons recorded in such
order, the special leave petition against the respondents 2 and 4 (Sagar @ Bittoo and Ankit,
respectively) stood dismissed.

3. The appellant has since obtained special leave to appeal. He questions the legality and correctness

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45908357/

1

of the impugned order.

Satbir Singh vs Rajesh Kumar on 1 April, 2025

4. Service of notice on Rajesh Kumar and Neeraj having been effected, they entered appearance and
are represented by Mr Gagan Gupta, senior learned counsel. The appellant is represented by Mr.
Neeraj Kumar Jain, learned senior counsel. We have heard both of them and perused the materials
on record.

5. We have also heard learned counsel appearing for the respondent no. 5- State of Haryana and
perused the counter affidavit filed on its behalf.

6. Briefly put, the facts of the case are that on 09.02.2020 an information was received in P.S. Sadar,
Karnal that accused Mukesh and the appellant, residents of village Rasulpur Khurd, District Karnal,
were admitted in Civil Cr. PC Mukesh IPC 2 of 10 Hospital, Karnal and Ram Chander Memorial
Hospital, Karnal, respectively, due to injuries received in an assault. The police officials of P.S.
Sadar, Karnal made abortive attempts to record the statements of the injured on 09.02.2020 and
10.02.2020, since the injured were not in a position to give statements. On 12.02.2020, Mukesh
stood discharged, whereas the appellant continued to be unfit. The Investigating Officer recorded
the statement of Mukesh. Based on Mukesh’s statement, a First Information Report came to be
registered. During the course of investigation, X-Ray report relating to injuries of Mukesh was
obtained, in which a fracture was reported. Medical opinion was also obtained, which did not rule
out the possibility of such injuries being self-suffered. The Investigating Officer reached a
conclusion that the allegations of Mukesh against the appellant were not substantiated and,
ultimately, submitted a closure report.

7. The appellant having regained consciousness on 14.02.2020 and certified by the attending doctor
to be fit, his statement was recorded. The appellant disclosed that he was serving in the Indian Army
and had come to his village on leave. On 09.02.2020 at about 2.30 p.m., while playing volleyball, an
altercation had taken place with Mukesh who was playing for the opposite team. Mukesh started
slapping the appellant. Team members pacified and separated them. However, Mukesh left
threatening that the appellant would be taught a lesson. After 15 minutes, Mukesh came armed with
a knife, accompanied by Neeraj, Sagar @ Bittoo, and Ankit armed with lathi, danda, etc. Neeraj
caught hold of the appellant and Mukesh gave a knife blow in the waist of the appellant followed by
another knife blow near his heart, which penetrated up to the lungs. Sagar and Ankit had beaten the
appellant 3 of 10 with lathi and danda. The appellant further alleged that he was threatened by
Rajesh who exhorted that although the appellant had been taught a lesson, he would be killed if he
came back to the village again. Further, in his statement, the appellant alleged that due to bleeding,
he became unconscious and came to know that he was brought to the hospital by Amarjeet and Jai
Singh. As per MLR of the appellant, he had two injuries caused with sharp weapons. The
Investigating Officer obtained the discharge summary of the appellant on 20.02.2020 as well as
medical opinion, vide which injury no.1 pertaining to chest was reported as dangerous to life. As
such, a cross-case under Section 323, 324, 307, 506/34 IPC was registered against Mukesh and
Rajesh, Neeraj, Sagar @ Bittoo, and Ankit. On 28.02.2020, the knife used in the crime by Mukesh
was recovered in pursuance of his disclosure statement.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45908357/

2

Satbir Singh vs Rajesh Kumar on 1 April, 2025

8. Further, during the course of investigation, the Investigating Officer did not find the involvement
of Rajesh and Ankit and the same was verified by the Station House Officer, P.S. Sadar, Karnal8.
Subsequent separate enquiries conducted by the Deputy Superintendent of Police, Karnal, Deputy
Superintendent of Police, HQ, Karnal, and Deputy Superintendent of Police, Karnal-II led to filing of
reports where, too, involvement of Rajesh, Neeraj, Sagar @ Bittoo and Ankit was found lacking.

9. Mukesh was arrested in the present case on 28.02.2020 and after completion of investigation, the
SHO submitted report under section 173(2), Cr. PC under Sections 307, 323, 324, 506/34 IPC
against Mukesh SHO 4 of 10 before the Illaqa Magistrate. Thereafter, the case was committed to the
court of the Sessions Judge for trial.

10. Charges under Section 324, 307 and 506, IPC and Section 25 of the Arms Act were framed
against Mukesh vide order dated 04.03.2021, whereafter trial commenced. It is proposed by the
prosecution to examine 14 (fourteen) witnesses in support of its case, of whom the appellant as
PW-1 was examined on 27.04.2021. He reiterated the allegations against Mukesh as also against
Rajesh, Neeraj, Sagar @ Bittoo, and Ankit in his examination-in-chief. He also submitted an
application under Section 319, Cr. PC for summoning Rajesh, Neeraj, Sagar @ Bittoo, and Ankit to
face trial.

11. It is this application that succeeded before the Sessions Judge, whereupon Rajesh, Sagar @
Bittoo, Neeraj and Ankit approached the High Court. The impugned order dated 13.09.2021 of the
Sessions Judge was thereafter set aside on contest.

12. The High Court proceeded to record as follows:

“12. From a perusal of the aforementioned both injuries, it is apparent that Satbir had
suffered only two injuries in the present case and both injuries were caused with a
knife by Mukesh Kumar. The complainant in his testimony (Annexure PW-4) stated
that all the accused were carrying dandas and handles of spade in their hands. Neeraj
had caught hold of him, whereas, Sagar @ Bittoo, petitioner No. 2 and Ankit,
petitioner No. 4 gave blows with handles of spade on his back and on his legs.
However, the injuries caused by the petitioners No. 2 and 4 are clearly missing in the
medical reports. In fact, as per PW-1, Satbir Singh, all the petitioners had come
prepared and were duly armed to cause injuries to him, but the injuries, which were
allegedly caused by them were not corroborated by medical evidence.

13. Apart from that, it is apparent from the record that repeated applications were moved by both
the sides to the local police and the matter was investigated by 03 different DSPs of Karnal police
and the facts were finally verified by SP, Karnal at his own level. However, during all the
investigations, it was found that all the petitioners had not 5 of 10 participated in the present case
and their presence at the place of occurrence could not be established. No doubt, the Court is
obliged to look into the evidence only, at this stage, however, the conclusions recorded by the police
and the supporting material collected during the course of investigation also cannot be overlooked
by the Court, while deciding the application under Section 319 Cr. P.C, even though the evidence led

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45908357/

3

Satbir Singh vs Rajesh Kumar on 1 April, 2025

by the prosecution is the main basis for disposal of the application. Still further, from the evidence
led by the prosecution, it appears that the fight in the present case had taken place at the spur of the
moment over a minor issue of counting the points in a Volley Ball game. Even otherwise, admittedly,
there was no enmity between the parties and the petitioners had no reason to participate in the
present occurrence. Still further, it is also apparent that Mukesh Kumar and Satbir Singh were
members of opposite teams, while playing the Volley Ball and the occurrence had taken place at the
spur of the moment and injuries were caused by both the sides. Apart from that, in the present case,
this Court has no hesitation to hold that there was not sufficient material on record, which could
serve as a ground for summoning the petitioners to face trial along with Mukesh Kumar, who had
already been arrayed as an accused in the present case.”

13. The law on the point of summoning additional accused in exercise of power conferred by Section
319, Cr. PC is well settled. One may profitably refer to and rely on the Constitution Bench decision of
this Court in Hardeep Singh v. State of Punjab9, where law has been authoritatively declared. We
consider it proper to quote the conclusions reached by this Court qua the questions arising for
decision, hereunder:

“117. We accordingly sum up our conclusions as follows:

Questions (i) and (iii) — What is the stage at which power under Section 319 CrPC
can be exercised?

AND — Whether the word “evidence” used in Section 319(1) CrPC has been used in a
comprehensive sense and includes the evidence collected during investigation or the
word “evidence” is limited to the evidence recorded during trial?

Answer 117.1. In Dharam Pal case [(2014) 3 SCC 306], the Constitution Bench has
already held that after committal, cognizance of an offence can be taken against a
person not named as an accused but against whom materials are available from the
papers filed by the police after (2014) 3 SCC 92 6 of 10 completion of the
investigation. Such cognizance can be taken under Section 193 CrPC and the Sessions
Judge need not wait till “evidence” under Section 319 CrPC becomes available for
summoning an additional accused.

117.2. Section 319 CrPC, significantly, uses two expressions that have to be taken note of i.e. (1)
inquiry (2) trial. As a trial commences after framing of charge, an inquiry can only be understood to
be a pre-trial inquiry. Inquiries under Sections 200, 201, 202 CrPC, and under Section 398 CrPC are
species of the inquiry contemplated by Section 319 CrPC. Materials coming before the court in
course of such inquiries can be used for corroboration of the evidence recorded in the court after the
trial commences, for the exercise of power under Section 319 CrPC, and also to add an accused
whose name has been shown in Column 2 of the charge-sheet.

117.3. In view of the above position the word “evidence” in Section 319 CrPC has to be broadly
understood and not literally i.e. as evidence brought during a trial.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45908357/

4

Satbir Singh vs Rajesh Kumar on 1 April, 2025

Question (ii)—Whether the word “evidence” used in Section 319(1) CrPC could only mean evidence
tested by cross- examination or the court can exercise the power under the said provision even on
the basis of the statement made in the examination-in-chief of the witness concerned? Answer 117.4.
Considering the fact that under Section 319 CrPC a person against whom material is disclosed is
only summoned to face the trial and in such an event under Section 319(4) CrPC the proceeding
against such person is to commence from the stage of taking of cognizance, the court need not wait
for the evidence against the accused proposed to be summoned to be tested by cross-examination.

Question (iv)—What is the nature of the satisfaction required to invoke the power under Section 319
CrPC to arraign an accused? Whether the power under Section 319(1) CrPC can be exercised only if
the court is satisfied that the accused summoned will in all likelihood be convicted?

Answer 117.5. Though under Section 319(4)(b) CrPC the accused subsequently impleaded is to be
treated as if he had been an accused when the court initially took cognizance of the offence, the
degree of satisfaction that will be required for summoning a person under Section 319 CrPC would
be the same as for framing a charge10. The difference in the degree of satisfaction for summoning
the original accused and a subsequent In paragraph 106, the Court held “Thus, we hold that though
only a prima facie case is to be established from the evidence led before the court, not necessarily
tested on the anvil of cross-examination, it requires much stronger evidence than mere probability
of his complicity. The test that has to be applied is one which is more than prima facie case as
exercised at the time of framing of charge, but short of satisfaction to an extent that the evidence, if
goes unrebutted, would lead to conviction. In the absence of such satisfaction, the court should
refrain from exercising power under Section 319 CrPC.” 7 of 10 accused is on account of the fact that
the trial may have already commenced against the original accused and it is in the course of such
trial that materials are disclosed against the newly summoned accused. Fresh summoning of an
accused will result in delay of the trial therefore the degree of satisfaction for summoning the
accused (original and subsequent) has to be different.

Question (v)—Does the power under Section 319 CrPC extend to persons not named in the FIR or
named in the FIR but not charge-sheeted or who have been discharged?

Answer 117.6. A person not named in the FIR or a person though named in the FIR but has not been
charge-sheeted or a person who has been discharged can be summoned under Section 319 CrPC
provided from the evidence it appears that such person can be tried along with the accused already
facing trial. However, insofar as an accused who has been discharged is concerned the requirement
of Sections 300 and 398 CrPC has to be complied with before he can be summoned afresh.”

14. Quite recently, a coordinate Bench of this Court in Jitendra Nath Mishra v. State of Uttar
Pradesh & Another11, upon considering Hardeep Singh (supra), had the occasion to observe as
follows:

“10. Section 319 CrPC, which envisages a discretionary power, empowers the court
holding a trial to proceed against any person not shown or mentioned as an accused
if it appears from the evidence that such person has committed a crime for which he

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45908357/

5

Satbir Singh vs Rajesh Kumar on 1 April, 2025

ought to be tried together with the accused who is facing trial. Such power can be
exercised by the court qua a person who is not named in the FIR, or named in the FIR
but not shown as an accused in the charge-sheet. Therefore, what is essential for
exercise of the power under Section 319 CrPC is that the evidence on record must
show the involvement of a person in the commission of a crime and that the said
person, who has not been arraigned as an accused, should face trial together with the
accused already arraigned. However, the court holding a trial, if it intends to exercise
power conferred by Section 319 CrPC, must not act mechanically merely on the
ground that some evidence has come on record implicating the person sought to be
summoned; its satisfaction preceding the order thereunder must be more than prima
facie as formed at the stage of a charge being framed and short of satisfaction to an
extent that the evidence, if unrebutted, would lead to conviction.”

15. It is in the light of such settled law that we need to examine the impugned order of the High
Court. However, we must exercise caution lest any observation has the effect of influencing the trial.
(2023) 7 SCC 344 8 of 10

16. Neeraj happens to be the sibling of Mukesh. The initial statement of the appellant referred to the
fact that Neeraj had held him facilitating stabbing by Mukesh, who gave a knife blow in the waist
followed by another blow near his heart which penetrated up to his lungs. Insofar as Rajesh is
concerned, it was alleged that he had threatened the appellant by saying “Chaaku maar ke tassali kar
di, agar dobaara zinda gaon me ayega to mai goli se uda dunga”. Although, the Sessions Judge
formed the requisite satisfaction bearing in mind the decision in Hardeep Singh (supra) and held
that the tests laid down therein were squarely met, reading the impugned order in its entirety, we
are of the considered opinion that the High Court failed to consider the matter from the proper
perspective and arrived at an entirely wrong conclusion.

17. Mr. Gupta has assiduously attempted to impress upon us that involvement of Rajesh and Neeraj
were not found in the several reports of the Deputy Superintendents of Police, attached to Karnal
district, and such reports should be given credence. We are, however, of the opinion that no
conclusive finding can be given that Rajesh and Neeraj were not involved merely on the basis of such
reports. Having regard to the version of the appellant in course of examination-in-chief, the Sessions
Judge formed a satisfaction higher than a prima facie satisfaction of the alleged involvement of
Rajesh and Neeraj and that their complicity in the crime has to be examined and tested on evidence
being led at the trial. To ascertain whether the Sessions Judge in allowing the application under
Section 319, Cr. PC had acted mechanically or in a manner not authorised by law or in derogation of
the law declared in Hardeep Singh (supra), the High Court 9 of 10 was well within its competence to
adopt an ‘eyes on’ approach, considering the nature of power conferred on the High Court by the Cr.
PC as the revisional court, but regard being had to the facts and circumstances, a ‘hands off’
approach would have been advisable and the correct approach.

18. We have no hesitation to hold that the conclusion of the Sessions Judge was a plausible
conclusion and not an absurd one so as to warrant interference by the High Court in the exercise of
its revisional jurisdiction.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45908357/

6

19. For the foregoing reasons, the impugned order of the High Court stands set aside and that of the
Sessions Judge is restored. The appeal is, accordingly, allowed.

Satbir Singh vs Rajesh Kumar on 1 April, 2025

20. We clarify, no observation made hereinbefore shall be construed as an expression of opinion as
regards the involvement of Rajesh and Neeraj in the crime and whatever we have said is solely for
the purpose of disposal of this appeal.

21. The Sessions Judge is encouraged to take the trial to its logical conclusion, in accordance with
law, as expeditiously as possible.

22. Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed of.

………….…………….. J.

(DIPANKAR DATTA) ……………….……….. J.

(MANMOHAN) NEW DELHI;

APRIL 01, 2025.

10 of 10

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45908357/

7

