Sukhdev Singh vs Sukhbir Kaur on 12 February, 2025

Sukhdev Singh vs Sukhbir Kaur on 12 February, 2025

Author: Abhay S. Oka

Bench: Abhay S Oka

2025 INSC 197                                                                  REPORTABLE

                                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                             CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                              CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2536 OF 2019
            Sukhdev Singh                                                       … Appellant

                                                         versus

            Sukhbir Kaur                                                    … Respondent

                                                          with

                                               CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5726 Of 2019

                                                     JUDGMENT

ABHAY S. OKA, J.

ISSUE REFERRED

1. The reference to a Bench of the three Hon’ble Judges has been made by the order dated 22nd
August 2024 of this Court, which reads thus:

“Learned counsel appearing for the parties state at the Bar that these matters need to
be considered by a Three Judge Bench combination as there are conflicting views on
the applicability of Sections 24 and 25 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, whether
alimony can be granted where marriage has been declared void.

Following are the judgments in favour of granting alimony :-

Sl.        CITATION         TITLED
                                          No.

                                          1.       (1993) 3 SCC   Chand   Dhawan
   ASHISH KONDLE
   Date: 2025.02.12

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/138104701/

1

Sukhdev Singh vs Sukhbir Kaur on 12 February, 2025

   16:28:58 IST
                                                   406            Vs.Jawaharlal
                                                                  Dhawan
   Reason:

(cid:12)                           2.       (2005) 2 SCC 33    Rameshchandra
                                                       Rampratapji Daga
                                                       Vs. Rameshwari
                                                       Rameshchandra
                                                       Daga

Following are the judgments against granting alimony :-

AIR 1999 AP 19     Abbayolla Reddy

Sl.         CITATION             TITLED
                           No.
                           1.       (1988) 1 SCC 530   Yamunabai
                                                       Anantrao Adhav
                                                       Vs.       Anantrao
                                                       Shivram Adhav &
                                                       Another
                           2.
                                                       Vs. Padmamma
                           3.
                                                       Dilraj Singh
                           4.       (2004) AIR Bom.    Bhausaheb        @
                                    283(FB)            Sandhu        S/o
                                                       Raguji Magar Vs.
                                                       Leelabai      W/o
                                                       Bhausaheb Magar
                           5.       (2005) 3 SCC 636   Savitaben
                                                       Somabhai
                                                       Bhatiya Vs. State
                                                       of    Gujarat    &
                                                       Others

(2003) 1 HLR 100   Navdeep Kaur Vs.

Accordingly, let the papers be placed before Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India for
passing appropriate orders.” RELEVANT PROVISIONS OF LAW

2. Before we refer to the submissions made across the Bar, it will be necessary to briefly refer to the
provisions of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 (for short, ‘the 1955 Act’). Section 5 deals with the
conditions for a Hindu marriage, which reads thus:

“5. Conditions for a Hindu marriage.—A marriage may be solemnized between any
two Hindus, if the following conditions are fulfilled, namely:—

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/138104701/

2

(i) neither party has a spouse living at the time of the marriage;

Sukhdev Singh vs Sukhbir Kaur on 12 February, 2025

(ii) at the time of the marriage, neither party—

(a) is incapable of giving a valid consent to it in consequence of unsoundness of
mind; or

(b) though capable of giving a valid consent, has been suffering from mental disorder
of such a kind or to such an extent as to be unfit for marriage and the procreation of
children; or

(c) has been subject to recurrent attacks of insanity;

(iii) the bridegroom has completed the age of twenty-one years and the bride, the age
of eighteen years at the time of the marriage;

(iv) the parties are not within the degrees of prohibited relationship unless the
custom or usage governing each of them permits of a marriage between the two;

(v) the parties are not sapindas of each other, unless the custom or usage governing
each of them permits of a marriage between the two;” (emphasis added)

3. The 1955 Act deals with void marriages and voidable marriages. Section 11, which deals with void
marriages, reads thus:

“11. Void marriages.— Any marriage solemnised after the commencement of this Act
shall be null and void and may, on a petition presented by either party thereto against
the other party, be so declared by a decree of nullity if it contravenes any one of the
conditions specified in clauses (i), (iv) and (v) of section 5.”

4. The 1955 Act contemplates the filing of the following categories of petitions for grant of different
reliefs:

a. A petition seeking relief of restitution of conjugal rights in accordance with Section
9;

b. A petition seeking relief of judicial separation in accordance with Section 10;

c. A petition seeking a declaration that a marriage is void in accordance with Section
11;

d. A petition for annulment of a marriage on the ground that it is voidable in
accordance with Section 12;

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/138104701/

3

Sukhdev Singh vs Sukhbir Kaur on 12 February, 2025

e. A petition seeking a divorce in accordance with Section 13; and f. A petition seeking
divorce by mutual consent in accordance with Section 13B.

5. We are called upon to interpret Sections 24 and 25 of the 1955 Act, which read thus:

“24. Maintenance pendente lite and expenses of proceedings.—Where in any
proceedings under this Act it appears to the court that either the wife or the husband,
as the case may be, has no independent income sufficient for her or his support and
the necessary expenses of the proceeding, it may, on the application of the wife or the
husband, order the respondent to pay to the petitioner the expenses of the
proceeding, and monthly during the proceeding such sum as, having regard to the
petitioner's own income and the income of the respondent, it may seem to the court
to be reasonable:

Provided that the application for the payment of the expenses of the proceeding and
such monthly sum during the proceeding shall, as far as possible, be disposed of
within sixty days from the date of service of notice on the wife or the husband, as the
case may be.”

25. Permanent alimony and maintenance.—(1) Any court exercising jurisdiction
under this Act may, at the time of passing any decree or at any time subsequent
thereto, on application made to it for the purpose by either the wife or the husband,
as the case may be, order that the respondent shall pay to the applicant for her or his
maintenance and support such gross sum or such monthly or periodical sum for a
term not exceeding the life of the applicant as, having regard to the respondent's own
income and other property, if any, the income and other property of the applicant,
the conduct of the parties and other circumstances of the case, it may seem to the
court to be just, and any such payment may be secured, if necessary, by a charge on
the immovable property of the respondent.

(2) If the court is satisfied that there is, a change in the circumstances of either party at any time
after it has made an order under sub-section (1), it may at the instance of either party, vary, modify
or rescind any such order in such manner as the court may deem just.

(3) If the court is satisfied that the party in whose favour an order has been made under this section
has remarried or, if such party is the wife, that she has not remained chaste, or, if such party is the
husband, that he has had sexual intercourse with any woman outside wedlock, it may at the instance
of the other party vary, modify or rescind any such order in such manner as the court may deem
just.” (emphasis added)

6. The following questions arise for our consideration:

(i)Whether a spouse of a marriage declared as void by a competent Court under
Section 11 of the 1955 Act is entitled to claim permanent alimony and maintenance

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/138104701/

4

under Section 25 of the 1955 Act?

Sukhdev Singh vs Sukhbir Kaur on 12 February, 2025

(ii)Whether in a petition filed seeking a declaration under Section 11 of the 1955 Act, a spouse is
entitled to seek maintenance pendente lite under Section 24 of the 1955 Act?

SUBMISSIONS

7. The learned counsel appearing for the appellant-husband relied upon five decisions mentioned in
the order dated 22nd August 2024. We have already reproduced the said order in this judgment.
The learned counsel has taken us through the relevant paragraphs of the five decisions. He urged the
Court to reconsider the two decisions mentioned in the order dated 22nd August 2024, which
support the proposition that a spouse of a declared void marriage is entitled to seek maintenance
under Section 25 of the 1955 Act.

8. The learned counsel pointed out that there can be void marriages between father and daughter,
brother and sister and grandfather and granddaughter. He questioned whether, in the case of such
marriages, after the same are declared void, the Court can exercise the power under Section 25 of
the 1955 Act to grant maintenance. He submitted that there would be cases where parties to void
marriages are conscious of the fact that their marriage would be bigamous. There would be cases
where the wife may be responsible for concealing her first marriage which is in subsistence, and
induce the husband to marry. There may be cases where both parties may be unaware that they are
solemnising a void marriage. He submitted that it is absurd to include a decree declaring a marriage
as void in the expression “any decree” used in Section 25 of the 1955 Act. He submitted that to that
extent, the view taken by this Court in the case of Chand Dhawan v. Jawaharlal Dhawan1 and
Rameshchandra Rampratapji Daga v. Rameshwari Rameshchandra Daga2 is incorrect.

9. He submitted that a marriage declared void under Section 11 is void ab initio, which does not
exist. Therefore, a wife whose marriage is declared void cannot claim to be a spouse within the
meaning of Section 25 of the 1955 Act. He relied upon a decision of the Full Bench of the Bombay
High Court in the case of Bhausaheb @ Sandhu s/o Raghuji Magar v. Leelabai w/o Bhausaheb
Magar3. He relied upon the observations made therein that an illegitimate wife cannot be equated to
a divorced wife. He would, therefore, submit that Section 25 of the 1955 Act cannot apply to a spouse
whose marriage is declared void.

10. The learned senior counsel appearing for the respondent-wife has made detailed submissions.
She supported the decisions in the cases of Chand Dhawan1 and Rameshchandra Rampratapji
Daga2 and submitted that the view taken therein is correct. She relied upon Article 15(3) of the
Constitution of India and submitted that Section 25 is a special provision enacted for women. The
learned senior counsel also tried to argue on facts of the case. However, we are not concerned with
the facts of the case.

OUR VIEW ON THE QUESTION (i)

11. If Section 5 is read in conjunction with Section 11, the following categories of marriages are void:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/138104701/

5

Sukhdev Singh vs Sukhbir Kaur on 12 February, 2025

(1993) 3 SCC 406 (2005) 2 SCC 33 AIR 2004 Bom 283 a. If one or both the parties to
the marriage have a spouse living at the time of marriage;

b. The parties to the marriage are within the degrees of prohibited relationship unless the custom or
usage governing each of them permits of a marriage between the two and c. The parties are sapindas
of each other, unless the custom or usage governing each of them permits of a marriage between the
two.

12. A marriage is void when either of the parties to the marriage has a spouse living, and the
marriage with the spouse is subsisting. If any of the spouses of the marriage had an earlier marriage
dissolved by a decree of divorce before their marriage, clause (a) above will not apply. As far as
clause (b) regarding prohibited relationships is concerned, the degrees of prohibited relationships
have been specified in clause (g) of Section 3. Regarding the third category of sapinda relationship,
clause

(f) of Section 3 defines what is a sapinda relationship.

13. Section 11 provides for the grant of a declaration of a marriage as null and void. The marriages
covered by the categories (a), (b) or (c) mentioned above become void at the inception. Therefore,
such marriages are void ab initio. Such marriage does not exist at all in the eyes of the law.

14. Now, we come to Section 25 of the 1955 Act. We have already reproduced Section 25. It confers a
power on the matrimonial court to grant permanent alimony “at the time of passing any decree or at
any time subsequent thereto”. The issue is about the meaning of the decree contemplated by Section
25. A cause of action arises for the spouses to apply for permanent alimony and maintenance when
any decree is passed by any court exercising its jurisdiction under the 1955 Act.

15. Section 23 has the title “decree in proceedings”. Section 23 of the 1955 Act reads thus:

“23. Decree in proceedings.— (1) In any proceeding under this Act, whether defended
or not, if the court is satisfied that

(a) any of the grounds for granting relief exists and the petitioner except in cases
where the relief is sought by him on the ground specified in sub-clause (a), sub-clause
(b) or sub-clause

(c) of clause (ii) of section 5 is not in any way taking advantage of his or her own
wrong or disability for the purpose of such relief, and

(b) where the ground of the petition is the ground specified in clause (i) of
sub-section (1) of section 13, the petitioner has not in any manner been accessory to
or connived at or condoned the act or acts complained of, or where the ground of the
petition is cruelty the petitioner has not in any manner condoned the cruelty, and
(bb) when a divorce is sought on the ground of mutual consent, such consent has not

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/138104701/

6

been obtained by force, fraud or undue influence, and

Sukhdev Singh vs Sukhbir Kaur on 12 February, 2025

(c) the petition (not being a petition presented under section 11) is not presented or
prosecuted in collusion with the respondent, and

(d) there has not been any unnecessary or improper delay in instituting the
proceeding, and

(e) there is no other legal ground why relief should not be granted, then, and in such
a case, but not otherwise, the court shall decree such relief accordingly.

(2) Before proceeding to grant any relief under this Act, it shall be the duty of the
court in the first instance, in every case where it is possible so to do consistently with
the nature and circumstances of the case, to make every endeavour to bring about
reconciliation between the parties:

Provided that nothing contained in this sub- section shall apply to any proceeding
wherein relief is sought on any of the grounds specified in clause (ii), clause (iii),
clause (iv), clause (v), clause (vi) or clause (vii) of sub-section (1) of section 13.

(3) For the purpose of aiding the court in bringing about such reconciliation, the
court may, if the parties so desire or if the court thinks it just and proper so to do,
adjourn the proceedings for a reasonable period not exceeding fifteen days and refer
the matter to any person named by the parties in this behalf or to any person
nominated by the court if the parties fail to name any person, with directions to
report to the court as to whether reconciliation can be and has been, effected and the
court shall in disposing of the proceeding have due regard to the report.

(4) In every case where a marriage is dissolved by a decree of divorce, the court
passing the decree shall give a copy thereof free of cost to each of the parties.”
(emphasis added) Clause (a) of Section 23(1) applies to a case where a decree of
annulment is sought under Section 12. Only clause (d) of Section 23(1) is applicable
when a decree of nullity is sought. The decree of nullity cannot be passed if there has
been unnecessary and improper delay in instituting the petition seeking a declaration
of nullity.

16. The following are the decrees which may be passed under the 1955 Act:

a. A decree under Section 9 of restitution of conjugal rights;

b. A decree under Section 10 of judicial separation;

c. A decree under Section 11 declaring a marriage as void;

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/138104701/

7

Sukhdev Singh vs Sukhbir Kaur on 12 February, 2025

d. A decree under Section 12 of annulment of a marriage on the ground that it is
voidable; and e. A decree of divorce under Sections 13 and 13B.

17. An order of dismissal of a suit will be a decree, provided the conditions in Section 2(2) of the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 are satisfied. However, a decree in proceedings contemplated by
Section 23 of the 1955 Act is a narrower concept. It can only be a decree granting one of the reliefs
under Sections 9 to 13 of the 1955 Act. The decree referred to in Section 25 of the 1955 Act is the
decree as contemplated by Section 23, which has the title ‘decree in proceedings’. On plain reading
thereof, the decree contemplated by Section 23 is a decree granting relief under the 1955 Act.
Section 23 deals with only the decrees granting reliefs under Sections 9 to 13 of the 1955 Act.
Considering the language employed in Section 23, the ‘decrees in proceedings’ will not include the
decisions dismissing the petitions seeking reliefs under Sections 9 to 13. The decrees passed under
Sections 11 to 13 bring about a change of status of the parties to the marriage. Even a decree of
restitution of conjugal rights brings about a change of status of the parties in case there is no
restitution of conjugal rights within one year of a decree. That is a ground for passing a decree of
divorce under Section 13(1A)(ii). Even a decree of judicial separation under Section 10 brings about
a change of status in the sense that a spouse who has got such a decree is no longer under an
obligation to cohabit with his or her spouse. If the separation from the date of the decree continues
for a period of one year, it becomes a ground for passing a decree of divorce by invoking Section
13(1A)(i).

18. While enacting Section 25(1), the legislature has made no distinction between a decree of divorce
and a decree declaring marriage as a nullity. Therefore, on a plain reading of Section 25(1), it will
not be possible to exclude a decree of nullity under Section 11 from the purview of Section 25(1) of
the 1955 Act.

19. In the case of Chand Dhawan1, the issue arose regarding the meaning of ‘decree’ referred to
under Section 25 of the 1955 Act. In paragraph 25 of the said decision, this Court observed thus:

“25. We have thus, in this light, no hesitation in coming to the view that when by
court intervention under the Hindu Marriage Act, affectation or disruption to the
marital status has come by, at that juncture, while passing the decree, it undoubtedly
has the power to grant permanent alimony or maintenance, if that power is invoked
at that time. It also retains the power subsequently to be invoked on application by a
party entitled to relief. And such order, in all events, remains within the jurisdiction
of that court, to be altered or modified as future situations may warrant. In contrast,
without affectation or disruption of the marital status, a Hindu wife sustaining that
status can live in separation from her husband, and whether she is living in that state
or not, her claim to maintenance stands preserved in codification under Section 18(1)
of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act. The court is not at liberty to grant
relief of maintenance simpliciter obtainable under one Act in proceedings under the
other. As is evident, both the statutes are codified as such and are clear on their
subjects and by liberality of interpretation inter- changeability cannot be permitted
so as to destroy the distinction on the subject of maintenance.” (emphasis added) In

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/138104701/

8

Sukhdev Singh vs Sukhbir Kaur on 12 February, 2025

the case of Rameshchandra Rampratapji Daga2, the same view was taken relying
upon the decision in the case of Chand Dhawan1. In paragraphs 18 to 20, this Court
held thus:

“18. In the present case, on the husband's petition, a decree declaring the second
marriage as null and void has been granted. The learned counsel has argued that
where the marriage is found to be null and void — meaning non-existent in the eye of
the law or non est, the present respondent cannot lay a claim as wife for grant of
permanent alimony or maintenance. We have critically examined the provisions of
Section 25 in the light of conflicting decisions of the High Court cited before us. In
our considered opinion, as has been held by this Court in Chand Dhawan case [(1993)
3 SCC 406 : 1993 SCC (Cri) 915] , the expression used in the opening part of Section
25 enabling the “court exercising jurisdiction under the Act” “at the time of passing
any decree or at any time subsequent thereto” to grant alimony or maintenance
cannot be restricted only to, as contended, decree of judicial separation under Section
10 or divorce under Section

13. When the legislature has used such wide expression as “at the time of passing of
any decree”, it encompasses within the expression all kinds of decrees such as
restitution of conjugal rights under Section 9, judicial separation under Section 10,
declaring marriage as null and void under Section 11, annulment of marriage as
voidable under Section 12 and divorce under Section 13.

19. Learned counsel for the husband has argued that extending the benefit of Section
25 to even marriages which have been found null and void under Section 11 would be
against the very object and purpose of the Act to ban and discourage bigamous
marriages.

20. It is a well-known and recognised legal position that customary Hindu law like
Mohammedan law permitted bigamous marriages which were prevalent in all Hindu
families and more so in royal Hindu families. It is only after the Hindu law was
codified by enactments including the present Act that bar against bigamous
marriages was created by Section 5(i) of the Act. Keeping in consideration the present
state of the statutory Hindu law, a bigamous marriage may be declared illegal being
in contravention of the provisions of the Act but it cannot be said to be immoral so as
to deny even the right of alimony or maintenance to a spouse financially weak and
economically dependent. It is with the purpose of not rendering a financially
dependent spouse destitute that Section 25 enables the court to award maintenance
at the time of passing any type of decree resulting in breach in a marriage
relationship.” (emphasis added) When a decree is sought under Sections 9 to 13 and
is declined by the court, the remedy under Section 18 of the Hindu Adoption and
Maintenance Act, 1956, remains available to the wife. Even the remedy under Section
125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short, ‘the CrPC’) or Section 144 of
the Bhartiya Nagrik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 (for short, ‘the BNSS’) continues to be

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/138104701/

9

Sukhdev Singh vs Sukhbir Kaur on 12 February, 2025

available. The view taken in both cases on the interpretation of the words ‘any
decree” used in Section 25 is consistent with what we have held above.

20. But in the case of Rameshchandra Rampratapji Daga , this Court observed that as a bigamous
marriage cannot be said to be immoral, the right to claim maintenance under Section 25 is not taken
away. The real question involved was whether a decree of nullity was a decree within the meaning of
section 25. If a decree of nullity is covered by Section 25, the issue of whether a bigamous marriage
is immoral is irrelevant. The entitlement under Section 25 does not depend on whether the
bigamous marriage is moral or immoral.

21. Now, we come to the decision relied upon by the appellant- husband. In the first decision in the
case of Yamunabai Anantrao Adhav v. Anantrao Shivram Adhav & Anr. 4, this Court was dealing
with an application under Section 125 of the CrPC. This Court held that when a marriage is nullity
by Section 25 of the 1955 Act, the spouse of such marriage is not entitled to get the benefit of Section
125 of the CrPC. Section 125 of the CrPC operates altogether in a different field. It is a quick and
efficacious remedy made available to a wife or a child to seek maintenance. The proceedings under
Section 125 of the CrPC are of a summary nature. While deciding the applications under Section 125
of the CrPC, a summary procedure is required to be followed, and a detailed adjudication of the
rights of the parties cannot be made. The same is the legal position as regards the corresponding
remedy under Section 144 of the BNSS. Hence, the decision in the case of Yamunabai6 will have no
application to Section 25.

22. The remedy under Section 25 of the 1955 Act is completely different from the remedy under
Section 125 of the CrPC. It confers rights on the spouses of the marriage declared as void under
Section 11 of the 1955 Act to claim maintenance from the other spouse. The remedy is available to
both husband and wife. The principles which (1988) 1 SCC 530 apply to Section 125 of the CrPC
cannot be applied to Section 25 of the 1955 Act. The relief under Section 125 of the CrPC can be
granted to wife or child and not to husband.

23. Now, we come to the decision in the case of Abbayolla Reddy v. Padmamma5. The Andhra
Pradesh High Court’s view is based on the right of a spouse to claim maintenance under Section 18
of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956. This is a specific provision for the grant of
maintenance to the wife. The right under Section 25 of the 1955 Act is different. The right is created
in favour of both spouses once there is a decree passed under Sections 9 to 13 of the 1955 Act. The
third decision is in the case of Navdeep Kaur v. Dilraj Singh6. In paragraph 10 of the said decision,
the Himachal Pradesh High Court gave a very narrow meaning to the ‘decree in proceedings’ under
the 1955 Act by holding that the expression “husband and wife” used in Section 23 must mean
legally wedded husband and wife. This view is entirely contrary to the view taken in the case of
Chand Dhawan1.

24. The Bombay High Court, in the case of Leelabai3, dealt with the reference made to the Full
Bench of the three Hon’ble Judges. The issue referred to Full Bench was the same one we are dealing
with. The Full Bench of the Bombay High Court relied upon the decision in the case of Yamunabai6.
In paragraph 18 of the judgment, the Full Bench has coined the term “illegitimate wife”. Calling the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/138104701/

10

Sukhdev Singh vs Sukhbir Kaur on 12 February, 2025

wife of a marriage declared as void as an illegitimate wife is very inappropriate. It affects the dignity
of the concerned woman. Unfortunately, the Bombay High Court went to the extent of using the
words “illegitimate wife”. Shockingly, in paragraph 24, the High Court described such a wife as a
“faithful mistress”. It is pertinent to note that the High Court has not AIR 1999 AP 19 (2003) 1 HLR
100 : 2002 SCC OnLine P&H 498 used similar adjectives in the case of husbands of void marriages.
Under Section 21 of the Constitution of India, every person has a fundamental right to lead a
dignified life. Calling a woman an “illegitimate wife” or “faithful mistress” will amount to a violation
of the fundamental rights of that woman under Article 21 of the Constitution of India. Describing a
woman by using these words is against the ethos and ideals of our Constitution. No one can use such
adjectives while referring to a woman who is a party to a void marriage. Unfortunately, we find that
such objectionable language is used in a judgment of the Full Bench of a High Court. The use of such
words is misogynistic. The law laid by the Full Bench of the Bombay High Court is obviously not
correct.

25. Then comes the decision in the case of Savitaben Somabhai Bhatiya v. State of Gujarat & Ors7.
We must note here that in this decision, this Court was dealing with the proceedings under Section
125 of the CrPC which is of a summary nature. This Court dealt with the eligibility of a spouse to
claim maintenance under Section 125 of the CrPC. Therefore, none of these decisions support the
stand taken by the appellant-husband.

26. An apprehension is the expression by the learned counsel for the appellant that if it is held that
Section 25 of the 1955 Act also applies to void marriages, it will lead to a ridiculous result. He gave
an example of a wife whose first marriage is subsisting, inducing another man to marry her. He also
gave an example of a daughter getting married to her father. We must note that Sub-Section 1 of
Section 25 uses the word “may". A grant of a decree under Section 25 of the 1955 Act is
discretionary. If the conduct of the spouse who applies for maintenance is such that the said spouse
is not entitled to discretionary relief, the Court can always turn down the prayer for the grant of
permanent (2005) 3 SCC 636 alimony under Section 25 of the 1955 Act. Equitable considerations do
apply when the Court considers the prayer for maintenance under Section 25. The reason is that
Section 25 lays down that while considering the prayer for granting relief under Section 25, the
conduct of the parties must be considered.

OUR VIEW ON THE QUESTION (ii)

27. Section 24 confers a power on a matrimonial Court to grant interim maintenance in pending
proceedings seeking a decree contemplated under the 1955 Act. The power is to be exercised
pending the proceedings for a grant of a decree under Sections 9 to 13 of the 1955 Act. The
conditions for applicability of Section 24 are:

(i) There must be a proceeding under the 1955 Act pending and

(ii) the court must come to a conclusion that either the wife or the husband, as the
case may be, has no independent income sufficient for her or his support and the
necessary expenses of the proceeding.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/138104701/

11

Sukhdev Singh vs Sukhbir Kaur on 12 February, 2025

26. Even if, prima facie, the matrimonial court finds the marriage between the parties is void or
voidable, the court is not precluded from granting maintenance pendente lite provided the
conditions mentioned above are satisfied. The grant of relief under Section 24 is discretionary as the
Section uses the word ‘may’. While deciding the prayer for interim relief under Section 24, the Court
will always consider the conduct of the party seeking the relief. It provides for issuing a direction to
pay a reasonable amount.

28. Accordingly, we answer the questions as follows:

a. A spouse whose marriage has been declared void under Section 11 of the 1955 Act is
entitled to seek permanent alimony or maintenance from the other spouse by
invoking Section 25 of the 1955 Act. Whether such a relief of permanent alimony can
be granted or not always depends on the facts of each case and the conduct of the
parties. The grant of relief under Section 25 is always discretionary; and b. Even if a
court comes to a prima facie conclusion that the marriage between the parties is void
or voidable, pending the final disposal of the proceeding under the 1955 Act, the
court is not precluded from granting maintenance pendente lite provided the
conditions mentioned in Section 24 are satisfied. While deciding the prayer for
interim relief under Section 24, the Court will always take into consideration the
conduct of the party seeking the relief, as the grant of relief under Section 24 is
always discretionary.

We direct the Registry to place these appeals before the appropriate Bench for the
decision on merits.

..………......………………….J. (Abhay S Oka) .……….....…………………...J. (Ahsanuddin
Amanullah) .………….…………………...J. (Augustine George Masih) New Delhi;

February 12, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/138104701/

12

