Suneeti Toteja vs State Of U.P on 25 February, 2025

Suneeti Toteja vs State Of U.P on 25 February, 2025

2025 INSC 267
                                                                                REPORTABLE
                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                   CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.                           OF 2025
                             (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.6898 of 2023)

                   SUNEETI TOTEJA                                             APPELLANT

                                        VERSUS

                   STATE OF U.P. & ANOTHER                                    RESPONDENTS

                                                 JUDGMENT

NAGARATHNA, J.

Leave granted.

2. The present Criminal Appeal arises out of the order dated 16.11.2022 passed by the High Court of
Judicature at Allahabad, Lucknow Bench, in Application u/s 482 No.8057/2022, wherein the High
Court has dismissed the petition filed by the appellant herein for quashing of the summoning order
dated 12.07.2022 and the chargesheet No.01/2022 dated 02.07.2022.

3. The appellant herein is stated to be an employee of the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS). Briefly
stated, the facts giving rise to the present case are that Dr. Manisha Narayan, the respondent No.2
herein (hereinafter referred to as “complainant”) had filed FIR No.610/2018 dated 30.10.2018 at the
Aliganj Police Station, District Lucknow. It was stated in the said FIR that during her tenure with
the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (hereinafter “FSSAI” or “authority”) in New Delhi
in the capacity of an Associate Director, she was sexually harassed on multiple occasions by Dr. S.S.
Ghonkrorkta, the Enforcement Director therein. Being aggrieved, she disclosed the same to her
mother who then filed a complaint before the FSSAI for action to be taken under the provisions of
the Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013
(hereinafter “POSH Act”). An Internal Complaints Committee (ICC) was constituted to investigate
the allegations of the complainant and the enquiry was referred to the ICC on 04.12.2014. The
enquiry report of the ICC was submitted to the Chief Executive Officer of FSSAI on 22.06.2015,
which found Dr. S.S. Ghonkrorkta to be guilty of the offences charged against him and thereby it
was recommended to the Authority to register an FIR against him for offences under Sections 354,
509, 192, 197, 204, 218, 202 and 120B of Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter “IPC”), apart from
taking appropriate disciplinary action against the other officers involved in the misconduct.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72973793/

1

Suneeti Toteja vs State Of U.P on 25 February, 2025

4. However, as per the complainant, since the Authority did not take any action against the persons
involved in the offence and misconduct, she was compelled to file FIR No.610 of 2018 dated
30.10.2018, in respect of offences punishable under Sections 354, 509, 120B, 192, 197, 204, 218,
202, 468, 471 and 506 of IPC, against Dr. S.S. Ghonkrorkta and Mr. Sunil Kumar Bhadoria. It is
pertinent to note that the appellant herein was neither part of the ICC proceedings, nor named in
the FIR. Her name surfaced during the statement given by the complainant under Section 164 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure (hereinafter “CrPC”) on 14.10.2020.

5. Meanwhile, Dr. S.S. Ghonkrorkta challenged the investigation report of the ICC before the Central
Administrative Tribunal, New Delhi (hereinafter “the Tribunal” for short) by filing O.A. No.1505 of
2016, and vide order dated 16.09.2016, the Tribunal directed the respondents therein not to act on
the report of the ICC. In the said case before the Tribunal, the complainant was arrayed as
respondent No. 6 and the FSSAI was represented by its officials who were arrayed as respondent
Nos.3 and 7. The appellant was posted on deputation during the period from 27.04.2016 to
25.07.2019 at the FSSAI, New Delhi. On 12.05.2016, the appellant herein was appointed as the
Presiding Officer (PO) of the ICC. In her capacity as the PO of the ICC, she filed a short counter
affidavit dated 16.01.2017 on behalf of respondent Nos.3, 6 and 7 therein before the Tribunal. In the
said affidavit, the appellant largely defended the findings of the enquiry report submitted by the
ICC. However, the complainant later asserted that she had not authorized the appellant to file the
counter affidavit on her behalf and that the said counter affidavit was filed without her knowledge
and consent. In response, the FSSAI, represented by the respondent Nos.3 and 7 therein, filed a
Misc. Application No.1658 of 2017 before the Tribunal, seeking the amendment of the counter
affidavit filed by them in O.A. No.1505 of 2016, since the complainant was willing to represent
herself independently in the case. Subsequently, the appellant was repatriated to her parent
Department BIS on 25.07.2019.

6. In the interregnum, the FIR had already been filed by the complainant on 30.10.2018, though it
did not name the appellant as an accused person. On 16.06.2020, the statement of the complainant
under Section 161 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, (for short “CrPC”) was recorded but the
appellant was not named therein as well. Thereafter, on 14.10.2020, the statement of the
complainant was recorded under Section 164 of the CrPC and it is here that the allegations against
the appellant were brought out. These allegations primarily pertained to the counter affidavit filed
by the appellant herein before the Tribunal. It was alleged that the appellant was representing the
complainant before the Tribunal without her knowledge and consent and that the appellant had
wrongfully submitted the affidavit before Tribunal to the effect that the complainant had authorized
the appellant to represent her in those proceedings.

7. It was further alleged by the complainant that she was transferred from Delhi to Chennai during
the pendency of the proceedings before the Tribunal, and when she gave a representation to cancel
her transfer, the appellant threatened her by saying that if she does not want to go to Chennai, then
she can take a study leave and quit the place, or else, she would be harassed. The appellant was also
allegedly involved in threatening and pressurising the complainant to withdraw the case.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72973793/

2

Suneeti Toteja vs State Of U.P on 25 February, 2025

8. In pursuance of these allegations, the chargesheet No.1 dated 02.07.2022 was filed in the matter
and the appellant herein was arrayed as accused No. 4 thereunder. The chargesheet stated that the
sanction for the prosecution of accused No.4 and others was sought under Section 197 of the CrPC,
but since the sanction was not granted within the stipulated time period, the sanction for
prosecution was deemed to have been received and therefore the chargesheet was filed against the
accused persons for the offences punishable under Sections 509, 120B, 192, 354A, 506, 202, 218,
204 and 197 of the IPC. The Special Chief Judicial Magistrate, Lucknow, vide order dated
06.10.2022, took cognizance of the chargesheet and offences stated thereunder and issued
summons against the accused persons.

9. Being aggrieved, the appellant and two other co-accused persons filed a petition under Section
482 of the CrPC before the High Court, seeking quashing of the chargesheet No.1 dated 02.07.2022
and the summoning order dated 06.10.2022 passed by the Special Chief Judicial Magistrate,
Lucknow. However, by the impugned order dated 16.11.2022 passed by the High Court of Judicature
at Allahabad, Lucknow Bench in Application u/s 482 No.8057/2022, the prayer of the appellant for
the quashing of the chargesheet and the summoning order was dismissed. The High Court however
reserved liberty to the appellant to approach the Magistrate in accordance with law and directed the
trial court to release the appellant on bail.

10. It is this order of the High Court which has now been assailed by the appellant before this Court
through the present Criminal Appeal.

11. We have heard learned senior counsel Ms. Rebecca John, appearing for the appellant herein;
learned counsel appearing for the respondent-State; and learned counsel, Mr. Prashant Bhushan,
appearing for complainant.

12. Learned senior counsel for the appellant has submitted that the High Court was not correct in
refusing to quash the chargesheet and the summoning order with respect to the appellant, having
regard to the facts and circumstances of the case. It was submitted that the appellant is a
government servant who had acted in the course of her official duties and therefore, cognizance
could not have been taken against the offences alleged against her in the absence of a valid sanction
for prosecution granted by the concerned authority. That the competent authority to grant sanction
for prosecution of the appellant herein is the BIS. However, the Investigating Officer failed to send
the letter seeking sanction directly to the BIS and had sent it to FSSAI on 02.12.2021, as a result of
which the letter was received by the BIS only on 29.07.2022, which was way beyond the stipulated
period of four months for granting sanction.

13. The learned senior counsel drew our attention to the letter Ref. No.HRD/7:062545 dated
22.09.2022 sent by BIS to the Additional Chief Secretary, Department of Home, UP Police
Division/4, Lucknow. In the said letter, the BIS had prima facie found the appellant to have not
been involved in the aforesaid crime, but the BIS sought the copy of the FIR and other relevant
documents to take an appropriate decision in the matter of grant of sanction for prosecution with
respect to the appellant. It is further submitted that after perusal of the relevant FIR and
chargesheet, BIS had sent another letter dated 14.11.2022, wherein BIS found that the appellant was

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72973793/

3

Suneeti Toteja vs State Of U.P on 25 February, 2025

in no way related to the allegations made in the chargesheet and thus it was not a fit case for grant of
sanction for prosecution. Therefore, BIS had categorically denied the sanction for prosecution of the
appellant in the said case vide its letter dated 14.11.2022.

14. Per contra, the learned counsel for the respondent-State have filed their counter affidavit,
wherein they have defended the action of taking cognizance against the appellant and have sought
the dismissal of this criminal appeal. It was contended that the Investigating Officer had sought the
sanction for prosecution, but upon not receiving the sanction, the Investigating Officer had sought a
legal opinion and on the basis of the same, the officer had proceeded to file the chargesheet against
the appellant. Reliance has been placed by the counsel on the judgment of this Court in Vineet
Narain vs. Union of India, AIR 1998 SC 889 [“Vineet Narain”], to contend that the time limit of
three months for grant of sanction for prosecution has to be strictly adhered to and therefore, in
light of the fact that no sanction was granted by the competent authority within the stipulated time
period, the State was correct in proceeding on the basis of deemed sanction. Therefore, it is
submitted that enough material was available on record to proceed against the appellant, and once
the cognizance has been taken and the trial has commenced, it is not open for the proceedings to be
quashed on the ground of refusal of sanction for prosecution.

15. Learned counsel, Sri Prashant Bhushan, has supported the impugned order and has also sought
the dismissal of the present criminal appeal, since the trial court and the High Court have already
taken the argument of sanction for prosecution into consideration. It was submitted that the
appellant has concealed material facts before this Court, including the fact that the appellant and the
other co-accused have filed applications before the trial court for seeking discharge in the matter.
That the appellant has annexed only the summoning order of the trial court to give an impression
that the trial court had mechanically issued summons to the accused and not applied its mind, but
in fact the trial court had also filed a separate detailed order dated 12.07.2022 while issuing process
in the matter. It was also submitted that the appellant not only filed an affidavit before the Tribunal
without the knowledge and consent of the complainant, but had also committed perjury by trying to
protect the other accused persons of the Authority. That there has been dereliction of duty by the
appellant insofar as the appellant in her capacity as the presiding officer of the ICC was duty-bound
to keep the complainant informed about the proceedings in the case and to proceed in furtherance
of the findings of the ICC in its investigation report.

16. With respect to the contention that the complainant did not name the appellant in the FIR and
the statement under Section 161 of the CrPC is concerned, learned counsel has submitted that the
police had initially refused to file the FIR against the appellant herein since her name was not
mentioned in the ICC report and later during the stage of recording of her statement under Section
161 of the CrPC, the police forced the complainant to restrict her statement to the accused
mentioned in the FIR. Thus, it was only later when statement was recorded by the Magistrate under
Section 164 of the CrPC that the complainant felt it was safe to explain her stance with respect to the
appellant herein.

17. Learned counsel for the complainant has reiterated the argument with respect to deemed
sanction upon which the prosecution against the appellant was proceeded with and has submitted

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72973793/

4

Suneeti Toteja vs State Of U.P on 25 February, 2025

that the letter of BIS which expressly refused to grant sanction was issued beyond the stipulated
period for granting sanction and therefore it does not amount to a denial of sanction for
prosecution. Learned counsel has placed reliance on the judgment of this Court in Subramanian
Swamy vs. Manmohan Singh, (2012) 3 SCC 64 [“Subramanian Swamy”], to contend that if no
decision is taken by the sanctioning authority, then at the end of the extended time limit, sanction
will be deemed to have been granted to the proposal for prosecution. It was further submitted that
the issue of sanction may be raised by the appellant either at the stage of cognizance or at any
subsequent stage of the trial, so as to contend that since the cognizance has now been taken in the
matter, the plea of sanction for prosecution may be taken by the appellant before the trial court
when they appear in compliance with the summons or at the stage of discharge. Thus, there is no
occasion to examine the issue of sanction for prosecution during the exercise of the powers under
Section 482 of the CrPC.

18. We have considered the material on record and the extensive submissions advanced at the Bar.
The short issue for consideration before this Court is, whether, in light of the facts and
circumstances of this case and the position of law apropos to the sanction for prosecution, the High
Court ought to have exercised its powers under Section 482 of the CrPC to quash the chargesheet
and the summoning with respect to the appellant herein.

19. The appellant herein is a permanent employee of BIS since 06.09.1999. She was holding the post
of Scientist E/Director & Head (FAD) in BIS. On 27.04.2016, she was relieved from BIS to take up
her assignment as the Director at FSSAI on deputation basis. She was relieved on 25.07.2019 from
the FSSAI and thereafter, she reported at BIS. Therefore, the appellant was at FSSAI from
27.04.2016 to 25.07.2019. During this tenure, the appellant took over the position of Presiding
Officer of ICC after the erstwhile presiding officer was repatriated to BIS, Ministry of Health on
completion of her tenure in April 2016. The allegations of sexual harassment levelled by
complainant date back to the year 2012. The enquiry under the provisions of the POSH Act took
place during the year 2014-15 and the final enquiry report of the ICC was submitted on 22.06.2015
to the Chief Execution Officer of the Authority. Therefore, it is clear that the appellant was not in the
picture or involved in the dispute till the submission of the enquiry report of the ICC in June 2015.

20. The report of the ICC was assailed by the accused Dr. S.S. Ghonkrokta before the Tribunal by
filing of O.A. No.1505 of 2016 on 16.03.2016. The appellant joined FSSAI, Delhi on 27.04.2016, after
a month of filing of this Original Application before the Tribunal. In the subsequent month, she was
appointed as the Presiding Officer of ICC. It is for the period thereafter, to which the allegations of
the complainant pertain to.

21. The complainant in the present case has alleged that the appellant filed a counter affidavit before
the Tribunal on her behalf, without the consent or knowledge of the complainant. The perusal of the
said counter affidavit shows that the appellant had detailed the events that unfolded in the Authority
from the time the sexual harassment complaint was filed by the complainant and till the completion
of the enquiry by the ICC. The counter affidavit reproduces the conclusions and recommendations of
the ICC and has therefore sought dismissal of the Original Application filed by Dr. S.S. Ghonkrokta.
Thus, the said counter affidavit does not reveal any aspersions made by the appellant or the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72973793/

5

Suneeti Toteja vs State Of U.P on 25 February, 2025

Authority against the complainant, or any averment to defend the actions of the accused Dr. S.S.
Ghonkrokta. The counter affidavit has been filed by the appellant in her official capacity as the
Director, FSSAI and the Presiding Officer, ICC.

22. Be that as it may. The appellant respected the desire of the complainant to represent her case
independently and therefore filed M.A. No.1658 of 2017 before the Tribunal, seeking to amend the
counter affidavit filed earlier. Thus, there is no criminal intent on the part of the appellant to cheat
the complainant or wrongfully represent her in the proceedings before the Tribunal. Further, the
question is whether, the actions of the appellant were during the course of her official duties only
requiring sanction for prosecution.

23. Now coming to the contentious issue of sanction for prosecution arising in the present case, the
test to decide whether sanction is necessary in a particular case is, whether, the act is totally
unconnected with the official duty or whether, there is a reasonable connection with the official
duty. In the present case, the letter requesting sanction for prosecution was sent to FSSAI, Delhi by
the Additional Chief Secretary, Department of Home (Police), Government of UP, but the same was
not sent to BIS, even though at that time, the appellant had gone back to BIS from her deputation at
FSSAI. The letter seeking sanction for prosecution is said to have been received by BIS only on
29.07.2022. By that time, the chargesheet had already been filed and the summoning order was
issued by the Magistrate. Thereafter, BIS sought for further documents, including the FIR, and upon
furnishing of the FIR and the chargesheet, BIS denied the sanction for prosecution of the appellant
vide its letter dated 14.11.2022. This issue of sanction was decided by BIS within the stipulated
period of four months. The relevant paragraph of the letter dated 14.11.2022 reads as under:

“2. To examine the matter, the related documents i.e. the report of Internal
Complaints Committee (ICC) and the copy of FIR was sought from FSSAI vide BIS
letter dated 25 Aug 2022 and 22 Sep 2022 respectively. On perusal of the records
received, the following facts are observed:

i. The alleged offence (based on the complaint filed by Dr. Manisha Narayan against
Dr. S. S. Ghonkrokta) took place during the period May 2012 to December 2012 and
the ICC submitted its report in June 2015.

ii. Smt. Suneeti Toteja Scientist-E was relieved on 27 April 2016 (FN) from BIS to
lake up her assignment on deputation as Director in FSSAl, long after the occurrence
of the alleged incident and submission of the report by the ICC. She was relieved
from FSSAl on 25 July 2019 and reported back to BIS on 26 July 2019.

iii. Dr S.S. Ghonkrokta had filed a case in CAT (O.A. No. 1505 of 2016) for setting
aside the constitution of ICC. its proceedings and findings. Smt. Suneeti Toteja had
signed the counter affidavit (to dismiss the referred OA) in this ease in her official
capacity' as the presiding officer of the ICC. alter the erstwhile presiding officer Dr.
Sandhya Kalra was repatriated to the Ministry of Health on completion of her tenure
in April 2016.”

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72973793/

6

Suneeti Toteja vs State Of U.P on 25 February, 2025

24. The question therefore is whether the sanction was necessary in the present case
for the prosecution of the appellant, or whether the Magistrate was correct in taking
cognizance against the appellant without there being any sanction.

25. For the sake of convenience, the provisions of Section 197 CrPC are reproduced
hereinunder:

“197. Prosecution of Judges and public servants.—(1) When any person who is or was
a Judge or Magistrate or a public servant not removable from his office save by or
with the sanction of the Government is accused of any offence alleged to have been
committed by him while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official
duty, no Court shall take cognizance of such offence except with the previous sanction
save as otherwise provided in the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013—

(a) in the case of a person who is employed or, as the case may be, was at the time of
commission of the alleged offence employed, in connection with the affairs of the
Union, of the Central Government;

(b) in the case of a person who is employed or, as the case may be, was at the time of
commission of the alleged offence employed, in connection with the affairs of a State,
of the State Government:

Provided that where the alleged offence was committed by a person referred to in
clause (b) during the period while a Proclamation issued under clause (1) of article
356 of the Constitution was in force in a State, clause (b) will apply as if for the
expression “State Government” occurring therein, the expression “Central
Government” were substituted.

Explanation.—For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that no sanction shall
be required in case of a public servant accused of any offence alleged to have been
committed under section 166A, section 166B, section 354, section 354A, section
354B, section 354C, section 354D, section 370, section 375, section 376A, section
376AB, section 376C, section 376D, section 376DA, section 376DB or section 509 of
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).

(2) No Court shall take cognizance of any offence alleged to have been committed by
any member of the Armed Forces of the Union while acting or purporting to act in the
discharge of his official duty, except with the previous sanction of the Central
Government.

(3) The State Government may, by notification, direct that the provisions of
sub-section (2) shall apply to such class or category of the members of the Forces
charged with the maintenance of public order as may be specified therein, wherever
they may be serving, and thereupon the provisions of that sub-

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72973793/

7

Suneeti Toteja vs State Of U.P on 25 February, 2025

section will apply as if for the expression “Central Government” occurring therein, the expression
“State Government” were substituted.

(3A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-

section (3), no court shall take cognizance of any offence, alleged to have been committed by any
member of the Forces charged with the maintenance of public order in a State while acting or
purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty during the period while a Proclamation issued
under clause (1) of article 356 of the Constitution was in force therein, except with the previous
sanction of the Central Government.

(3B) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Code or any other law, it is hereby
declared that any sanction accorded by the State Government or any cognizance taken by a court
upon such sanction, during the period commencing on the 20th day of August, 1991 and ending with
the date immediately preceding the date on which the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment)
Act, 1991 (43 of 1991), receives the assent of the President, with respect to an offence alleged to have
been committed during the period while a Proclamation issued under clause (1) of article 356 of the
Constitution was in force in the State, shall be invalid and it shall be competent for the Central
Government in such matter to accord sanction and for the court to take cognizance thereon.

(4) The Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, may determine the
person by whom, the manner in which, and the offence or offences for which, the prosecution of
such Judge, Magistrate or public servant is to be conducted, and may specify the Court before which
the trial is to be held.”

26. The object and purpose of the aforesaid provision was recently reiterated by this Court in the
case of Gurmeet Kaur vs. Devender Gupta, 2024 SCC OnLine SC 3761, which reads as follows:

“22. … the object and purpose of the said provision is to protect officers and officials
of the State from unjustified criminal prosecution while they discharge their duties
within the scope and ambit of their powers entrusted to them. A reading of Section
197 of the CrPC would indicate that there is a bar for a Court to take cognizance of
such offences which are mentioned in the said provision except with the previous
sanction of the appropriate government when the allegations are made against, inter
alia, a public servant. There is no doubt that in the instant case the appellant herein
was a public servant but the question is, whether, while discharging her duty as a
public servant on the relevant date, there was any excess in the discharge of the said
duty which did not require the first respondent herein to take a prior sanction for
prosecuting the appellant herein. In this regard, the salient words which are relevant
under sub- section (1) of Section 197 are “is accused of any offence alleged to have
been committed by him while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his
official duty, no Court shall take cognizance of such offence except with the previous
sanction”. Therefore, for the purpose of application of Section 197, a sine qua non is
that the public servant is accused of any offence which had been committed by him in

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72973793/

8

Suneeti Toteja vs State Of U.P on 25 February, 2025

“discharge of his official duty”. The said expression would clearly indicate that
Section 197 of the CrPC would not apply to a case if a public servant is accused of any
offence which is de hors or not connected to the discharge of his or her official duty.
However, there are a line of judgments which have considered this expression in two
different ways which we shall now advert to.”

27. In Amod Kumar Kanth vs. Association of Victim of Uphaar Tragedy, 2023 SCC Online SC 578
disposed of by a three-Judge Bench of this Court on 20.04.2023, of which one of us (Nagarathna, J.)
was a member, it was observed that the question of cognizance being taken in the absence of
sanction and thereby Section 197 of the CrPC being flouted is not to be conflated and thereby
confused with the question as to whether an offence has been committed. The salutary purpose
behind Section 197 of the CrPC is protection being accorded to public servants. In paragraphs 28, 29
and 31, it was observed as under:

“(28) The State functions through its officers. Functions of the State may be
sovereign or not sovereign. But each of the functions performed by every public
servant is intended to achieve public good. It may come with discretion. The exercise
of the power cannot be divorced from the context in which and the time at which the
power is exercised or if it is a case of an omission, when the omission takes place.

(29) The most important question which must be posed and answered by the Court
when dealing with the argument that sanction is not forthcoming is whether the
officer was acting in the exercise of his official duties.

It goes further. Even an officer who acts in the purported exercise of his official power is given the
protection under Section 197 of the Cr.P.C. This is for good reason that the officer when he exercises
the power can go about exercising the same fearlessly no doubt with bona fides as public
functionaries can act only bona fide. In fact, the requirement of the action being bona fide is not
expressly stated in Section 197 of the Cr.P.C., though it is found in many other statutes protecting
public servants from action, civil and criminal against them.

x x x x (31) One ground which has found favour with the High Court against the appellant is that the
appellant, according to the High Court, could raise the issue before the Magistrate.

(32) Here we may notice one aspect. When the question arises as to whether an act or omission
which constitutes an offence in law has been done in the discharge of official functions by a public
servant and the matter is under a mist and it is not clear whether the act is traceable to the discharge
of his official functions, the Court may in a given case tarry and allow the proceedings to go on.
Materials will be placed before the Court which will make the position clear and a delayed decision
on the question may be justified. However, in a case where the act or the omission is indisputably
traceable to the discharge of the official duty by the public servant, then for the Court to not accept
the objection against cognizance being taken would clearly defeat the salutary purpose which
underlies Section 197 of the Cr.P.C. It all depends on the facts and therefore, would have to be
decided on a case-to-case basis.” It was concluded that learned Magistrate had erred in the facts of

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72973793/

9

Suneeti Toteja vs State Of U.P on 25 February, 2025

the said case in taking cognizance against the appellant therein contrary to the mandate of Section
197 of the CrPC and on that short ground alone, the appeal was allowed and the proceedings
challenged in Section 482 CrPC were quashed. However, it was observed that the same would not
stand in the way of the competent authority taking a decision in the matter and/or granting sanction
for prosecuting the appellant therein in accordance with law.

28. In another case titled Amrik Singh vs The State of PEPSU, AIR 1955 SC 309, this Court
explained the scope of Section 197 of CrPC as follows:

“8. … It is not every offence committed by a public servant that requires sanction for
prosecution under section 197(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure; nor even every
act done by him while he is actually engaged in the performance of his official duties;
but if the act complained of is directly concerned with his official duties so that, if
questioned, it could be claimed to have been done by virtue of the office, then
sanction would be necessary; and that would be so, irrespective of whether it was, in
fact, a proper discharge of his duties, because that would really be a matter of defence
on the merits, which would have to be investigated at the trial, and could not arise at
the stage of the grant of sanction, which must precede the institution of the
prosecution.” The Court thereunder further concluded that:

“12 … The result then is that whether sanction is necessary to prosecute a public
servant on a charge of criminal misappropriation, will depend on whether the acts
complained of hinge on his duties as a public servant. If they do, then sanction is
requisite. But if they are unconnected with such duties, then no sanction is
necessary.”

29. As per the aforementioned proposition, it is only to be seen if the accused public servant was
acting in the performance of his/her official duties, and if the answer is in the affirmative, then prior
sanction for their prosecution is a condition precedent to the cognizance of the cases against them
by the courts. It is therefore largely a disputed question of fact here and not a question of law.
However, this fact of appellant herein acting in her official capacity is not seriously contested by the
respondents herein. In the instant case, the appellant had filed the counter affidavit and interacted
with the complainant in her capacity of a Presiding Officer, ICC. The correctness of the allegations
with regard to the conduct of the appellant need not be ascertained herein by this Court but the fact
that she was acting in her official duty is sufficient to hold that a prior sanction from the department
was in fact necessary before the Magistrate taking cognizance against her. The Magistrate therefore
erred in proceeding to take cognizance against the appellant without the sanction for prosecution
being received from BIS, and since BIS has eventually refused to grant sanction for the prosecution
of the appellant, the prosecution against the appellant could not have been sustained.

30. The argument advanced by the respondent-State and the complainant with respect to “deemed
sanction” is also not tenable. Section 197 of CrPC does not envisage a concept of deemed sanction.
The chargesheet, as well as the counter affidavit of the respondent-State, have relied upon the
judgment of this Court in Vineet Narain to contend that lack of grant of sanction by the concerned

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72973793/

10

Suneeti Toteja vs State Of U.P on 25 February, 2025

authority within relevant time would amount to deemed sanction for prosecution. However, a
perusal of the said judgment reveals that it did not deal with Section 197 CrPC and rather it dealt
with the investigation powers and procedures of Central Bureau of Investigation and Central
Vigilance Commission. While it did mention that the time limits for grant of sanction for
prosecution must be strictly adhered to, there is no observation to the effect that lack of grant of
sanction for prosecution within the time limit would amount to deemed sanction for prosecution.

31. Similarly, learned counsel for the complainant had placed reliance on the judgment of this Court
in Subramanian Swamy to lend credence to the argument of deemed sanction for prosecution.
However, even the said judgment does not in any manner lay down the notion of deemed sanction.
First, the said judgment dealt primarily with the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 and the
sanction for prosecution under that Act. Secondly, G.S. Singhvi, J. while penning his separate but
concurring opinion in the said judgment, had given some guidelines for the consideration of the
Parliament, one of which is to the effect that at the end of the extended period of time limit, if no
decision is taken, sanction will be deemed to have been granted to the proposal for prosecution, and
the prosecuting agency or the private complainant will proceed to file the chargesheet/ complaint in
the court to commence prosecution within fifteen days of the expiry of the aforementioned time
limit. However, such a proposition has not yet been statutorily incorporated by the Parliament and
in such a scenario, this Court cannot read such a mandate into the statute when it does not exist.

32. Therefore, we are of the opinion that the learned Magistrate was not right in taking cognizance
of the offence against the appellant herein without there being a sanction for prosecution granted by
the competent authority. Further, the High Court erred in not considering the fact that the sanction
for prosecution was not granted by the competent authority under Section 197 of the CrPC and
eventually the sanction was expressly denied by the competent authority with respect to the
allegations against the appellant. The necessary sanction not having been granted has vitiated the
very initiation of the criminal proceeding against the appellant herein. Consequently, the
chargesheet, the summoning order and the consequent steps, if any, taken by the trial court
pursuant to the same are liable to be quashed qua the appellant herein and are thus quashed.

The appeal is therefore allowed in the aforesaid terms.

….…………………………………………..J. (B. V. NAGARATHNA) .……………………………………………..J.
(SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA) NEW DELHI;

FEBRUARY 25, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72973793/

11

