Thammaraya vs State Of Karnataka on 22 January, 2025

Thammaraya vs State Of Karnataka on 22 January, 2025

Author: Vikram Nath

Bench: Sanjay Karol, Vikram Nath

2025 INSC 108                                                                     REPORTABLE

                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). 649 OF 2013

             THAMMARAYA AND ANOTHER                                           …APPELLANT(S)

                                       VERSUS

             THE STATE OF KARNATAKA                                           …RESPONDENT(S)

                                                      JUDGMENT

Mehta, J.

1. This appeal takes exception to the common judgment dated 3rd August, 2010 rendered by the
Division Bench of High Court of Karnataka(Circuit Bench, Gulbarga)1 in Criminal Appeal No. 964 of
2006 filed by Manoj @ Manohar2 and Criminal Appeal No. 1157 of 2006 filed by the appellants,
Thammaraya3 and Basappa @ Basavaraj.4

2. The three accused persons, namely, Manoj(A-1), Thammaraya(A-2) and Basappa @
Basavaraj(A-3) were tried by the Reason: 1 Hereinafter, referred to as the ‘High Court’.

2 Hereinafter, referred to as ‘Manoj(A-1)’(since deceased). Hereinafter, referred to as
‘Thammaraya(A-2)’. Hereinafter, referred to as ‘Basappa(A-3)’. learned Fast Track Court-1, Bijapur5
in Sessions Case No. 22 of 2002 for the offence punishable under Section 302 read with Section 34
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.6 They were convicted and sentenced in the following terms: -

 Manoj(A-1)                                i.      Under Section 302 IPC r/w
 (since deceased)                                  Section      34      IPC:    Life
                                                   imprisonment with fine of Rs.
                                                   1000/-.
                                           ii.     Under Section 201 IPC: 7 years
                                                   R.I with a fine of Rs. 1000/-.
 Thammaraya(A-2)                           i.      Under Section 302 IPC r/w

Section      34      IPC:    Life

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100938282/

1

Thammaraya vs State Of Karnataka on 22 January, 2025

                                                   imprisonment with fine of Rs.
                                                   1000/-.
                                           ii.     Under Section 201 IPC: 7 years
                                                   R.I with a fine of Rs. 1000/-.
 Basappa(A-3)                              i.      Under Section 302 IPC r/w

                                                   imprisonment with fine of Rs.
                                                   1000/-.
                                           ii.     Under Section 201 IPC: 7 years
                                                   R.I with a fine of Rs. 1000/-.

Section      34      IPC:    Life

3. The appeal(s) preferred by the accused persons against the judgment of the trial Court came to be
dismissed by the High Court, vide common judgment dated 3rd August, 2010, which is a subject
matter of challenge in this appeal by special leave.

4. Since accused Manoj(A-1) passed away during the pendency of this appeal, Criminal Appeal No.
648 of 2013 filed by him has 5 Hereinafter being referred to as the ‘trial Court’ 6 Hereinafter being
referred to as the ‘IPC’ been dismissed as abated by this Court vide order dated 9th January, 2025.

Brief Facts: -

5. As per the prosecution case, Manoj(A-1) was the nephew of Shrishail, a liquor
merchant. He had developed an immoral and illicit relation with the wife of Shrishail.
As a sequel to this illicit relationship, Manoj(A-1) hatched a plan to eliminate
Shrishail. For this purpose of carrying out the same, he contacted Thammaraya(A-2)
and Basappa(A-3).

6. On 24th August, 2001, Manoj(A-1) took Shrishail in his Indica car bearing No.
MP-09/HB-7769 on the pretext of taking him to see an expert doctor at Sholapur,
Maharashtra. He also instructed Thammaraya(A-2) and Basappa(A-3) to meet them
on the way. All the accused persons thereafter committed murder of Shrishail by
strangulating him with a nylon rope and abandoned the dead body between Konnur
cross to Domnal cross of Bijapur on National Highway No. 13. Before abandoning the
dead body, the clothes worn by the deceased Shrishail were taken off and his
denuded body was thrown in the forest area near Tungabhadra dam at Hospet. The
clothes of deceased Shrishail were thrown away at some different location. Accused
Manoj(A-1) made a pretence of being a victim of dacoity and lodged a complaint7
before the Solapur Police at Bijapur Naka for the offences punishable under Sections
395, 363, 365, 323, 506(2) IPC read with Section 3(25) of the Arms Act, 1959 and
Section 135 of Bombay Police Act, 1951 which came to be registered as Crime No. 165
of 2001 dated 25th August, 2001. It was inter alia alleged in the said complaint that
when he was near Teramail R.T.O Check Post, some unknown persons, with their
faces hidden under a “Burka” and armed with weapons had come in two Maruti vans,

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100938282/

2

Thammaraya vs State Of Karnataka on 22 January, 2025

stopped their car and launched an attack on them. Eventually, the assailants
abducted Shrishail. He also alleged that the unknown persons dragged him out of the
car and pointed a revolver at him, thereby, looting away money from both, accused
Manoj(A-1) and Shrishail. Two of the unknown assailants allegedly also looted the car
driven by accused Manoj(A-1), abandoning him at a distance of one furlong.

7. Accused Manoj(A-1), thereafter, sent the information of Shrishail’s death at the
house of the deceased Shrishail and as a consequence, the wife of the deceased
Shrishail, further communicated it to his friends, who were the members of the Wine
Shop Merchants Association in Bijapur. The friends of the deceased Shrishail
proceeded to Bijapur Naka Police Station, where accused Manoj(A-1) was present.
Thereafter, accused Manoj(A-1) was taken to the Commissioner of Police at Solapur.

8. Looking at the suspicious conduct and the flimsy story concocted by the accused
Manoj(A-1), the police officers started interrogating him. During the course of
interrogation, accused Manoj(A-1) broke down and confessed to have murdered
Shrishail by strangulating him with a nylon rope while he was in the car with the aid
and assistance of co-accused Thammaraya(A-2) and co-accused Basappa(A-3). He
confessed that the dead body of Shrishail was thrown away, after removing his
clothes. G. Kandakumar P. Govindaswamy(PW-1), discovered the dead body of the
deceased at Smayar factory forest area and subsequently, gave the information8 of
the same to Bijapur Rural Police Station.

After the dead body was discovered, an F.I.R.9 was registered against the accused persons for the
offences punishable under Sections 302 and 201 IPC read with Section 34 IPC.

9. The Bijapur police took over the investigation and recovered one gold chain bearing “S” symbol
(MO-8), a chocolate coloured diary (MO-2), a gold ring studded with white stones (MO-9), clothes 8
Exh. P-1 worn by the deceased(MO-4 & 5), one Jambia(MO-1) and one nylon rope(MO-6), which
was used for the commission of the offence. All these recoveries were purportedly made in
furtherance of the disclosure statements given by the accused persons to the Investigating Officer
under Section 27 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872. Charge sheet was filed against the accused
persons for the offences punishable under Sections 302 and 201 IPC read with Section 34 IPC and
the case was committed to the learned Fast Track Court-I, Bijapur(trial Court). Upon committal,
charges were framed against the accused persons who denied the same and claimed to be innocent.
During trial, the prosecution examined 31 witnesses, exhibited 47 documents and 9 material objects
to prove its case.

10. The accused persons were confronted with the circumstances appearing against them in their
statements recorded under Section 313 of Code of Criminal Procedure, 197310. They denied the
prosecution allegations and claimed to be innocent. However, upon conclusion of the trial, the trial
Court proceeded to convict and sentenced all the three accused as noted above.11 10 Hereinafter
being referred to as ‘CrPC’ 11 Refer Para 2 of this judgment.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100938282/

3

Thammaraya vs State Of Karnataka on 22 January, 2025

11. Aggrieved by the conviction and sentence order, the accused persons filed criminal appeals
before the High Court, which came to be dismissed vide a common judgment dated 3rd August,
2010, which is assailed in the present appeal by special leave. Discussion and Conclusion: -

12. We have heard and considered the submissions advanced by learned counsel for the parties and
have been taken through the impugned judgments and the evidence available on record.

13. The entire case of the prosecution hinges on circumstantial evidence. The law with regard to the
appreciation of evidence in a case based purely on circumstantial evidence has been crystallized by
this Court in a plethora of decisions. The locus classicus on this issue is the case of Sharad
Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra12, wherein this Court formulated the five golden
principles(Panchsheel) for cases based on circumstantial evidence, which are as follows:-

“153. A close analysis of this decision would show that the following conditions must
be fulfilled before a case against an accused can be said to be fully established:

(1) the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should be
fully established.

It may be noted here that this Court indicated that the circumstances concerned “must or should”
and not “may be” established. There is not only a grammatical but a legal 12 (1984) 4 SCC 116.

distinction between “may be proved” and “must be or should be proved” as was held by this Court in
Shivaji Sahabrao Bobade v. State of Maharashtra [(1973) 2 SCC 793 : 1973 SCC (Cri) 1033 : 1973 Crl
LJ 1783] where the observations were made:

[SCC para 19, p. 807: SCC (Cri) p. 1047] “Certainly, it is a primary principle that the
accused must be and not merely may be guilty before a court can convict and the
mental distance between ‘may be’ and ‘must be’ is long and divides vague conjectures
from sure conclusions.” (2) the facts so established should be consistent only with the
hypothesis of the guilt of the accused, that is to say, they should not be explainable on
any other hypothesis except that the accused is guilty, (3) the circumstances should
be of a conclusive nature and tendency, (4) they should exclude every possible
hypothesis except the one to be proved, and (5) there must be a chain of evidence so
complete as not to leave any reasonable ground for the conclusion consistent with the
innocence of the accused and must show that in all human probability the act must
have been done by the accused.”

14. It is a well-established principle of criminal jurisprudence that conviction on a
charge of murder may be based purely on circumstantial evidence, provided that such
evidence is deemed credible and trustworthy. In cases involving circumstantial
evidence, it is crucial to ensure that the facts leading to the conclusion of guilt are
fully established and that all the established facts point irrefutably towards the
accused person’s guilt. The chain of incriminating circumstances must be conclusive

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100938282/

4

Thammaraya vs State Of Karnataka on 22 January, 2025

and should exclude any hypothesis other than the guilt of the accused.

15. It is also a fundamental principle that a court can convict an accused only if their
guilt is established beyond reasonable doubt and not merely on the possibility of
guilt. The gap between “may be guilty” and “must be guilty” is significant, separating
uncertain speculations from definitive conclusions. Thus, it is the duty of the
prosecution to elevate its case from the realm of ‘may be true’ to ‘must be true’.13

16. After adverting to the settled principles on cases based on circumstantial
evidence, we shall now discuss the evidence in the present case. There is no dispute
that the cause of death of Shrishail was homicidal inasmuch as Ravi Basavaraj Akki,
the Medical Officer(PW-13) gave a categoric opinion in his testimony, stating that the
death of Shrishail was caused by asphyxia resulting from strangulation.

17. The case as against accused Manoj(A-1) was based on three incriminating
circumstances i.e., ‘motive’, ‘last seen’ and ‘recoveries’.

18. So far as the surviving accused persons, Thammaraya(A-2) and Basappa(A-3) are
concerned, we find that the only piece of

13 Shivaji Sahabrao Bobade v. State of Maharashtra, (1973) 2 SCC 793. circumstantial evidence
available on record against them is that of ‘recoveries’. As per the prosecution, accused
Thammaraya(A-2) made a disclosure statement leading to the recovery of one gold chain, one
Jambia and a diary, which were all seized in the presence of panch witnesses i.e. Ektarsab Hajisab @
Hayatsab Honnutagi(PW-8) and Srimant, son of Khandu Hakke. Accused Basappa(A-3) also made a
similar disclosure statement, in furtherance whereof, a ring studded with white stones was
recovered. These recovered articles were produced by the prosecution before the trial Court as
material object Nos. 1, 2, 8 and 9. The prosecution claims that these were the ornaments worn by the
deceased Shrishail at the time of the incident.

19. While analyzing the jurisprudence concerning the proving of disclosure statements, this Court
has held in Babu Sahebagouda Rudragoudar and Other v. State of Karnataka14, as follows:

“64. The manner of proving the disclosure statement under Section 27 of the
Evidence Act has been the subject-matter of consideration by this Court in various
judgments, some of which are being referred to below……..

66. Further, in Subramanya v. State of Karnataka (2023) 11 SCC 255 , it was held as
under :

“76. Keeping in mind the aforesaid evidence, we proceed to consider whether the
prosecution has been able to prove and establish the discoveries 14 (2024) 8 SCC 149.

in accordance with law. Section 27 of the Evidence Act reads thus:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100938282/

5

Thammaraya vs State Of Karnataka on 22 January, 2025

‘27. How much of information received from accused may be proved.— Provided that,
when any fact is deposed to as discovered in consequence of information received
from a person accused of any offence, in the custody of a police officer, so much of
such information, whether it amounts to a confession or not, as relates distinctly to
the fact thereby discovered, may be proved.’

77. The first and the basic infirmity in the evidence of all the aforesaid prosecution
witnesses is that none of them have deposed the exact statement said to have been
made by the appellant herein which ultimately led to the discovery of a fact relevant
under Section 27 of the Evidence Act.

78. If, it is say of the investigating officer that the appellant-accused while in custody
on his own free will and volition made a statement that he would lead to the place
where he had hidden the weapon of offence, the site of burial of the dead body,
clothes, etc. then the first thing that the investigating officer should have done was to
call for two independent witnesses at the police station itself. Once the two
independent witnesses would arrive at the police station thereafter in their presence
the accused should be asked to make an appropriate statement as he may desire in
regard to pointing out the place where he is said to have hidden the weapon of
offence, etc. When the accused while in custody makes such statement before the two
independent witnesses (panch witnesses) the exact statement or rather the exact
words uttered by the accused should be incorporated in the first part of the
panchnama that the investigating officer may draw in accordance with law. This first
part of the panchnama for the purpose of Section 27 of the Evidence Act is always
drawn at the police station in the presence of the independent witnesses so as to lend
credence that a particular statement was made by the accused expressing his
willingness on his own free will and volition to point out the place where the weapon
of offence or any other article used in the commission of the offence had been hidden.
Once the first part of the panchnama is completed thereafter the police party along
with the accused and the two independent witnesses (panch witnesses) would
proceed to the particular place as may be led by the accused. If from that particular
place anything like the weapon of offence or bloodstained clothes or any other article
is discovered then that part of the entire process would form the second part of the
panchnama.

This is how the law expects the investigating officer to draw the discovery panchnama as
contemplated under Section 27 of the Evidence Act. If we read the entire oral evidence of the
investigating officer then it is clear that the same is deficient in all the aforesaid relevant aspects of
the matter.” (emphasis supplied)

20. On going through the evidence of Basanagouda, the Investigating Officer(PW-27), who
purportedly recorded the disclosure statements of accused persons Thammaraya(A-2) and
Basappa(A-3), which led to the recovery of the articles allegedly looted from the person of the
deceased Shrishail at the time of the commission of the offence, we find that his testimony is

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100938282/

6

Thammaraya vs State Of Karnataka on 22 January, 2025

woefully lacking on the material aspects required to prove the disclosure statement followed by the
recovery. The relevant extract from the evidence of the Investigating Officer(PW-27) is reproduced
hereinbelow for the sake of ready reference: -

“…On 3.9.2001 I arrested accused Tammaraya Biradar and Basavaraj @ Basappa
Mallappa Hattaraki both resident of Yelagi village, Indi taluka and interrogated them.
They accepted the commission of the murder of the Rudragouda. I recorded their
voluntary statement and also took their finger prints for verification. On the basis of
voluntary statement of Tammaraya Patil, I conducted the recovery panchanama with
the help of panchas. Ek tarsab Hayatsab Honnutagi and Shrimanth s/o Khandu
Hakke. I recovered one gold chain bearing ‘S’ symbol which was of a disco model
weighing of about 8 ½ grams, one chalklate colour diary written in bold letters as
“Sonni telephone Index”, Knife of about 15” long including handle with one side
sharpened. Secondly, I conducted the recovery panchanama with the same panchas
on the basis of voluntary statement given by Basavaraj @ Basappa Hattaraki. I
recovered one white stone ring gold weighing about 8 grams and a diary on which it
was written as “personal memorandam”…..”

21. A cautious appraisal of the above extract from the evidence of the Investigating Officer(PW-27)
would reveal that he did not depose the exact words as narrated by the accused Thammaraya(A-2)
and accused Basappa(A-3) in their disclosure statements. In fact, he even did not care to exhibit the
disclosure statements of which he was the scribe in his deposition. He also did not depose in clear
words that the accused persons had led him to the place mentioned in the disclosure statements and
got the articles recovered. No connection between the accused and the particular articles recovered
is visible from the testimony of the Investigating Officer(PW-27). The Investigating Officer(PW-27)
also failed to exhibit the recovery memorandums. There is no indication in the deposition of the
Investigating Officer(PW-27) that he sealed the recovery articles or got the same subjected to test
identification at the hands of the relatives of the deceased Shrishail.

22. Furthermore, another very crucial missing link in the prosecution case that it failed to conduct
the Test Identification Parade(TIP) of the recovered articles, thereby, bringing the identification of
the material objects in Court for the first time, is under a cloud of doubt. It is a case of sheer
negligence and dereliction of duty on the part of the Investigating Agency and the Public Prosecutor
for not conducting Test Identification Parade(TIP). This Court shed light on the purpose of Test
Identification Parade(TIP) in Ramkishan Mithanlal Sharma v. State of Bombay15, wherein it held as
follows:

“20. … These parades are held by the police in the course of their investigation for the
purpose of enabling witnesses to identify the properties which are the subject-matter
of the offence or to identify the persons who are concerned in the offence. …the
identifying witnesses are explained the purpose of holding these parades and are
asked to identify the properties which are the subject-matter of the offence or the
persons who are concerned in the offence.” (emphasis supplied)

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100938282/

7

Thammaraya vs State Of Karnataka on 22 January, 2025

23. This Court has further noted the significance of Test Identification Parade(TIP) in Munna
Kumar Upadhyay alias 15 (1954) 2 SCC 516 Munna Upadhyaya v. State of Andhra Pradesh through
Public Prosecutor, Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh16, wherein it was held:

“66. There was some delay in holding the identification parade. But the delay per se
cannot be fatal to the validity of holding an identification parade, in all cases, without
exception. The purpose of the identification parade is to provide corroborative
evidence and is more confirmatory in its nature.” ………..

(emphasis supplied)

24. Therefore, this material omission on part of the Investigating Officer(PW-27) in
not conducting a Test Identification Parade(TIP) of the recovered articles, more
particularly when the case of prosecution is based solely upon recoveries of these
articles, has created holes in the fabric of the prosecution story, which are impossible
to mend.

25. Every piece of relevant fact needs to be sewn via the golden thread of duly proved
circumstances, in order to ultimately formulate the fabric of guilt. Sadly, in the
present case, the facta probantia fails to sustain and support the alleged factum
probando, rendering the prosecution’s case miserably weak. Hence, the evidence led
by the prosecution against the accused person is woefully short of the mandate to
prove the case beyond reasonable doubt.

16 (2012) 6 SCC 174.

26. Thus, we have no hesitation in arriving at a conclusion that neither the disclosure statements of
the accused persons were proved as per law, nor the prosecution was able to establish the factum of
recoveries of allegedly looted articles purported to have been made on the behest of the accused
persons by leading proper evidence. No other evidence was led by the prosecution to bring home the
guilt of the accused persons Thammaraya(A-2) and Basappa(A-3).

27. In wake of the above discussion, the chain of circumstantial evidences in the present case cannot
be held to be so complete, so as to lead to the only hypothesis of the guilt of the accused which is
totally inconsistent with their innocence.

28. Resultantly, the conviction of the accused Thammaraya(A-2) and accused Basappa(A-3)
recorded by the trial Court and affirmed by the High Court is unsustainable in the eyes of law. The
impugned judgments do not stand to scrutiny and are hereby quashed and set aside.

29. The appellant Thammaraya(A-2) and appellant Basappa(A-3) are acquitted of the charges. They
are on bail and need not surrender.

30. The appeal is allowed, accordingly.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100938282/

8

31. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.

Thammaraya vs State Of Karnataka on 22 January, 2025

… … … … … … … . … … … . J .   ( V I K R A M   N A T H )   … … … … … … … … … … . J .   ( S A N J A Y   K A R O L )
………………………….J. (SANDEEP MEHTA) New Delhi;

January 22, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100938282/

9

