The Auroville Foundation vs Natasha Storey on 17 March, 2025

The Auroville Foundation vs Natasha Storey on 17 March, 2025

Author: Bela M. Trivedi

Bench: Bela M. Trivedi

2025 INSC 348

                                                                      REPORTABLE

                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 13651 OF 2024

                            THE AUROVILLE FOUNDATION                 .... APPELLANT

                                                         VERSUS

                            NATASHA STOREY                         .... RESPONDENT

                                                   JUDGMENT

BELA M. TRIVEDI, J.

1. The legality and validity of the Judgment and Order dated 15.03.2024 passed by the High Court of
Judicature at Madras in Writ Petition No. 25882 of 2022, allowing the said Writ Petition filed by the
Respondent- Natasha Storey and setting aside the impugned Notification dated 01.06.2022
containing the Standing Order No. 01/2022 issued by the Appellant – Foundation, is under
challenge before this Court by way of instant appeal.

2. Before adverting to issues involved in the Appeal, it would be apposite to peep into the history of
Auroville, and the objects and reasons of enacting the Auroville Foundation Act (hereinafter referred
to as the “A.F. Act”).

3. Prelude on the History of Auroville: -

(I) In 1965, the “Mother” (Mirra Alfassa, a French Lady), a spiritual collaborator of
Sri Aurobindo (a Spiritual reformer, Philosopher and Educationist), envisioned to
launch the project of Auroville, with an aim to establish an international universal
township, where men and women of all countries are able to live in peace and
harmony, above all creeds, all politics and all nationalities and to realise human
unity. The project of Auroville was formerly inaugurated by the “Mother” in

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/58582385/

1

The Auroville Foundation vs Natasha Storey on 17 March, 2025

28.02.1968. The Charter of Auroville given by the “Mother” was the following:

“1. Auroville belongs to nobody in particular. Auroville belongs to humanity as a
whole. But to live in Auroville one must be a willing servitor of the Divine
Consciousness.

2. Auroville will be the place of an unending education, of constant progress and a
youth that never ages.

3. Auroville wants to be the bridge between the past and the future. Taking advantage
of all discoveries from without and from within, Auroville will boldly spring towards
future realisations.

4. Auroville will be a site of material and spiritual researches for a living embodiment
of an actual Human Unity.” (II) The original Master Plan of the Auroville was
conceptualized in Galaxy shape, and was planned to eventually accommodate 50,000
residents, a number which the “Mother” considered sufficient to allow the
experiment in human unity to take on a meaningful and significant dimension.
Picture of Galaxy Model Plan conceptualized in 1968 is shown below:

(III) The project Auroville was legally started as the project of a charitable
organization, “The Sri Aurobindo Society” in Pondicherry, which was created to
diffuse Sri Aurobindo’s thoughts. The development of Auroville in the initial few
years showed good progress and it further developed at a rapid pace. Number of
Indians and foreigners settled down in Auroville and devoted themselves to various
activities showing a remarkable harmony amongst the members of Auroville, which
gave a promise to the Government of India of an early fulfilment of the ideals for
which Auroville was established. It was also encouraged by UNESCO and other
International Organizations of the world.

However, after the “Mother” passed away in 1973, the situation changed, and number of complaints
came to be received by the Government of India with regard to the mismanagement in the working
of the Sri Aurobindo Society. Following the requests by majority of Auroville residents, the
Government of India issued a Presidential Ordinance called the Auroville (Emergency Provisions)
Ordinance, 1980, later replaced by the Auroville (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1980. Finally, the
Government of India created a unique status for Auroville by passing the A.F. Act.

4. The Provisions of A.F. Act: -

(I) The long title of the said A.F. Act of 1988 enacted by the Parliament on
29.09.1988 reads as under:

“THE AUROVILLE FOUNDATION ACT, ACT NO. 54 OF 1988 [29th September,
1988] An Act to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the undertakings of

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/58582385/

2

The Auroville Foundation vs Natasha Storey on 17 March, 2025

Auroville and to vest such undertakings in a foundation established for the purpose
with a view to making long-term arrangements for the better management and
further development of Auroville in accordance with its original charter and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

WHEREAS Auroville was founded by the “Mother” on the 28th day of February, 1968
as an international cultural township;

AND WHEREAS in view of the serious difficulties which had arisen with regard to
the management of Auroville, the management thereof had been vested in the
Central Government for a limited period by the Auroville (Emergency Provisions)
Act, 1980 (59 of 1980);

AND WHEREAS under the management of the Central Government and under the
overall guidance of the International Advisory Council set up under the aforesaid Act,
Auroville had been able to develop during the last eight years along several important
lines and the residents of Auroville have also carried on activities for the development
of Auroville which need further encouragement and consolidation;

AND WHEREAS Auroville was developed as a cultural township with the aid of funds received from
different organisations in and outside India as also from substantial grants received from the
Central and State Governments, and the United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural
Organisation also had, from time to time, reflected in its resolutions that the project on Auroville is
contributing to international understanding and promotion of peace;

AND WHEREAS for the purpose of encouraging, continuing and consolidating the aforesaid
activities of Auroville, it is necessary in the public interest to acquire the undertakings of Auroville
and to vest them in a body corporate established for the purpose; BE it enacted by Parliament in the
Thirty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows: —"

(II) The relevant provisions contained in Chapter-

III, germane for the purpose of deciding the present Appeal are reproduced for ready reference:

“10. Establishment and incorporation of the Foundation. — (1) With effect from such
date as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint in this behalf, there
shall be established for the purpose of this Act, a Foundation, to be called the
Auroville Foundation.

(2) The Foundation shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having
perpetual succession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of
property, both movable and immovable, and to contract and shall by the said name
sue and be sued.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/58582385/

3

The Auroville Foundation vs Natasha Storey on 17 March, 2025

(3) The Foundation shall consist of the following authorities, namely: —

(a) the Governing Board;

(b) the Residents’ Assembly;

(c) the Auroville International Advisory Council

11. Governing Board. — (1) The Governing Board shall consist of the following
members, namely: —

(i) not more than seven members to be nominated by the Central Government from
amongst persons, who have—

(a) rendered valuable service to Auroville;

(b) dedicated themselves to the ideals of life-long education, synthesis of material and spiritual
researches or human unity;

(c) contributed significantly in activities that are being persued or are envisaged to be promoted in
Auroville, including activities relating to environment, afforestation, arts and crafts, industry,
agriculture, humanities, sciences and integral yoga;

(ii) two representatives of the Central Government to be nominated by it.

(2) The Central Government shall nominate a Chairman of the Governing Board from amongst the
members nominated by it under clause (i) of sub- section (1).

(3) The general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs of the Foundation shall
vest in the Governing Board which may exercise all the powers and discharge all the functions which
may be exercised or discharged by the Foundation.

(4) The Governing Board may associate with itself in such manner and for such purposes as may be
prescribed, any persons whose assistance or advice it may desire in complying with any of the
provisions of this Act and a person so associated shall have the right to take part in the discussions
of the Governing Board relevant to the purposes for which he has been associated, but shall not have
the right to vote.

(5) No act or proceeding of the Governing Board or any committee appointed by it under section 16
shall be invalidated merely by reason of, —

(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Governing Board or such committee; or

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/58582385/

4

The Auroville Foundation vs Natasha Storey on 17 March, 2025

(b) any defect in the nomination of a person acting as a member of the Governing Board or such
committee; or

(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Governing Board or such committee not affecting the
merits of the case.

12 to 15…………..

16. Committees of the Governing Board. — (1) The Governing Board may appoint such committees
as may be necessary for the efficient discharge of its duties and performance of its functions under
this Act.

(2) The Governing Board shall have the power to co-opt as members of any committee appointed
under sub-section (1), such number of persons who are not members of the Governing Board as it
may think fit, and the persons so co- opted shall have the right to attend the meetings of the
committee, and take part in the proceedings of the committee, but shall not have the right to vote.

17. Powers and functions of the Governing Board. — The powers and functions of the Governing
Board shall be—

(a) to promote the ideals of Auroville and to coordinate activities and services of Auroville in
consultation with the Residents(cid:134) Assembly for the purposes of cohesion and integration of
Auroville;

(b) to review the basic policies and the programmes of Auroville and give necessary directions for
the future development of Auroville;

(c) to accord approval to the programmes of Auroville drawn up by the Residents(cid:134) Assembly;

(d) to monitor and review the activities of Auroville and to secure proper management of the
properties vested in the Foundation under section 6 and other properties relatable to Auroville;

(e) to prepare a master-plan of Auroville in consultation with the Residents(cid:134) Assembly and to
ensure development of Auroville as so planned;

(f) to authorise and coordinate fund- raising for Auroville and to secure proper arrangements for
receipts and disbursement of funds for Auroville.

18. Residents’ Assembly. — (1) The Residents(cid:134) Assembly shall consist of all the residents of
Auroville who are for the time being entered in the register of residents maintained under this
section.

(2) The Secretary to the Governing Board shall maintain the register of residents in such manner as
may be prescribed and all the persons who are residents of Auroville and who are of the age of

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/58582385/

5

The Auroville Foundation vs Natasha Storey on 17 March, 2025

eighteen years and above are entitled to have their names entered in the register on an application
made to the Secretary in such form as may be prescribed.

(3) All the names of residents, which have been included in the register maintained by the
Administrator appointed under section 5 of the Auroville (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1980 (59 of
1980) immediately before the appointed day, shall be deemed to have been included in the register
maintained under this section.

19. Functions of Residents’ Assembly. (1) The Resident’s Assembly shall perform such functions as
are required by this Act and shall advise the Governing Board in respect of all activities relating to
the residents of Auroville.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the foregoing powers, the Residents(cid:134) Assembly may—

(a) allow the admission or cause the termination of persons in the register of residents in accordance
with the regulations made under section 32;

(b) organise various activities relating to Auroville;

(c) formulate the master plan of Auroville and make necessary recommendations for the recognition
of organisations engaged in activities relatable to Auroville for the approval of the Governing Board;

(d) recommend proposals for raising funds for Auroville for the approval of the Governing Board.

(3) For the purpose of carrying of its functions, the Residents(cid:134) Assembly may establish such
committees as it may consider necessary which shall represent it in relation to the functions to be
performed by the Governing Board.” (III) Section 31 empowers the Central Government to make
rules for carrying out the provisions of the A.F. Act. Accordingly, the Ministry of Human Resource
Development (Department of Education) vide the notification dated 10.11.1997 has framed the rules
called the “Auroville Foundation Rules, 1997 (hereinafter referred to as the said “A.F. Rules”) in
exercise of the powers conferred by Section 31 of the A.F. Act.

Rule 5 of the said Rules states about the Committees of the Foundation, which reads as under: -

“5. Committees (1) The following shall be the Committees of the Foundation, namely
–

(a)………

(b)……..

(c) Such other Committee or committees as may be constituted by the Governing
Board under sub-section (1) of section 16 or by the Residents Assembly under sub-

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/58582385/

6

The Auroville Foundation vs Natasha Storey on 17 March, 2025

section (3) of section 19, as the case may be (2) Subject to the provision of sub- rule (1), the
Governing Board shall determine the composition and functions of every Committee constituted by
it (3) The Residents’ Assembly shall determine the composition and functions of every Committee
constituted by it (4)………..” (IV) Section 32 of the A.F. Act empowers the Governing Board to make
regulations not in consistent with the Act and the Rules made thereunder, for enabling the
Governing Board to discharge its functions under the Act.

5. Constitution of Auroville Foundation and its Standing Orders-

I. The Government of India notified the Constitution of Auroville Foundation as a Statutory body on
29.01.1991 under the A.F. Act. At present it is under the realm of Ministry of Human Resources
Development (Department of Higher Education) as the Central Government Undertaking.

II. As transpiring from the record, the original Galaxy Plan envisioned by the “Mother” in 1968 was
the plan with four zones in Auroville, with the centripetal force, being the “Matrimandir”. The said
Galaxy Plan was revised in 1972 as the First Master Plan called the “Town Plan”. As the A.F. Act
required statutory Master Plan as contemplated in Section 17(e) read with Section 19(2)(c) of the
said A.F. Act, the Master Plan was approved by the Governing Board and the Residents’ Assembly of
the Appellant Foundation in 1999. The said 1999 Master Plan was further approved by the
Competent Authority- the Town and Country Planning Organisation (TCPO), Ministry of Urban
Development, on 15.02.2001 under the Model Town and Country Planning Act. The said Master
Plan was notified on 16.08.2010 and published in the Gazette on 28.08.2010.

III. In view of Section 11(3) of the A.F. Act, the Governing Board decided, that “Standing Orders” not
inconsistent with the provisions of the A.F. Act and the Rules made thereunder, on the matters that
the Governing Board may consider appropriate and necessary, shall be notified from time to time,
by the Auroville Foundation. The said Resolution was notified in the Gazette of India, Part III, dated
05.03.2011 by the Ministry of Human Resources Development (Department of Higher Education).

IV. Since the said approved Master Plan prescribed the “Town Development Council” as the body for
implementing the Master Plan with the organizational structure as in Appendix V of the Master
Plan, the Governing Board in terms of the provisions of the Master Plan, constituted the Town
Development Council for the purpose of implementation of the Master Plan, vide the Standing
Order No.6/2011 dated 01.05.2011, which was notified in the Government of India Gazette, Part III,
dated 11.06.2011. The said Standing Order dated 01.05.2011 came to be replaced by the Standing
Order No.1/2019 dated 04.06.2019. V. Again, the said Standing Order dated 04.06.2019 came to be
replaced by the Standing Order No.1/2022 dated 01.06.2022, which was notified in the Gazette of
India, Part III, on 15.07.2022. On 01.06.2022, the Auroville Foundation issued the Office Order for
the re- constitution of the Auroville Town Development Council (ATDC). The Appellant-Foundation
thereafter also issued a Corrigendum dated 07.12.2022, to the Standing Order No. 1/2022 dated
01.06.2022, in order to clarify and add the source of statutory power in the Preamble to the said
original Standing Order dated 01.06.2022. The said Corrigendum was also published in the Gazette
of India, Part III, on 10.12.2022.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/58582385/

7

6. Series of Litigations: -

The Auroville Foundation vs Natasha Storey on 17 March, 2025

It appears that some disgruntled residents of Auroville, instead of cooperating the
Governing Board of the Foundation in the implementation of the said legally
approved Master Plan and in carrying out the development work of Auroville as per
the said Master Plan envisioned by the “Mother,” started causing obstructions by
filing the Petitions in the High Court of Judicature at Madras one after the other,
dragging the Appellant-Foundation into unnecessary litigations. As transpiring from
the records, the following litigations came to be filed.

(i) A Writ Petition being No.17181/2020 came to be filed by one Mr. M.
Ayyanarappan, challenging some of the clauses of Auroville Master Plan 2010 after
the years of its approval and publication in the Official Gazette. The said petition
came to be dismissed as withdrawn by the Division Bench of the High Court vide the
order dated 15.02.2022.

(ii) Two other petitions being Writ Petition No.18220/2021 and Writ Petition
No.597/2022 came to be filed by the petitioner Mr. A. Suriya, the son of the earlier
petitioner Mr. M. Ayyanarappan, challenging some of the clauses of Auroville Master
Plan, 2010, and for restraining the Appellant-Foundation from implementing the
Auroville Master Plan Perspective 2025. The said two petitions came to be dismissed
as withdrawn by the Division Bench vide the order dated 20.01.2022, granting liberty
to the said petitioner to avail the remedy in accordance with law against the
infraction of his personal interest.

(iii) The said Writ Petitioner, Mr. A. Suriya filed another Writ Petition
No.12378/2022 again challenging some of the clauses of the Auroville Universal
Township Master Plan Perspective 2025. The said Writ Petition came to be dismissed
by the Division Bench by passing a detailed order on 07.06.2022, on the ground of
maintainability and delay of more than 12 years in challenging the Gazette
Notification dated 28.08.2010. It was also observed therein by the Division Bench
inter alia that the Master Plan cannot otherwise be subjected to challenge unless it is
carved out in violation of the Constitutional or Statutory provisions.

(iv) Some other Writ Petitions being No.11738/2022 and others came to be filed by
one Krishna Devanandan and Others in respect of the functioning of the Appellant-

Foundation, particularly on the imposition of restrictions on the Residents’ Assembly for
non-updation of the Register of the Residents. It appears that the said petitions came to be allowed
by the Single Bench vide the order dated 12.08.2022 issuing various directions including the
directions to the Secretary of Auroville Foundation to give wide publicity of its effective
administration for updation of the Register of the Residents Assembly, and further directing the
four statutory bodies of the Foundation not to take any policy decision which would alter the
existing structure and working of the Auroville Foundation, till the Register of the Residents’

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/58582385/

8

The Auroville Foundation vs Natasha Storey on 17 March, 2025

Assembly was updated. The said order passed by the Single Bench having been challenged by the
Appellant-Foundation before the Division Bench, the same was stayed by the Division Bench vide
the orders dated 26.08.2022, in W.A.No.1961-1962/2022. The said interim order was continued till
the disposal of the Appeals on 09.09.2022.

(v) The Respondent herein i.e. Natasha Storey filed the Writ Petition being No. 22895/2022
challenging the office order dated 01.06.2022 bearing no. AF/M/63 issued by the Appellant-
Foundation and seeking direction against the Foundation to appoint the members nominated by the
Residents’ Assembly through its working Council to the ATDC. The said petition came to be
dismissed by the Single Bench vide the order dated 13.10.2022, however the Court directed the
Appellant-Foundation to issue appropriate corrigendum to the impugned office order dated
01.06.2022, tracing the power under which the said order was issued.

The Foundation accordingly issued the Corrigendum dated 07.12.2022 to the Standing Order dated
01.06.2022.

(vi) The Respondent Natasha Storey again filed the Writ Petition being no. 25882/2022 seeking
almost the same relief as sought in the earlier petition, challenging the notification no.
AF/M/63/2022-23 dated 01.06.2022 containing the Standing Order No.1/2022 issued by the
Appellant-Foundation, published in the official gazette on 15.07.2022. The Division Bench vide the
impugned judgment and order dated 15.03.2024 allowed the said Writ Petition and set aside the
said impugned Notification and the Standing Order issued by the Appellant- Foundation.

(vii) This Appeal emanates from the said impugned judgment and order dated 15.03.2024, passed in
the Writ Petition No.25882/2002.

(viii) It may also be noted that the Respondent-

Natasha had also filed an application as an intervenor, in the proceedings being O.A. No.239/2021
filed by one Navroz Kersasp Mody before the National Green Tribunal, Chennai. The Appeals being
C.A.s Nos. 5781- 5782/22 arising out of the orders passed by the NGT in the said proceedings, were
also heard simultaneously by this Court, along with the present Appeal, and are being decided
simultaneously by a separate judgment.

7. ANALYSIS From the above array of litigations, it is explicitly clear that a small group of
disgruntled residents of Auroville, who instead of supporting and cooperating the Governing Body
of Appellant-Foundation, in implementing the approved Master Plan and developing Auroville as
envisioned by the “Mother,” kept themselves busy by filing the litigations one after the other, and
causing obstructions in the smooth implementation of the Master Plan. As narrated hereinabove
one Mr. Suriya and his father filed series of petitions one after the other. They all came to be
dismissed by the High Court. Then the present Respondent-Natasha Storey herself filed Writ
Petition No. 22895 of 2022 seeking almost the same relief as sought in the Writ Petition of the
p r e s e n t   p r o c e e d i n g s ,   c h a l l e n g i n g   t h e   O f f i c e   O r d e r   d a t e d   0 1 . 0 6 . 2 0 2 2   i s s u e d   b y   t h e
Appellant-Foundation. The said earlier Writ Petition having been dismissed by the High Court vide

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/58582385/

9

The Auroville Foundation vs Natasha Storey on 17 March, 2025

the Order dated 13.10.2022, again she filed the Writ Petition No. 25882 of 2022, without disclosing
the fact of her filing of the earlier petition, and the dismissal of the same. The Appellant-Foundation
(who was respondent in the said Writ Petition) had raised specific preliminary objections in its
counter affidavit regarding the maintainability of the petition and regarding the suppression of
material facts by the respondent.

8. However, unfortunately the High Court without dealing with such a serious issue, entertained the
Writ Petition of the respondent.

9. It is no more res integra that the Doctrine of “Clean hands and non-suppression of material facts”
is applicable with full force to every proceedings before any judicial forum. The party invoking
extraordinary jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India must
come with clean hands and disclose all correct and material facts in his Writ Petition. If it is brought
to the notice of the Court that the petition has been guilty of suppression of material and relevant
facts or has not come with clean hands, such conduct must be seriously viewed by the courts as the
abuse of process of law and the petition must be dismissed on that ground alone without entering
into the merits of the matter.

10. As held in S.J.S. Business Enterprises (P) Ltd. Vs. State of Bihar & Ors.1, as a general rule,
suppression of material fact by a litigant disqualifies such litigant from obtaining any relief. This
rule has been evolved out of the need of the Courts to deter a litigant from abusing the process of
court by deceiving it. Similar view has been taken in General Manager, Haryana Roadways Vs. Jai
Bhagwan & Anr.2, in Prestige Lights Ltd. Vs. State Bank of India3 etc.

11. In the instant case, the Respondent-Natasha Storey had challenged the Office Order dated
01.06.2022 by filing the earlier Writ Petition No. 22895 of 2022, and the High Court while
dismissing the same vide its Order dated 13.10.2022 had categorically held, after considering the
various provisions of the A.F. Act, that the activities which are provided under Section 19 of the Act,
to be undertaken by the Residents’ Assembly are only in the nature of supplementing and not
supplanting the main powers and functions vested AIR 2004 SC 2421 (2008) 4 SCC 127 (2007) 8
SCC 449 with the Governing Board under the provisions of the Act, and that the writ petitioner
could not claim that she being a member of the Assembly, the right of the Assembly was getting
affected, or the functions of the Assembly as entrusted through the provisions of the Act were
getting affected. Despite the fact that the said judgment and order passed in Writ Petition No. 22895
of 2022 was not challenged by the respondent any further, and had become final, the second Writ
Petition was filed by her (i.e., Writ Petition no. 25882/2022 in the present proceedings), seeking
substantially the same reliefs without disclosing the said material fact of dismissal of earlier petition.
The non-disclosure of the material facts at the instance of the respondent should have been seriously
viewed by the High Court, as the abuse of the process of court.

12. So far as the merits of the Appeal are concerned, the learned Senior Advocate Mr. R.
Venkatramani for the appellant had strenuously taken the court to the record of the case from which
it appears that the Appellant-Foundation is a Statutory body established under the A.F. Act, and is
under the realm of the Government of India, in the Ministry of Human Resource Development

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/58582385/

10

The Auroville Foundation vs Natasha Storey on 17 March, 2025

(Department of Education).

The said Foundation consists of three authorities i.e.,

(a) The Governing Board (b) The Residents’ Assembly

(c) The Auroville International Advisory Council. As per Section 11(3), the general superintendence,
direction and management of the affairs of the Foundation vest in the Governing Board, which is
empowered to exercise all the powers and discharge all the functions which may be exercised or
discharged by the Foundation. Section 16 of the Act empowers the Governing Board to appoint such
Committees as may be necessary for the efficient discharge of its duties and performance of its
functions under the Act. The powers and functions of the Governing Board are prescribed in Section
17. Clause (e) of Section 17 pertains to the preparation of Master Plan of Auroville in consultation
with the Residents’ Assembly, and to ensure development of Auroville as so planned. Meaning
thereby, as per Section 17(e), the Governing Board was required to prepare a Master Plan of
Auroville in consultation with the Residents’ Assembly, and further to ensure development of
Auroville as per the said Master Plan.

13. As already discussed earlier, the Master Plan of Auroville as envisioned and envisaged by the
“Mother” as an international universal Township dedicated to human unity and international
understanding, described by her in the Auroville Charter, was approved by the Governing Board in
consultation with the Residents’ Assembly and was further approved by the Government of India in
Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) vide the letter dated
12.04.2001. It was also notified by the Auroville Foundation with the approval of the Central
Government, in the Gazette of India, Part III on 16.08.2010. It was only to ensure the development
of Auroville as per the said approved Master Plan, the Auroville Town Development Council (ATDC)
was constituted as per the Standing Order dated 01.05.2011 issued by the Governing Board. The said
Standing Order was replaced by the Standing Order No. 01 of 2019 dated 04.06.2019, and the said
Standing Order No. 01 of 2019 has been further replaced by the Standing Order No. 01 of 2022
dated 01.06.2022 vide the Notification published in the Gazette of India dated 15.07.2022.

14. Though it was sought to be submitted by the learned counsel Mr. M.V. Swaroop appearing for
the Respondent-Writ Petitioner that the impugned Standing Order replacing the nominees of the
Residents’ Assembly with the nominees of Governing Board of the Foundation was not in
consonance with the provisions of the said Act and that the Governing Board did not have the power
to appoint any committee of its own as contained in the impugned Standing Order dated 01.06.2022
and the Office Order dated 01.06.2022, we do not find any substance in the same. The ATDC was
constituted and reconstituted from time to time by the Governing Board by issuing the Standing
Orders, for the proper implementation of the approved Master Plan. It may be noted that in view of
Section 11(3), the Governing Board vide the Regulation No.AF/1/2011/Regulations, had also decided
that “Standing Orders, not in consistent with the provisions of the Act and the Rules made
thereunder, and without prejudice to the generality of the laws enacted by the Parliament of India
and/or the legislatures of the States and the Indian Territory, on all the matters covered by the
provisions of Section 11(3), and also such other matters that Governing Board may consider

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/58582385/

11

The Auroville Foundation vs Natasha Storey on 17 March, 2025

appropriate and necessary, shall be notified by the Auroville Foundation from time to time. The said
Regulation was also notified in the Government of India Gazette on 05.03.2011. The said Regulation
clearly empowered the Governing Board of the Appellant-Foundation to issue the Standing Orders
on all the matters covered by the provisions of Section 11(3) as also such other matters that the
Governing Board may consider appropriate and necessary.

15. Further, Section 16 of the Act also empowers the Governing Board to appoint such committees as
may be necessary for the efficient discharge of its duties and performance of its functions under the
Act. Even as per Rule 5 of the said Rules, the Governing Board is empowered to constitute the
committees under sub- section (1) of Section 16. As per Rule 5(2), it is the Governing Board alone
which has to determine the composition and functions of every committee constituted by it. Neither
the said A.F. Act nor the said Rules contemplate or confer any right upon the Residents’ Assembly,
much less upon an individual resident of Auroville to be part of any committee or council
constituted by the Governing Board for the efficient discharge of its duties and functions under the
Act.

16. From the conjoint reading of the provisions of the A.F. Act and the said Rules, there remains no
shadow of doubt that the Governing Board is vested with all the powers and is empowered to
discharge all the functions as may be exercised or discharged by the Foundation, and that the
general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs of the Foundation vests in the
Governing Board alone. Though, it is true that Section 19(1)(c) required the Residents’ Assembly to
assist the Governing Board to formulate the Master Plan of Auroville, however, the said stage was
already over, when the Master Plan was prepared by the Governing Board in consultation with the
Residents’ Assembly as contemplated in Section 17(e), and was then approved by the Central
Government, Ministry of Human Resource Development way back in 2001. After the publication of
the said Master Plan, the Governing Board had issued the Standing Orders from time to time for the
implementation of the said approved Master Plan and for the development of Auroville as planned.

17. Having regard to the statutory provisions in the Act and the Rules, we are of the opinion that the
impugned Standing Order 01.06.2022 containing the Standing Order No. 01/2022 does not suffer
from any legal infirmity. There is no legal or statutory right conferred upon the Residents’ Assembly
or upon an individual resident to be part of any committee/council constituted by the Governing
Board in exercise of its powers conferred under Section 11(3), 16(1) and 17(e) of the said Act read
with Rule 5(1) and 5(2) of the said Rules. The functions of the Residents’ Assembly are confined only
to advise the Governing Board in respect of the activities relating to the residents of Auroville and to
make recommendations as specified in Section 19 of the Act, and not any further.

18. In that view of the matter, we are of the opinion that the High Court has thoroughly misdirected
itself in misinterpreting the provisions of the A.F. Act and in setting aside the impugned Notification
containing the Standing Order dated 01.06.2022. The impugned Order being highly erroneous
deserves to be set aside, and is hereby set aside.

19. As demonstrated earlier, some disgruntled and discontented residents kept on filing petitions
one after the other dragging the Appellant-Foundation into unnecessary litigations. The Writ

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/58582385/

12

The Auroville Foundation vs Natasha Storey on 17 March, 2025

Petition filed by the respondent before the High Court was one of such ill- motivated petitions filed
by her to abuse the process of law, to hamper the development of Auroville and to cause
obstructions in the smooth functioning of the Governing Board of the Foundation. Hence, the
Appeal is allowed with cost of Rs.50,000/- to be deposited by the respondent before the Supreme
Court Legal Service Committee within two weeks from today. The office to follow the compliance.

20. The Appeal stands allowed accordingly.

....….....…………………J. [BELA M. TRIVEDI] ....…......…………..……….J. [PRASANNA B. VARALE]
NEW DELHI;

17th MARCH, 2025

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/58582385/

13

