The Cosmos Co Operative Bank Ltd vs Central Bank Of India on 4 February, 2025

The Cosmos Co Operative Bank Ltd vs Central Bank Of India on
4 February, 2025

                                                                     REPORTABLE
2025 INSC 243
                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1565 of 2025
                            (@SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO. 11557/2019)

        THE COSMOS CO. OPERATIVE BANK LTD.                                   …

        APPELLANT(S)

                                              VERSUS

        CENTRAL BANK OF INDIA & ORS.                                         …
        RESPONDENT(S)

                                          JUDGMENT

J.B. PARDIWALA, J.:

For the convenience of exposition, this judgment is divided into the following parts: -

INDEX A. FACTUAL MATRIX....................................................................................2
B. SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES...........................................................8 i.
S u b m i s s i o n s   o n   b e h a l f   o f   t h e   a p p e l l a n t   C o s m o s   C o .   O p e r a t i v e
Bank............................8 ii. Submissions on behalf of the respondent no.1; Central
B a n k   o f   I n d i a . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 0   C .   I S S U E   F O R
C O N S I D E R A T I O N . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 1   D .
ANALYSIS..................................................................................................12 i. Relevant
Provisions.......................................................................................................12 ii.
Concept of Equitable Mortgage....................................................................................24
e
i
Mortgage..................................................................................31 iv. Distinction
between Mortgage by Deposit of Title Deeds under the English Law and under the
Transfer Of Property Act, 1882.....................................................................41 E.

a n   E q u i

  N a

a b l

t u r

  o f

e

t

i

i

.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144487932/

1

 
The Cosmos Co Operative Bank Ltd vs Central Bank Of India on 4 February, 2025

CONCLUSION...........................................................................................58

1. Leave granted.

2. This appeal arises from the judgment and order passed by the High Court of
Judicature at Bombay (Civil Appellate Jurisdiction) dated 12.12.2018 in Writ Petition
No.11324 of 2015, by which the writ petition filed by the ap-

pellant herein seeking to challenge the order passed by the (Debt Recovery Appellate Tribunal) (for
short, the “DRAT") dated 28.08.2015 in Appeal No. 41 of 2007 came to be rejected thereby affirming
the order passed by the DRAT.

A. FACTUAL MATRIX

3. The facts giving rise to this appeal may be summarised as under: -

(a) We take notice of the fact that the respondent nos. 2, 3 and 4 respect-

ively, are the original borrowers. However, the respondent No.4 has passed away and therefore his
name came to be deleted from the array of parties vide order dated 4.12.2020.

(b)The original borrowers on the strength of one unregistered agreement of sale availed loan facility
from the Central Bank of India i.e. the respond- ent No. 1 to the tune of Rs.30,00,000/-
approximately. What was offered by way of security was a flat which the original borrowers
proposed to purchase from the developer and all that they had on the day and date when they went
before the bank to avail the loan was an unregistered agreement of sale.

(c) It is not in dispute that the Central Bank on the strength of an unre-

gistered agreement of sale sanctioned the loan creating a charge over the flat.

(d)Since the borrowers defaulted in the repayment of the loan, the Central Bank initiated
proceedings for the recovery of the requisite amount be- fore the Debt Recovery Tribunal-I, Mumbai
(in short "the DRT"). The DRT Mumbai adjudicated the Original Application No. 74 of 2002 and
held the borrowers jointly and severally liable to pay an amount of (cid:130)43,15,405.56 paisa with interest
thereon @15% per annum from the date of filing of the O.A. till its payment.

(e) The relevant observations made by the DRT, Mumbai in Para 8 reads thus: -

"8. In application affidavit of the applicant state that the Defendant No. 2 with
intention to create mortgage deposited title deeds of her flat No. C-28, Sahyadari
Apartment, L.T. Road, Borivali West, Bombay-400092 as security of the loan.
sanctioned to Defendant No. l. To prove this fact the Applicant's side rely on Exh. 53,
which is an unregistered memorandum. It being unregistered document itself is not

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144487932/

2

The Cosmos Co Operative Bank Ltd vs Central Bank Of India on 4 February, 2025

sufficient to create the mortgage. The applicants state further on 04.02.1993, the
Defendant No. 2 again attended Applicants office and re- deposited the title deeds of
her flat on the enhanced, revised loan. The applicant's case about mortgage is based
on the title deeds, the documents produced by Defendants to create the mortgage.
That was primary evidence. It was not produced. Memorandum, Exh. 53 affidavit and
pleading of applicant cannot take place. The applicant do not state or explain why
that primary, basic evidence is not brought before the Tribunal. Unless these
documents are on record, it cannot be assessed/ascertained whether those
documents were sufficient to create mortgage or not. In all the circumstances, I hold
the applicant failed in proving the Defendant No. 2 mortgaged her flat as a security of
the loan given by the Applicants.”

(f) The operative part of the order passed by the DRT reads thus: -

"A) The Defendant No. 2 and 3 shall jointly and severally pay the amount of Rs.
43,15,405.56 ps (Rupees Forty Three Lacs Fifteen Thousand Four Hundred Five and
Paise Fifty Six only) to the Applicant with interest thereon @ 15% p.a. from the date
of filing of this application till the payment.

B) The defendant No. 2 shall pay the Applicant, the amount of Rs.

5,70,787.21 ps. (Rupees Five Lacs Seventy Thousand Seven Hundred Eight Seven and Paise Twenty
One Only) as dues of Overdraft Accounts, Rs. 4,08,157.25 ps. (Rupees Four Lacs Eight Hundred One
Hundred Fifty Seven and Paise Twenty Five only) as due of Short Term Loan Account, Rs.
2,25,498.45 ps. (Rupees Two Lacs Twenty Five Thousand Four Hundred Ninety Eight and Paise
Forty Five only) as dues of Working Capital Loan with interest thereon @ 15% p.a. C) The Applicant
will be entitled to recover this amount from the hypothecation created by the defendants as
mentioned in the application of the defendants fail to pay the above amount.” D) The defendants
No. 2 & 3 shall pay cost of this Application to the applicant and to bear their own costs".

(g) The Central Bank of India had to file an appeal before the DRAT be- cause of the observations
made by the DRT in its order as contained in para 8 referred to above.

(h)The order passed by the DRAT, allowing the appeal filed by the Central Bank reads thus: -

“1. This appeal has been filed by the plaintiffs /appellant herein being aggrieved by
the order dated 30/11/2006 passed by the learned Presiding Officer, DRT-I, Mumbai
in O.A. No. 74 of 2002, whereby the learned Presiding Officer directed the defendant
nos. 2 and 3 to jointly and severally pay the amount of Rs.43,15,405.56 ps. to the
applicant with interest thereon @15% p.a. from the date of filing of the application till
its payment. Further directed the defendant No. 2 to pay the amount of
Rs.5,70,787.21 ps. as dues of Overdraft Accounts, Rs. 4,08,157.25 ps. as dues of Short
Term Loan Account and Rs.2,25,498.45 ps. as dues of Working Capital Loan with
interest thereon @15% p.a.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144487932/

3

The Cosmos Co Operative Bank Ltd vs Central Bank Of India on 4 February, 2025

2. The ld. counsel for the appellant raised two grounds namely the description made
by the defendant no.1 is not correct one and second ground is that the original title
deeds have not been produced before this court. Hence he prayed that the appeal has
to be allowed against the defendant no.1 alone. The suit has been dismissed against
the defendant no.1. Anyhow the suit against the defendant nos. 2 and 3 has been
decreed.

3. The contention of the ld. counsel for the appellant is that the defendant no.1 is real
borrower and is sued in his personal capacity as proprietor of M/s. Ajanta Industries
which is evident from Para No. 2. Hence he prayed that the appeal has to be allowed.

4. The contention of the respondent is that the mortgage has not been proved before
the DRT. Hence the suit has been rightly dismissed. Thereafter respondent no. 4 has
advanced the loan to the respondent no. 1 and thereafter the property is sold to the
third person. Hence he prayed that the appeal has to be dismissed.

5. From the perusal it is seen that it has been mentioned that the respondent no.1 was
sued in his personal and individual capacity as proprietor of M/s. Ajanta Industries
as clearly set out in Para No.2.

Hence as per Order 30 Rule 10 he has been properly described, hence the finding in this regard
given by the DRT has to be set aside and in turn is set aside.

6. The next contention is that the original documents have not been produced before the trial court
is not in dispute. Now it has been produced before this court which pertains to the mortgaged
property and original agreement are now brought on record and is taken on record. It is pertinent to
note that the original title deeds are with the appellants and mortgage is not denied by the
guarantor. It is also clear that respondent no.4 do not have title deeds pertaining to the property and
their alleged mortgage is very much subsequent to the mortgage of appellants. Hence, I am of the
view that it can be accepted that the appellant bank has valid and subsisting mortgage in its favour
and in turn mortgage is admitted and finding given by the DRT in this regard has to be set aside and
the O.A. against the defendant no.1 also decreed and allowed as all parties are properly sued and
joined.

7. The appeal is allowed.

8. Subsequent to sale by respondent no. 4 in favor of third party and amount of deposit is
concerned, this point is left open to agitate before the appropriate forum."

(i) While the proceedings before the DRAT were pending in the form of ap- peal filed by the Central
Bank of India, the appellant bank herein had to intervene, and they were also heard on the question
as to which bank had the first charge over the security interest created by the original borrow- ers.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144487932/

4

The Cosmos Co Operative Bank Ltd vs Central Bank Of India on 4 February, 2025

(j) The appellant bank herein being dissatisfied with the order passed by the DRAT referred to above
challenged the same by filing a writ petition be- fore the High Court. The High court proceeded on
the footing that the DRAT was right in recording a finding that the mortgage of the flat in question
created in favour of the appellant bank herein was subsequent in point of time and besides the same,
the appellant bank had no valid title deeds with them at the time of sanctioning the loan in favour of
the original borrowers.

(k)In short, the finding of fact recorded by the High Court in its impugned judgment is that the flat
was mortgaged with the Central Bank of India on 31.10.1989, whereas the mortgage claimed by the
appellant Bank herein was of October, 1998.

(l) The High Court observing as aforesaid, rejected the writ petition filed by the appellant herein.
The relevant observations made by the High Court in its impugned judgment read thus: -

“6. By the impugned order, therefore, the DRAT had arrived at a clear finding of fact
that the mortgage of the said flat to the Petitioner-Cosmos Bank is 'subsequent' to the
m o r t g a g e   o f   t h e   R e s p o n d e n t - C e n t r a l   B a n k   a p a r t   f r o m   t h e   f a c t   t h a t   t h e
Petitioner-Cosmos Bank did not have title deeds pertaining to the said flat. This
f i n d i n g   w a s   a r r i v e d   a t   b y   D R A T   a s   t h e   s a i d   f l a t   w a s   m o r t g a g e d   t o   t h e
Respondent-Central Bank on 31-10- 1989, whereas the mortgage claimed by the
Petitioner-Cosmos Bank was of October 1998.

7. It is brought out in the Affidavit-in-Reply of the Respondent-Central Bank that the
Respondent-Central Bank had Initially filed a suit against the borrower/guarantors
(Respondents Nos.2 to 4 herein) in this Court on 5 September 1994. By an interim
order dated 20-10-1994, this Court had appointed a Court Receiver in respect of the
said flat.

8. It would thus be evident that at the time of sanction and grant of the Loan by the
Petitioner-Cosmos Bank i.e. sometime in November 1998, the said flat was in
custodia legis as the Court Receiver was appointed in the year 1994. In these
circumstances, there appears to be substance in this submission of the learned
Counsel for the Respondent-Central. Bank that the validity of the mortgage of the
said flat in favour of the Petitioner-Cosmos Bank was even otherwise questionable.
The suit which was filed in this Court was ultimately transferred to DRT only in the
year 2002 and numbered as O.A.No. 74 of 2002. Before this Court, the
Petitioner-Cosmos Bank have essentially relied upon the Share Certificate which was
as a matter of fact issued by the Society only in the year 1989 (as the Society itself was
formed in the year 1986-87) and Agreement for Sale dated 7-12-1978 (which is
s u b s e q u e n t   t o   A g r e e m e n t   f o r   S a l e   d a t e d   0 9 - 1 1 - 1 9 7 8   r e l i e d   u p o n   b y   t h e
Respondent-Central Bank).

Both the Agreements are unregistered. It Is not even pleaded by the Petitioner-Cosmos Bank in the
present Petition that the documents of title deeds relied upon by the Respondent-Central Bank were

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144487932/

5

The Cosmos Co Operative Bank Ltd vs Central Bank Of India on 4 February, 2025

not credible or that the mortgage of the said flat in favour of the Respondent-Central Bank was not
valid. In any event, it can be hardly disputed that the mortgage in favour of the Respondent- Central
Bank was prior in point of time. In the circumstances, in our view, the DRAT rightly held in the
impugned order that the alleged mortgage of the Petitioner-Cosmos Bank was subsequent in point
of time to the mortgage of the Respondent- Central Bank.

9. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we are unable to find fault with the impugned order of the
DRAT. The Petition is, accordingly, dismissed. The Recovery Officer, DRT may now pass
appropriate orders as regards the distribution of the sale proceeds of the said flat which has been
deposited in the DRT.”

4. In such circumstances referred to above, the appellant bank is here before this Court with the
present appeal.

   B.       SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES

(cid:12)      i.      Submissions on behalf of the appellant Cosmos Co. Operative
      Bank.

5. The learned counsel appearing for the appellant bank vehemently submitted that the High Court
committed an egregious error in rejecting the writ peti- tion filed by his client and thereby affirming
an equally egregious order passed by the DRAT.

6. He would submit that indisputably the first mortgage was created in favour of the Central Bank of
India, but the said mortgage was invalid or rather having no force in law. According to him any
bank, while sanctioning the loan would ensure that what is being offered by way of security is some-
thing valid. In such circumstances, when an unregistered agreement of sale was offered as a title
deed, it was of no value as it is a settled law that agree- ment of sale does not confer any right title or
interest. Far from being a re- gistered agreement of sale, in the case on hand, what was offered by
way of security to the Central Bank was an unregistered agreement of sale.

7. In the aforesaid context, the learned counsel first invited the attention of this Court to Section 54
of the Transfer of Property Act, 1884 (for short, the “Act, 1884”) which defines the terms sale.
Thereafter he invited the atten- tion of this Court to Section 58 of the Act, 1884 which defines the
term "Mortgage”, “mortgagor”, “mortgagee”, “mortgage-money” and “mort- gage-deed”.

8. He laid much emphasis on sub-section (a) of Section 58, which explains what is mortgage.
Thereafter, he invited the attention of the Court to Section 100 of the Act, 1884 which explains what
is “charge”.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144487932/

6

The Cosmos Co Operative Bank Ltd vs Central Bank Of India on 4 February, 2025

9. The learned counsel thereafter invited the attention of this Court to certain provisions of the
Maharashtra Ownership Flats (Regulation of the promo- tion of construction, sale, management
and transfer) Act, 1963 (for short the "Act 1963") more particularly Section(s) 4, 4A and 11 therein,
respectively.

10.He thereafter invited the attention of this Court to few provisions of the Ma- harashtra
Apartment Ownership Act 1970 (for short the “Act, 1970”) more particularly the preamble to the Act
and Sections 2, 4 and 5 respectively.

11.To fortify his submissions more particularly the principal contention that the respondent no. 1
Bank cannot be said to have the first charge over the mort- gaged property, he relied on few
decisions of this Court, which are as under:

-

i. Suraj Lamp & Industries (P) Ltd. (2) through Director v. State of Haryana and
Another reported in (2012) 1 SCC 656 more particu- larly paras 16 and 19 respectively
therein.

ii. Bank of India v. Abhay D. Narottam and Others reported in (2005) 11 SCC 520
more particularly the observations made in paras 9 and 11 respectively therein.

iii. Anita Enterprises and Anr. v. Belfer Coop. Housing Society Ltd.

and Ors. reported in (2008) 1 SCC 285 more particularly the obser- vations made in para 41 therein.

iv. Dattatreya Shanker Mote and Ors. v. Anand Chintaman Datar and Ors. reported in (1974) 2 SCC
799 more particularly the obser- vations made in para 67 therein."

12.In such circumstances referred to above, the learned counsel prayed that there being merit in his
appeal, the same may be allowed and the impugned order passed by the High Court may be set
aside.

ii. Submissions on behalf of the respondent no.1; Central Bank of In- dia.

13.On the other hand, the learned counsel appearing for the Central Bank of In- dia submitted that
no error not to speak of any error of law could be said to have been committed by the High Court in
passing the impugned order. He would submit that indisputably the first charge over the mortgaged
property is that of the Central Bank.

14.At this stage, we must record that the learned counsel wanted to place few additional documents
on record to make good his case that the view taken by the High Court is correct. However,
considering the fact that this litiga- tion is pending past almost 10 years, we declined such request.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144487932/

7

The Cosmos Co Operative Bank Ltd vs Central Bank Of India on 4 February, 2025

15.We requested the learned counsel to proceed on the basis of the material on record and make
good his case that the impugned order passed by the High Court needs no interference.

16.He would submit that there are concurrent findings recorded by the DRAT and by the High Court
in so far as the validity of the mortgage is concerned and also which bank has the first charge over
the mortgaged property.

17.In such circumstances, referred to above, the learned counsel would submit that there being no
merit in this appeal, the same may be dismissed.

C. ISSUE FOR CONSIDERATION

18.Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having gone through the
materials on record, the only question that falls for our consid- eration is whether the High Court
committed any error in passing the im- pugned order.

     D.        ANALYSIS

i.        Relevant Provisions

19.Before adverting to the rival submissions canvassed on either side, we must look into the few
provisions of the law relevant for the purpose of deciding the present appeal which are as follows: -

SECTION(S) 58 AND 100 OF THE ACT, 1884.

“58. “Mortgage”, “mortgagor”, “mortgagee”, “mortgage-money” and “mortgage-deed”
defined.—

(a) A mortgage is the transfer of an interest in specific immoveable property for the
purpose of securing the payment of money advanced or to be advanced by way of
loan, an existing or future debt, or the performance of an engagement which may give
rise to a pecuniary liability. The transferor is called a mortgagor, the transferee a
mortgagee; the principal money and interest of which payment is secured for the
time being arc called the mortgage-

money, and the instrument (if any) by which the transfer is effected is called a mortgage-deed.

(b) Simple mortgage.— Where, without delivering possession of the mortgaged property, the
mortgagor binds himself personally to pay the mortgage-money, and agrees, expressly or impliedly,
that, in the event of his failing to pay according to his contract, the mortgagee shall have a right to
cause the mortgaged property to be sold and the proceeds of sale to be applied, so far as may be
necessary, in payment of the mortgage-money, the transaction is called a simple mortgage and the
mortgagee a simple mortgagee.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144487932/

8

The Cosmos Co Operative Bank Ltd vs Central Bank Of India on 4 February, 2025

(c) Mortgage by conditional sale.— Where the mortgagor ostensibly sells the mortgaged property—
on condition that on default of payment of the mortgage-money on a certain date the sale shall
become absolute, or on condition that on such payment being made the sale shall become void, or
on condition that on such payment being made the buyer shall transfer the property to the seller, the
transaction is called a mortgage by conditional sale and the mortgagee a mortgagee by conditional
sale:

Provided that no such transaction shall be deemed to be a mortgage, unless the
condition is embodied in the document which effects or purports to effect the sale.

(d) Usufructuary mortgage.— Where the mortgagor delivers possession or expressly
or by implication binds himself to deliver possession of the mortgaged property to the
mortgagee, and authorises him to retain such possession until payment of the
mortgage-money, and to receive the rents and profits accruing from the property or
any part of such rents and profits and to appropriate the same in lieu of interest, or in
payment of the mortgage -money, or partly in lieu of interest or partly in payment of
the mortgage-money, the transaction is called an usufructuary mortgage and the
mortgagee an usufructuary mortgagee.

(e) English mortgage.— Where the mortgagor binds himself to re-

pay the mortgage-money on a certain date, and transfers the mortgaged property absolutely to the
mortgagee, but subject to a proviso that he will re-transfer it to the mortgagor upon payment of the
mortgage-money as agreed, the transaction is called an English mortgage.

(f) Mortgage by deposit of title-deeds.— Where a person in any of the following towns, namely, the
towns of Calcutta, Madras, and Bombay, and in any other town which the State Government
concerned may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, delivers to a creditor or
his agent documents of title to immoveable property, with intent to create a security thereon, the
transaction is called a mortgage by deposit of title-deeds.

(g) Anomalous mortgage.—A mortgage which is not a simple mortgage, a mortgage by conditional
sale, an usufructuary mortgage, an English mortgage or a mortgage by deposit of title- deeds within
the meaning of this section is called an anomalous mortgage.” “100. Charges.— Where immoveable
property of one person is by act of parties or operation of law made security for the payment of
money to another, and the transaction does not amount to a mortgage, the latter person is said to
have a charge on the property; and all the provisions hereinbefore contained which apply to a simple
mortgage shall, so far as may be, apply to such charge. Nothing in this section applies to the charge
of a trustee on the trust property for expenses properly incurred in the execution of his trust, 5 [and,
save as otherwise expressly provided by any law for the time being in force, no charge shall be
enforced against any property in the hands of a person to whom such property has been transferred
for consideration and without notice of the charge.” SECTIONS 4, 4A AND 11 RESPECTIVELY OF
THE ACT, “4. Promoter before accepting advance payment or deposit to enter into agreement and
agreement to be registered. – (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, a promoter

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144487932/

9

The Cosmos Co Operative Bank Ltd vs Central Bank Of India on 4 February, 2025

who intends to construct or constructs a block or building of flats, all or some of which are to be
taken or are taken on ownership basis, shall, before, he accepts any sum of money as advance
payment or deposit, which shall not be more than 20 per cent. of the sale price enter into a written
agreement for sale with each of such persons who are to take or have taken such flats, and the
agreement shall be registered under the Registration Act, 1908 (hereinafter in this section referred
to as "the Registration Act") and such agreement shall be in the prescribed form.” (lA) The
agreement to be prescribed and sub-section (1) shall contain inter alia the particulars as specified in
clause (a); and to such agreement there shall be attached the copies of the documents specified in
clause (b),-

(a) particulars,-

(i) if the building is to be constructed, the liability of the promoter to construct it according to the
plans and specifications approved by the local authority where such approval is required under any
law for the time being in force;

(ii) the date by which the possession of the flat is to be handed over to the purchaser;

(iii) the extent of the carpet area of the flat including the area of the balconies which should be
shown separately;

(iv) the price of the flat including the proportionate price of the common areas and facilities which
should be shown separately, to be paid by the purchaser of flat; and the intervals at which
instalments thereof may be paid;

(v) the precise nature of organisation to be constituted of the persons who have taken or are to take
the flats;

(vi) the nature, extent and description of limited common areas and facilities;

(vii) the nature, extent and description of limited common areas and facilities, if any;

(viii) percentage of undivided interest in the common areas and facilities appertaining to the flat
agreed to be sold;

(ix) statement of the use of which the flat is intended and restriction of its use, if any;

(x) percentage of undivided interests in the limited common areas and facilities, if any, appertaining
to the flat agreed to be sold;

(b) copies of documents,-

(i) the certificate by an Attorney at law or Advocate under clause

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144487932/

10

The Cosmos Co Operative Bank Ltd vs Central Bank Of India on 4 February, 2025

(a) of sub-section (2) of section 3;

(ii) Property Card or extract of village Forms VI or VII and XII or any other relevant revenue record
showing the nature of the title of the promoter to the land on which the flats are constructed or are
to be constructed;

(iii) the plans and specifications of the flat as approved by the concerned local authority.

(2) Any agreement for sale entered into under sub-section (1) shall be presented by the promoter or
by any other person competent to do so under section 32 of the Registration Act, at the proper
registration office for registration, within the time allowed under sections 23 to 26 (both inclusive)
to the said Act and execution thereof shall be admitted before the registering officer by the person
executing the document or his representative, assign or agent as laid down in sections 34 and 35 of
the said Act also within the time aforesaid:

Provided that, where any agreement for sale is entered into, or is purported to be
entered into, under sub-section (1), at any time before the commencement of the
Maharashtra Ownership Flats (Regulation of the promotion of construction, sale,
management and transfer) (Amendment and Validating Provisions) Act, 1983, and
such agreement was not presented for registration or was presented for registration
but its execution was not admitted before the registration officer by the person
concerned, before the commencement of the said Act, then such document may be
presented at the proper registration office for registration, and its execution may be
admitted, by any of the persons concerned referred to above in this sub-section, on or
before the 31st December 1984, and the registering officer shall accept such
document for registration, and register it under the Registration Act, as if it were
presented, and its execution was admitted, within the time laid down in the
Registration Act:

Provided further that, on presenting a document for registration as aforesaid if the
person executing such document or his representative, assign or agent does not
appear before the registering officer and admit the execution of the document, the
registering officer shall cause a summons to be issued under section 36 of the
Registration Act requiring the executant to appear at the registration office, either in
person or by duly authorised agent, at a time fixed in the summons. If the executant
fails to appear in compliance with the summons, the execution on the document shall
be deemed to be admitted by him and the registering officer may proceed to register
the document accordingly. If the executant appears before the registering officer as
required by the summons but denies execution of the document, the registering
officer shall, after giving him a reasonable opportunity of being heard, if satisfied that
the document has been executed by him, proceed to register the document
accordingly.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144487932/

11

The Cosmos Co Operative Bank Ltd vs Central Bank Of India on 4 February, 2025

4A. Effect of non-registration of agreement required to be registered under section
4.-

Where an agreement for sale entered into under sub-section (1) of section 4, whether
entered into before or after the commencement of the Maharashtra Ownership Flats
(Regulation of the promotion of construction, sale, Management and transfer)
(Amendment and Validating Provisions) Act, 1983, remains unregistered for any
reason, then notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in
force, or in any judgement, decree or order of any Court, it may be received as
evidence of a contract in a suit for specific performance under Chapter II of the
Specific Relief Act, 1963, or as evidence of part performance of a contract for the
purposes of section 53A of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, or as evidence of any
collateral transaction not required to be effected by registered instrument.

xxx xxx xxx

11.Promoter to convey title, etc., and execute documents, according to agreement-

(1) A promoter shall take all necessary steps to complete his title and convey to the organisation of
persons, who take flats, which is registered either as a co-operative society or as a company as
aforesaid or to an association of flat takers or apartment owners, his right, title and interest in the
land and building, and execute all relevant documents therefor in accordance with the agreement
executed under section 4 and if no period for the execution of the conveyance is agreed upon, he
shall execute the conveyance within the prescribed period and also deliver all documents of title
relating to the property which may be in his possession or power. (2) It shall be the duty of the
promoter to file with the Competent Authority, within the prescribed period, a copy of the
conveyance executed by him under sub-section (1).

(3) If the promoter fails to execute the conveyance in favour of the Cooperative society formed under
section 10 or, as the case may be, the Company or the association of apartment owners, as provided
by sub-section (1), within the prescribed period, the members of such Co-operative society or, as the
case may be, the Company or the association of apartment owners may, make an application, in
writing, to the concerned Competent Authority accompanied by the true copies of the registered
agreements for sale, executed with the promoter by each individual member of the society or the
Company or the association, who have purchased the flats and all other relevant documents
(including the occupation certificate, if any), for issuing a certificate that such society, or as the case
may be, Company or association, is entitled to have an unilateral deemed conveyance, executed in
their favour and to have it registered.

(4) The Competent Authority, on receiving such application, within reasonable time and in any case
not later than six months, after making such enquiry as deemed necessary and after verifying the
authenticity of the documents submitted and after giving the promoter a reasonable opportunity of
being heard, on being satisfied that it is a fit case for issuing such certificate, shall issue a certificate
to the Sub-Registrar or any other appropriate Registration Officer under the Registration Act, 1908,

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144487932/

12

The Cosmos Co Operative Bank Ltd vs Central Bank Of India on 4 February, 2025

certifying that it is a fit case for enforcing unilateral execution, of conveyance deed conveying the
right, title and interest of the promoter in the land and building in favour of the applicant, as
deemed conveyance.

(5) On submission by such society or as the case may be, the Company or the association of
apartment owners, to the Sub- Registrar or the concerned appropriate Registration Officer
appointed under the Registration Act, 1908, the certificate issued by the Competent Authority
alongwith the unilateral instrument of conveyance, the Sub-Registrar or the concerned appropriate
registration Officer shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the Registration Act, 1908, issue
summons to the promoter to show cause why, such unilateral instrument should not be registered as
'deemed conveyance' and after giving the promoter and the applicants a reasonable opportunity of
being heard, may on being satisfied that it was fit case for unilateral conveyance, register that
instrument as, 'deemed conveyance’.” SECTIONS 2, 4 AND 5 RESPECTIVELY OF THE ACT, 1970
“2. Application of the Act. -

This Act applies only to property, the sole owner or all of the owners of which submit the same to the
provisions of this Act by duly executing and registering a Declaration as hereinafter provided :
Provided that, no property shall be submitted to the provisions of this Act, unless it is used or
proposed to be used for residence, office, practice of any profession or for carrying on any
occupation, trade or business or for any other type of independent use :

(cid:12)                      xxx                     xxx                   xxx

           4. Status of apartments. –

Subject to the provisions of the second proviso to section 2 of this Act, each apartment, together
with its undivided interest in the common areas and facilities, appurtenant to such apartment, shall
for all purposes constitute heritable and transferable immoveable property within the meaning of
any law for the time being in force in the State;

and accordingly, an apartment owner may transfer his apartment and the percentage of undivided
interest in the common areas and facilities appurtenant to such apartment by way of sale, mortgage,
lease, gift, exchange or in any other manner whatsoever in the same manner, to the same extent and
subject to the same rights, privileges, obligations, liabilities, investigations, legal proceedings,
remedies and to penalty, forfeiture and punishment as any other immoveable property, or make a
bequest of the same under the laws applicable to the transfer and succession of immoveable
property.

5. Ownership of apartments. – (1) Each apartment owner shall be entitled to the exclusive
ownership and possession of his apartment in accordance with the Declaration executed and
registered as required by section 2 of this Act.

(2) Each apartment owner shall execute a Deed of Apartment in relation to his apartment in the
manner prescribed for the purpose.”

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144487932/

13

The Cosmos Co Operative Bank Ltd vs Central Bank Of India on 4 February, 2025

20.Without any doubt in our mind, we say that the High Court fell in error more particularly, in
view of, what has been observed in para 8 of the im- pugned order. The law is very well settled as
explained by this Court in Suraj Lamp (supra) that a contract of sale i.e. an agreement of sale does
not itself create any interest in or charge on any property. This is evident on plain reading of Section
54 of the Act, 1884 which we have referred to above.

21.In the aforesaid context, the decision of this Court in Abhay D. Narottam (supra) is also relevant
more particularly the observations made in para 11 therein. Paras 9 and 11 read thus: -

"9. It is not necessary for us to determine the import of Section 125 of the Companies
Act as we are of the opinion that the ap- peal must be dismissed on a much more
basic ground. “Mort- gage” has been defined in Section 58(a) of the Transfer of Prop-
erty Act, 1882 as a transfer of an interest in specific immovable property for the
purpose of securing the payment of money ad- vanced or to be advanced by way of
loan, etc. Without a transfer of interest there is no question of there being a
mortgage. The same principle would apply to a charge under Section 100 of the
Transfer of Property Act. Section 100 provides that all the provi- sions which apply to
a simple mortgage shall, so far as may be, apply to such charge. The definition of
simple mortgage in Sec- tion 58(b) of the Act merely speaks of the procedure and de-
scribes that species of mortgage.

xxx xxx xxx

11. As far as the flat is concerned, it needs no authority to say that a contract for sale
of immovable property does not of itself create any interest in or charge over such
property. This is provided in Section 54 of the Act and is well-settled law. In this case,
the agreement for sale which was deposited by Respondent 2 with the appellant Bank
was not an agreement by which Re- spondent 2 agreed to sell the property to a third
party, but an agreement to sell the flat to Respondent 2. No interest was cre- ated in
favour of Respondent 2 by virtue of this agreement for sale which could have been
transferred by way of security to the appellant Bank. There is as such no question of
the appellant Bank having any charge over such non-existent interest."

(Emphasis supplied)

22.The observations referred to above are directly applicable to the facts of the present case.

23.The observations made by this Court in Dattatreya Shanker Mote (supra), more particularly, in
para 67 also assumes significance. Para 67 reads thus: -

"67. The contention was that, although a charge may not be described as “a transfer”,
yet, the result of Section 100 of the Act was to equate it with a simple mortgage which
is a transfer because Section 100 says: “all the provisions hereinbefore contained
which apply to a simple mortgage shall, so far as may be, apply to such charge”. I

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144487932/

14

The Cosmos Co Operative Bank Ltd vs Central Bank Of India on 4 February, 2025

think that, apart from the qualifying words, “so far as may be”, used by Section 100 of
the Act, a condition essential to the applicability of Section 48 of the Act is that there
must be an actual transfer of property. Furthermore, another condition for invoking
Section 48 of the Act is that the previous and the subsequently created rights “cannot
all exist or be exercised to their full extent together”. In the case before us, this does
not appear from facts found. In any case, the prior right of the charge-holders could
only obtain priority provided other things are not unequal. This follows from words
used indicating that each of the two or more transactions must at least be a
“transfer”. Furthermore, the conditions of priority as between the holder of a
previous charge and a subsequent simple mortgage are completely covered by Section
100 of the Act. The principle underlying Section 48 is one expressed in the maxim of
Equity: “Qui prior est tempore potior est jure” (first in time is stronger in right). This
principle, applied to ranking between rival equitable claims, is applied by Section 48
to contending claims of otherwise equal legal validity. The effect of Section 100 is that
while a charge, which is not a “transfer” of property, gets recognition as a legally
enforceable claim, that enforceability is subjected by the proviso to the requirements
of a prior notice in order to give it precedence over a legally valid transfer of property.
The rights of the appellants charge-holders could only be exercised, on facts found,
subject to the priority obtained by the respondent mortgagee's rights. This clear
result of the law, as contained in Section 100 of the Act, cannot be defeated by
invoking either the terms of or the principles underlying Section 48 of the Act read
with the first part only of Section 100 of the Act. If the respondent simple mortgagee
Oswal could not have claimed the benefit of the proviso to Section 100, the first part
of Section 100, read with Section 48 of the Act, could have come to the aid of the
appellants. But, on the view adopted by me, this line of reasoning does not help the
unfortunate charge-holders at all.” (Emphasis supplied)

24.The observations made by this Court in Anita Enterprises (supra) in para 41 are also relevant.
The para 41 reads thus: -

“41. It appears to us that the status of a member in a tenant co- partnership housing
society is very peculiar. The ownership of the land and building both vests in the
society and the member has, for all practical purposes, right of occupation in
perpetuity after the full value of the land and building and interest accrued thereon
have been paid by him. Although de jure he is not owner of the flat allotted to him,
but, in fact, he enjoys almost all the rights which an owner enjoys, which includes
right to transfer in case he fulfils the two preconditions, namely, he occupies the
property for a period of one year and the transfer is made in favour of a person who is
already a member or a person whose application for membership has been accepted
by the society or whose appeal under Section 23 of the Societies Act has been allowed
by the Registrar or to a person who is deemed to be a member under sub-section
(1-A) of Section 23 of the Societies Act. In case any of these two conditions is not
fulfilled, a member cannot be said to have any right of transfer. Thus, we reiterate the
law laid down by this Court in Sanwarmal [(1990) 2 SCC 288] that a member has

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144487932/

15

The Cosmos Co Operative Bank Ltd vs Central Bank Of India on 4 February, 2025

more than a mere right to occupy the flat, meaning thereby higher than tenant, which
is not so in the case of a tenant within the meaning of Section 5(11) of the Rent Act.
This being the position, we have no difficulty in coming to the conclusion that the
status of a member in the case of tenant co-partnership housing society cannot be
said to be that of a tenant within the meaning of Section 5(11) of the Rent Act, as such
there was no relationship of landlord and tenant between the Society and the
member.” (Emphasis supplied)

25.The observations made by this Court in Suraj Lamp (supra) in paras 16 and 19 are
also relevant. The paras 16 and 19 respectively read thus: -

“Scope of an agreement of sale

16. Section 54 of the TP Act makes it clear that a contract of sale, that is, an
agreement of sale does not, of itself, create any interest in or charge on such property.
This Court in Narandas Karsondas v. S.A. Kamtam [(1977) 3 SCC 247] observed:
(SCC pp. 254-55, paras 32-33 & 37) “32. A contract of sale does not of itself create any
in-

terest in, or charge on, the property. This is expressly declared in Section 54 of the Transfer of
Property Act. (See Ram Baran Prasad v. Ram Mohit Hazra [AIR 1967 SC 744 : (1967) 1 SCR 293] .)
The fiduciary character of the personal obligation created by a con- tract for sale is recognised in
Section 3 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963, and in Section 91 of the Trusts Act.

The personal obligation created by a contract of sale is described in Section 40 of the Transfer of
Property Act as an obligation arising out of contract and an-

nexed to the ownership of property, but not amounting to an interest or easement therein.

33. In India, the word ‘transfer’ is defined with refer- ence to the word ‘convey’. … The word
‘conveys’ in Section 5 of the Transfer of Property Act is used in the wider sense of conveying
ownership.

***

37. … that only on execution of conveyance, ownership passes from one party to another….” xxx xxx
xxx

19. Any contract of sale (agreement to sell) which is not a registered deed of conveyance (deed of
sale) would fall short of the requirements of Sections 54 and 55 of the TP Act and will not confer any
title nor transfer any interest in an immovable property (except to the limited right granted under
Section 53-A of the TP Act). According to the TP Act, an agreement of sale, whether with possession
or without possession, is not a conveyance. Section 54 of the TP Act enacts that sale of immovable
property can be made only by a registered instrument and an agreement of sale does not create any

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144487932/

16

The Cosmos Co Operative Bank Ltd vs Central Bank Of India on 4 February, 2025

interest or charge on its subject-matter.” (Emphasis supplied)

26.Suraj Lamp (supra) later came to be referred to and relied upon by this Court in Shakeel Ahmed
v. Syed Akhlaq Hussain reported in 2023 SCC OnLine SC 1526 wherein the Court after referring to
its earlier judgment held that the person relying upon the customary documents cannot claim to be
the owner of the immovable property and consequently not maintain any claims against a
third-party. The relevant paras read as under: -

“10. Having considered the submissions at the outset, it is to be em- phasized that
irrespective of what was decided in the case of Suraj Lamps and Industries (supra)
the fact remains that no title could be transferred with respect to immovable
properties on the basis of an unregistered Agreement to Sell or on the basis of an
unregistered Gen- eral Power of Attorney. The Registration Act, 1908 clearly provides
that a document which requires compulsory registration under the Act, would not
confer any right, much less a legally enforceable right to approach a Court of Law on
its basis. Even if these documents i.e. the Agreement to Sell and the Power of
Attorney were registered, still it could not be said that the respondent would have
acquired title over the property in question. At best, on the basis of the registered
agree- ment to sell, he could have claimed relief of specific performance in
appropriate proceedings. In this regard, reference may be made to sections 17 and 49
of the Registration Act and section 54 of the Trans- fer of Property Act, 1882.

11. Law is well settled that no right, title or interest in immovable property can be
conferred without a registered document. Even the judgment of this Court in the case
of Suraj Lamps & Indus-

tries (supra) lays down the same proposition. Reference may also be made to the following
judgments of this Court:

(i). Ameer Minhaj v. Deirdre Elizabeth (Wright) Issar (2018) 7 SCC

(ii). Balram Singh v. Kelo Devi Civil Appeal No. 6733 of 2022

(iii). Paul Rubber Industries Private Limited v. Amit Chand Mitra SLP(C) No. 15774
of 2022.

12. The embargo put on registration of documents would not override the statutory provision so as
to confer title on the basis of unregistered documents with respect to immovable property. Once this
is the settled position, the respondent could not have maintained the suit for pos- session and mesne
profits against the appellant, who was admittedly in possession of the property in question whether
as an owner or a li-

censee.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144487932/

17

The Cosmos Co Operative Bank Ltd vs Central Bank Of India on 4 February, 2025

13. The argument advanced on behalf of the respondent that the judg- ment in Suraj Lamps &
Industries (supra) would be prospective is also misplaced. The requirement of compulsory
registration and effect on non-registration emanates from the statutes, in particular the Re-
gistration Act and the Transfer of Property Act. The ratio in Suraj Lamps & Industries (supra) only
approves the provisions in the two enactments. Earlier judgments of this Court have taken the same
view.” iii. Concept of Equitable Mortgage.

27.The question whether Central Bank of India i.e., the respondent no. 1 herein had a valid mortgage
or not can be looked at from one another angle. It is an undisputed fact that the original borrowers
herein whilst availing the loan facility from the respondent no. 1 bank herein had offered the said
flat in question as a security, and pursuant to the same had willingly deposited the agreement of sale
in respect of the same with the respondent no. 1 bank.

28.Although, indisputably as discussed in the foregoing paragraphs the said agreement to sale can
by no means be treated as title deeds to the said flat and as such would not constitute a mortgage in
terms of Section 58 of the Act, 1884, yet could it be said that there was no charge created on the said
flat at all by the original borrowers? Could it be argued that the failure to deposit the share
certificate to the said flat at the time of availing the loan for whatsoever reasons by a necessary
implication nullifies the charge that was intended or sought to be created over the said flat in favour
of the ap- pellant bank herein, merely because the agreement to sale in itself does not purport any
title even though the intention of the parties was to create a charge over the flat? The answer to the
same has to be an emphatic “No”.

29.Before we proceed to explain the aforesaid, it would be apposite for us to understand the concept
of “Equitable Mortgage”. Under the English Law, broadly there are two kinds of mortgages; (i) a
legal mortgage and (ii) an equitable mortgage. A ‘legal mortgage’ entails creation of a charge by way
of conveyance of a proprietary interest over the property or security in fa- vour of the lender in
accordance with the formalities set out under the Law of Property Act, 1925. This is typically
effectuated through execution of a deed of charge or a mortgage deed simpliciter. While such
conveyance need not involve transfer of the title or ownership in itself nor is the conveyance
required to be physical or actual and may be symbolic in nature where the borrower or mortgagor
continues to retain possession or even title of the mortgaged property; however, the de jure effect of
such conveyance must be in the nature of vesting the lender with an enforceable right to take pos-
session, to foreclose or to sell the property in the event of default. Thus, the legal effect of the deed of
charge or mortgage must convey certain enforce- able rights in favour of the lender or mortgagor
over the mortgaged property even though the title or ownership may not be transferred.

30.However, there may be instances where the parties agree to mortgage a property as security, but
no formal charge or conveyance of any proprietary interest in the said property has taken place, still
the same may be recog- nized as a mortgage. This is popularly understood as an ‘equitable mort-
gage’ where although under the law the formalities required for creating a legal charge or mortgage
over a property are patently absent, yet the said property would be in equity deemed to have been
mortgaged and as such may be apportioned or appropriated by the lender on the strength of mere
intention of the parties to create a mortgage. In other words, where under the law no mortgage or

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144487932/

18

The Cosmos Co Operative Bank Ltd vs Central Bank Of India on 4 February, 2025

charge is said to have been created over a property i.e., no conveyance of a right or interest over the
subject property has been effected, yet if the intention of parties to create a mortgage is clear, equity
would demand that such intention is not only respected but given some ef- fect to and the said
property be deemed to have been mortgaged so as to en- able the lender to assert its rights over the
same, it is known as an ‘equitable mortgage’.

31.The concept or doctrine of ‘equitable mortgage’ owes its origin to the Eng- lish case of Russel v.
Russel reported in [1783] 28 E.R. 1121 wherein the High Court of Chancery speaking through Lord
Thurlow held that where there is delivery of title by the borrower to the lender for the purpose of
availing a loan, although such deposit may not constitute a valid mortgage, but the courts in
granting specific performance to the lender to create a se- curity or lien over the property would
effectively be “supplying the legal formalities necessary to create nothing but a mortgage though one
in equity”. He explained that the court in permitting the lender to create a se- curity over the
property on the strength of the title deeds lying with it is not per se performance of a contract but
rather its execution and hence for all purposes would be a mortgage inter se the borrower and the
lender in equity. He lastly elaborated that the further grant of relief to execute such a contract which
is not a valid mortgage but nevertheless being converted into one is grounded on it being already
being a contract part performed. [See; J.B. White & Tudor in Equitable Mortgage and Leading Cases
in Equity, 9 th Ed. (Sweet & Maxwell (1928)]

32.Thus, the underlying distinction between a legal mortgage and an equitable mortgage under the
English Law is that in the former, there is conveyance or transfer of some proprietary interest in the
mortgaged property in accord- ance with the statute or law whereas in the latter the formalities
required for a legal mortgage are not fully satisfied, but the parties' intentions to create a mortgage
are clear as result of which it is deemed as a mortgage.

33.The rationale behind the existence of the concept of an ‘equitable mortgage’ was elaborated upon
by Sir William Holdsworth in A History of English Law. He explained that the evolution of equitable
mortgage is based on the principle that a mortgage at its core is essentially nothing more than a
‘secu- rity’. It is not intended as a mechanism of transferring either ownership or any vested interest
in the strict sense but rather only a means for providing a security. He elaborated how ‘equitable
mortgages’ of today’s time is a re- flection of the practicalities of the then mercantile system of the
time where due to the commercial exigencies and need for quick financial arrangements led the
community to resort to the informal practice of extending loans and creating security by mere
deposit of titles or a promissory note to repay solely on a ‘mutual understanding’ between the
parties, without any actual agreement or memorandum and without following the cumbersome
formal- ities of any transfer of conveyance of proprietary rights as required under a traditional or
legal mortgage.

34.The aforesaid may be better understood through the well-known maxim of ‘Quod fieri debuit pro
facto censetur’ which means that ‘what ought to have been done is considered as done’. Edward
Henry Turner Snell in his book on The Principles of Equity explained that the role of equity in law is
only one i.e. to rectify the injustice arising out of the rigidities of the law, to in- tervene and ensure
that substantive justice prevails over mere formalities or hyper technicalities, even when strict legal

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144487932/

19

The Cosmos Co Operative Bank Ltd vs Central Bank Of India on 4 February, 2025

requirements have not been met. Snell articulated that equity operates as a "court of conscience"
tempering the harshness of the law and fulfilling its enduring mission to deliver fair- ness and
justice where the rigid application of legal rules would otherwise result in inequity. In the context of
mortgages, take a situation where there is no express document or deed to evince that a charge was
created over the subject property and the parties at the time of availing the loan merely agreed that
they would create a mortgage in the event of default. In the eyes of law, it would be said that no
mortgage has been created whatsoever, yet the understanding between the parties to later create a
mortgage at the time whilst advancing the loan shows the ab initio intention to create a charge and
treat the subject property as a security or a collateral for the sum so ad- vanced. Under the general
principle of law, the recourse that would ordinar- ily be available to the lender in the aforesaid
situation would be to seek spe- cific performance of the said agreement (oral or written) to create a
mort- gage on the strength that there has been part performance of the agreement i.e., loan has been
advanced and thus, charge should now be permitted to be created, and thereafter proceed to
exercise its rights after the said mortgage is created. But a “court of conscience” would instead of
subjecting the lender to the rigmarole of the law, will directly give effect to the true sum and
substance of the intention of the parties and thereby give to the very agreement itself the effect of
creating a mortgage in ‘equity’ and enable the lender to exercise its rights as he would be entitled to
if the agreement had been performed.

35.Thus, where a borrower willingly parts away with any title deed or a docu- ment or a promissory
note or an undertaking in respect of a property by de- positing it with the lender for the purpose of
availing any credit facility and upon such deposit, the loan is so advanced by the lender, fairness,
good con- science and justice or in other words ‘equity’ would demand that some meaningful
significance be given to such act or conduct of the parties, as generally such act of depositing
documents against loans is more often than not for no other purpose but to create a mortgage. Thus,
a “court of con- science” would give effect to the intention of the parties in the form of an ‘equitable
mortgage’ even if there is no formal agreement or a shred of doc- ument expressly providing that
such deposit is for the purpose of creating a charge OR if the documents so deposited do not
necessarily have the effect of transferring or conveyancing any title or interest in the subject
property to the lender.

iv. Nature of an Equitable Mortgage.

36.Having understood the concept of ‘equitable mortgage’, it would now be apposite to understand
the ways in which an equitable mortgage may be cre- ated and its nature. Under the English Law,
the two primary ways for creat- ing an ‘equitable mortgage’ is either (i) by deposit of the original title
deeds to the subject property with the lender or where the original title deeds are retained by the
borrower then (ii) by way of a memorandum of understanding or an agreement simpliciter
recording the intention of the parties to create a charge over the subject property.

37.In the case on hand, the original borrowers had availed loan facilities from both, the appellant
bank and the respondent no. 1 bank herein by deposit of certain documents in respect of the said
Flat. For availing the loan facility from the respondent no. 1 bank, the original borrowers deposited
two unre- gistered agreement to sale dated 15.10.1973 and 09.11.1978 respectively in relation to the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144487932/

20

The Cosmos Co Operative Bank Ltd vs Central Bank Of India on 4 February, 2025

said Flat all the way back in 1989. Whereas, whilst availing the loan facility from the appellant bank
herein in the year 1998 the original borrowers deposited one another unregistered agreement to sale
dated 07.12.1978 in respect of the said flat which is subsequent in time along with a share certificate
of ownership of the said Flat dated 14.09.1989 that was issued by the concerned cooperative housing
society.

38.Indisputably, when the loan was granted to the original borrowers, the share certificate of
ownership being the sole document for conveyance of title had not been issued by the concerned
housing society. In such a scenario, could it be said that in order to create a mortgage by deposit of
title deeds, the re- spondent no. 1 bank was required to take or collect all documents and deeds of
title to the said Flat in its possession, more particularly when the title deed or share certificate of
ownership was not in existence at that time?

39.The High Court of Chancery in Robberts v. Croft reported in 44 E.R. 887 and a catena of other
decisions have emphatically answered the aforesaid question in a negative. It has been held that
“[...] It is not necessary, to cre- ate an equitable mortgage, that all the title deeds, or even all the
material title deeds, should be deposited. It is sufficient if the deeds deposited are material evidence
of title.”

40.In fact, the English Courts have gone to the extent of saying that the title deeds are not the only
documents a deposit of which may create an equit- able charge upon the subject property, and that
even a promissory note or an agreement for purchase of the subject property can create an equitable
mort- gage. [See; Ex parte Warner, reported in [1812] 19 Ves Jr 202; Lacon v. Allen reported in
[1856] 3 Drew. 579]. Samuel Miller in The Law of Equit- able Mortgages explained the aforesaid
with a illustration that take a case where the owner has lost an important deed or where the deeds
which have been deposited while purporting title to the property contain no reference to any other
material deeds, or a situation where there exists no possible way for the lender to ascertain whether
any other deeds or documents are actu- ally outstanding, should the lender be deprived of the
benefit of the deposit of the other documents even if the intention of parties to create a mortgage is
clear? In his opinion, the principle underlying the doctrine of ‘equitable mortgages’ is premised to
mitigate these very hardships or technicalities that often emerge in transactions of such nature from
coming in the way of cre- ation and enforcement of mortgages. He added, to hold otherwise, would
be nothing but an unfaithful dilution of the doctrine of equitable mortgages and by extension the
concept of ‘equity’ based justice. This is because for decid- ing a question of an equitable mortgage,
the court is not required to look for deposit of a valid legal title, because no passing or transfer of
title is in- volved in the first place in equitable mortgage unlike a legal mortgage, rather what the
courts look for is a transaction in the nature of a contract whereby the interests of the borrower
embraced in the subject property may be later subjected and made liable for the debt.

41.Even though, the High Court of Chancery speaking through Lord Eldon in the case of In Re: Rice
reported in [1819] 36 E.R. 632 argued against the idea of extending the doctrine of ‘equitable
mortgage’ to instances of de- posit of ‘part-deeds’ to discourage the act of scrupulous borrowers of
ob- taining loans from multiple creditors by dividing and depositing different deeds with each of
them, the position under the English Law has continued to remain the same i.e., part deposits of

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144487932/

21

The Cosmos Co Operative Bank Ltd vs Central Bank Of India on 4 February, 2025

title would be sufficient to create an equitable mortgage and that there is neither any requirement
that the mort- gagee or the lender should be required to acquire every title deed, nor is there any
requirement that the documents so deposited show a good title to the vested property. [See;
Robberts (supra). What is required is that the deeds or documents so deposited materially evinces
the intention of the parties to create a charge over the subject property and the mortgagor as- sures
itself that he has acquired all available titles or documents.

42.The Court of Chancery speaking through Lord Eldon in Knight v. Knight reported in (1840) 3
Beav 148 held that “equity looks to the intent rather than the form”. Thus, even if the document that
was deposited with the lender falls short, it would still be enforceable in equity provided the inten-
tion of the parties to do so is as clear as a noon day. In the case at hand, even though what was
deposited with the respondent no. 1 bank herein was nothing but an unregistered agreement to sale
having no legal effect of con- veyance or transfer of the said flat or any right therein in favour of the
bank, the undisputed factum that the said agreement to sale was deposited by the original borrowers
herein so as to offer the said flat as security would tan- tamount to an equitable mortgage.
Moreover, since at the time of availing the loan, the share certificate of ownership to the said Flat
was yet to be is- sued, it could be said that the respondent no. 1 bank had all the documents to the
said Flat that it could have at that time possibly taken in possession, and we even proceed on the
footing that the respondent no. 1 bank might have undertaken all the necessary steps to assure itself
that there were no other material documents to be taken possession of at the time of extending the
loan.

43.Thus, where ‘equitable mortgages’ have been created based on deposit of part-deeds or
documents purporting title or evincing intention of parties to create an interest, all such deposits
will be a valid mortgage in equity and the charge that might have been created prior in time will
assume priority over any subsequent charges or mortgagors. However, since such a mort- gage is an
‘equitable mortgage’ any rights flowing from such mortgages are only of personal character and only
rights in personam and as such will not operate against any strangers or subsequent incumbrancers
unaware of such equitable mortgage. This stems from the rule that equity acts only in perso- nam.
The very basis for creation of an ‘equitable mortgage’ is the intention of parties alone, and as such
any action or remedy can be directed only against the parties so involved. This is because, unlike a
legal mortgage where a ‘charge’ is created directly on the property itself and the title or any
proprietary interest therein is transferred to the lender thereby becoming a right enforceable in rem
in respect to the property, in case of an ‘equitable mortgage’ no such charge is said to have been
formally created on the prop- erty nor any transfer or conveyance of interest has said to occur.
Rather on the contrary, the de jure title or ownership continues to vest with the ori- ginal borrower
and only the documents thereof is ordinarily retained by the lender and as such the right of the
lender in such a situation is being en- forced through the party having title over the said property
alone i.e., the borrower and thus is only a right in personam. Edgar N. Durfee in The Lien or
Equitable Theory of the Mortgage explaining the aforesaid stated that, in cases of equitable
mortgage in the absence of any ‘conveyance’ or creation of ‘charge’, the money so advanced against
the subject property is only in the form of a personal debt and hence a right in personam at best and
the right of the lender to apportion or appropriate the subject property for repay- ment of loan only
a right to take such an action rather than a right in the property itself.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144487932/

22

The Cosmos Co Operative Bank Ltd vs Central Bank Of India on 4 February, 2025

44.‘Equitable Mortgage’ being a right in personam will not affect successive incumbrances and will
not be enforceable against successive mortgagees if the creation of such equitable charge was no
disclosed to them. This is par- ticularly because, ‘equitable mortgages’ are construed as ‘incomplete
mort- gages’ (as no actual charge is created nor any conveyance of title has taken place) and thus no
person can be permitted to derive any advantage from any incomplete title who has on his own
volition not done everything re- quisite to complete its title. If a first mortgagee voluntarily either
leaves the title deeds with the mortgagor, or voluntarily accepts part-deeds and fails to either secure
the rest or assure himself of any outstanding deeds or docu- ments, then the charge of such first
mortgagee must be postponed to any and all subsequent mortgagees, without notice of the charge of
first mort- gagee, because he due to his own gross negligence enabled the subsequent incumbrances.
Thus, even if multiple equitable mortgages are created, the first charge will have priority, unless in
case of fraud or gross negligence, or a voluntary, distinct, and unjustifiable concurrence, on the part
of the first mortgagee in either (i) retaining the remaining deeds or (ii) failure to take steps in
putting everyone to notice, more particularly the subsequent incum- brancers about the first
equitable mortgage. Where the first mortgagor has made bond fide inquiry for them and received a
reasonable excuse for their non-delivery, he shall not be postponed to a subsequent equitable
mortgage that may be created.

45.In India, the aforesaid has been recognized in Section 78 of the Act, 1882 which provides that
where on account of any fraud, misrepresentation or gross neglect of a prior mortgagee, another
person has been induced to ad- vance money on the security of the mortgaged property, the prior
mortgagee shall be postponed to the subsequent mortgagee. The said provision reads as under: -

7 8 .   P o s t p o n e m e n t   o f   p r i o r   m o r t g a g e e .   —   W h e r e ,   t h r o u g h   t h e   f r a u d ,
misrepresentation or gross neglect of prior mortgagee, another person has been
induced to advance money on the security of the mortgaged property, the prior
mortgagee shall be postponed to the subsequent mortgagee.

46.It is in this very context, this Court in Suraj Lamps (supra) emphasized on the need for
registration of documents so as to give publicity and public ex- posure to various transactions in
respect of immovable properties and en- able people to find out whether any particular property
with which they are concerned, has been subjected to any legal obligation or liability and who is or
are the person/s presently having right, title, and interest in the property. The relevant observation
reads as under: -

Advantages of Registration

10. In the earlier order dated 15.5.2009, the objects and benefits of registration were
explained and we extract them for ready ref-

erence: -

"The Registration Act, 1908, was enacted with the intention of providing orderliness,
discipline and public notice in regard to transactions relating to immovable property

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144487932/

23

The Cosmos Co Operative Bank Ltd vs Central Bank Of India on 4 February, 2025

and protection from fraud and forgery of documents of transfer. This is achieved by
requiring compulsory registration of certain types of documents and providing for
consequences of non- registration.

Section 17 of the Registration Act clearly provides that any document (other than
testamentary instru- ments) which purports or operates to create, de-

clare, assign, limit or extinguish whether in present or in future "any right, title or interest" whether
vested or contingent of the value of Rs. 100 and up-

wards to or in immovable property.

Section 49 al the said Act provides that no document required by Section 17 to be registered shall,
affect any immovable property comprised therein or re-

ceived as evidence of any transaction affected such property, unless it has been registered.
Registration of a document gives notice to the world that such a document has been executed.

Registration provides safety and security to transactions relating to immovable property, even if the
document is lost or destroyed. It gives publicity and public exposure to documents thereby pre-
venting forgeries and frauds in regard to transactions and execu- tion of documents. Registration
provides information to people who may deal with a property, as to the nature and extent of the
rights which persons may have, affecting that property. In other words, it enables people to find out
whether any particular prop- erty with which they are concerned, has been subjected to any le- gal
obligation or liability and who is or are the person/s presently having right, title, and interest in the
property. It gives solemnity of form and perpetuate documents which are of legal importance or
relevance by recording them, where people may see the record and enquire and ascertain what the
particulars are and as far as land is concerned what obligations exist with regard to them. It ensures
that every person dealing with immov- able property can rely with confidence upon the statements
con- tained in the registers (maintained under the said Act) as a full and complete account of all
transactions by which the title to the property may be affected and secure extracts/copies duly certi-
fied."

(Emphasis supplied)

47.In the present case, it appears from the materials on record, that when the loan was being
advanced by the respondent no. 1 bank, a Memorandum of Equitable Mortgage recording transfer /
deposit of the agreement to sale in respect of the said Flat was sought to be created, although the
same has not been placed on record. There are no correspondences or communications between the
respondent no. 1 bank or the original borrowers where the share certificate of ownership was
demanded, even though the Bank was well aware that the conveyance of title where the subject Flat
is situated only takes place through such certificate and not by the agreement of sale in terms of
Section 11 of the Act, 1963 read with Section 4 of the Act, 1970. Moreover, it appears that no steps
were taken by the respondent no. 1 bank to issue a public notice of equitable charge that was created

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144487932/

24

The Cosmos Co Operative Bank Ltd vs Central Bank Of India on 4 February, 2025

in its favour, as discernible from the fact that when the appellant bank upon inquiry was in- formed
by the concerned cooperative housing society that the said flat was not subject to any prior
encumbrances or charge. In such a scenario, the equitable charge of the respondent no. 1 bank
herein is liable to be post- poned to the charge created in favour of the appellant bank herein in
terms of Section 78 of the Act, 1882, and the impugned order of the High Court is liable to be
set-aside on this ground alone.

v. Distinction between Mortgage by Deposit of Title Deeds under the English Law and under the
Transfer Of Property Act, 1882.

48.At this stage we must also address ourselves on one another important as- pect where the High
Court grossly erred whilst passing the impugned judg- ment and order. As discussed in the
foregoing paragraphs of this judgment, the original borrower whilst availing the loan facility from
the respondent no. 1 and appellant, had deposited with them two unregistered agreement to sale,
and another unregistered agreement to sale along with the share certi- ficate of ownership,
respectively. Although both of the aforesaid transac- tions seek to create mortgage by deposit of
documents or title, yet there lies a very fine but pertinent distinction between the two transactions.
In respect of the loan advanced by the respondent no. 1 bank, only two unregistered agreements to
sale were deposited which as discussed earlier do not purport any title as held in Suraj Lamps
(supra) while with the appellant bank herein apart from one unregistered agreement to sale the
share certificate of ownership had also been deposited which has the effect of conveyance of title.

49.Under the English Law, whether the documents so deposited actually pur- port or transfer any
title is immaterial for the purpose of creating an ‘equit- able mortgage’ as long as the intention to do
so is clearly discernible. The position in India however is quite different. This is because under the
Eng- lish Law, a mortgage created by deposit of title or documents is not con- strued as a legal
mortgage and is only treated as an equitable mortgage. Whereas in India under the Act, 1882, more
particularly under Section 58 sub-section (f) a statutory recognition has been given to the mode of
cre- ation of mortgage by deposit of title deeds. Such a mortgage by deposit of title deeds is for all
purposes a ‘legal mortgage’ and not an equitable mort- gage. At the cost of repetition, the said
provision is once again reproduced hereunder: -

“58. “Mortgage”, “mortgagor”, “mortgagee”, “mortgage-money” and “mortgage-deed”
defined.—

(a) A mortgage is the transfer of an interest in specific immoveable property for the
purpose of securing the payment of money advanced or to be advanced by way of
loan, an existing or future debt, or the performance of an engagement which may give
rise to a pecuniary liability.

The transferor is called a mortgagor, the transferee a mortgagee; the principal money and interest of
which payment is secured for the time being arc called the mortgage-money, and the instrument (if
any) by which the transfer is effected is called a mortgage-deed.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144487932/

25

The Cosmos Co Operative Bank Ltd vs Central Bank Of India on 4 February, 2025

(b) Simple mortgage.— Where, without delivering possession of the mortgaged property, the
mortgagor binds himself personally to pay the mortgage-money, and agrees, expressly or impliedly,
that, in the event of his failing to pay according to his contract, the mortgagee shall have a right to
cause the mortgaged property to be sold and the proceeds of sale to be applied, so far as may be
necessary, in payment of the mortgage-money, the transaction is called a simple mortgage and the
mortgagee a simple mortgagee.

(c) Mortgage by conditional sale.— Where the mortgagor ostensibly sells the mortgaged property—
on condition that on default of payment of the mortgage-money on a certain date the sale shall
become absolute, or on condition that on such payment being made the sale shall become void, or
on condition that on such payment being made the buyer shall transfer the property to the seller, the
transaction is called a mortgage by conditional sale and the mortgagee a mortgagee by conditional
sale:

Provided that no such transaction shall be deemed to be a mortgage, unless the
condition is embodied in the document which effects or purports to effect the sale.

(d) Usufructuary mortgage.— Where the mortgagor delivers possession or expressly
or by implication binds himself to deliver possession of the mortgaged property to the
mortgagee, and authorises him to retain such possession until payment of the
mortgage-money, and to receive the rents and profits accruing from the property or
any part of such rents and profits and to appropriate the same in lieu of interest, or in
payment of the mortgage -money, or partly in lieu of interest or partly in payment of
the mortgage-money, the transaction is called an usufructuary mortgage and the
mortgagee an usufructuary mortgagee.

(e) English mortgage.— Where the mortgagor binds himself to re-

pay the mortgage-money on a certain date, and transfers the mortgaged property absolutely to the
mortgagee, but subject to a proviso that he will re-transfer it to the mortgagor upon payment of the
mortgage-money as agreed, the transaction is called an English mortgage.

(f) Mortgage by deposit of title-deeds.— Where a person in any of the following towns, namely, the
towns of Calcutta, Madras, and Bombay, and in any other town which the State Government
concerned may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, delivers to a creditor or
his agent documents of title to immoveable property, with intent to create a security thereon, the
transaction is called a mortgage by deposit of title-deeds.

(g) Anomalous mortgage.—A mortgage which is not a simple mortgage, a mortgage by conditional
sale, an usufructuary mortgage, an English mortgage or a mortgage by deposit of title- deeds within
the meaning of this section is called an anomalous mortgage.”

50.Section 58 sub-section (a) stipulates the general rule that mortgage is “the transfer of an interest
in specific immoveable” or as understood under the English Law as a “legal mortgage”. Section 58

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144487932/

26

The Cosmos Co Operative Bank Ltd vs Central Bank Of India on 4 February, 2025

sub-section(s) (b) to (g) fur- ther explains the different modes to create a mortgage under the Act,
1882. What is particularly important to note is the fact that, the subsequent sub- section(s) do not
either expressly or impliedly stipulate that no transfer of interest is taking place where mortgage is
created in terms of the other modes provided therein. There is also nothing in the entire Act, 1882
that mortgage created by one particular mode under Section 58 would be subser- vient to another.
In such a scenario, any mortgage that happens to be created in terms of the Act, 1882 more
particularly Section 58 would for all pur- poses be equal except in the consideration of priority of
charge. Thus, while mortgage by deposit of title deeds under the English Law is an equitable
mortgage and subservient to a legal mortgage, in India mortgage created by such deposit is not
subservient to an equitable mortgage as such mortgage is in itself a legal mortgage.

51.Deposit of title deeds is one of the many forms of mortgages whereunder there is a transfer of
interest in specific immovable property for the purpose of securing payment of money advanced or
to be advanced by way of loan. The three requisites for a valid mortgage are, (i) debt; (ii) deposit of
title deed; and (iii) an intention that the deed shall operate as security for the debt. In other words,
when the debtor deposits with the creditor title deeds of his property with an intent to create a
security, the law implies a contract between the parties to create a mortgage and no registered
instrument is re- quired under Section 59 of the Act, 1882 as in other classes of mortgage. It is
essential to bear in mind that the essence of a mortgage by deposit of title deeds is the actual
handing over by a borrower to the lender of documents of title to immovable property with the
intention that those documents shall constitute a security which will enable the creditor ultimately
to recover the money which he has lent. Whether there is an intention that the deed shall be security
for the debt is a question of fact to be decided in each case on its own merits. The said fact will have
to be decided just like any other fact based on legal presumptions, oral, documentary and/or
circumstantial evi- dence. Normally, title deeds are delivered to the bank along with a covering letter
indicating therein an intention of delivering title deed i.e. to create se- curity for the present or
future liability. In turn, bank gives a letter to the person delivering title deeds indicating acceptance
of the documents and/or title deeds by way of security either for the outstanding dues or for the loan
to be advanced. The banks, normally, maintain register of securities called Equitable Mortgage
Register; wherein the entry of title deeds is taken in the form of memorandum signed by the Branch
Manager alone, as a person ac- cepting delivery of the documents as security. These formalities are
done to establish three essential requisites of equitable mortgage, viz. (1) debit, (2) deposit of title
deed and (iii) the intention that deed shall op- erate as security for the present or future debt. But if
the parties choose to reduce the contract to writing, this implication of law is excluded by their
express bargain, and the document will be the sole evidence of its terms. In such a case the deposit
and the document both form integral parts of the transaction and are essential ingredients in the
creation of the mortgage.

52.Thus, when the original borrowers deposited with the appellant bank herein, the share certificate
of ownership to the said Flat, on that very day and date, a legal charge is said to have been created
on the flat in favour of the appel- lant bank, whereas, when it comes to the respondent no. 1 bank no
such charge on the flat was created, rather what was created was only an equit- able mortgage,
though prior in time. This distinction is particularly import- ant, because even if the agreements to
sale deposited with the respondent no. 1 bank were registered and thereby, giving public notice of

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144487932/

27

The Cosmos Co Operative Bank Ltd vs Central Bank Of India on 4 February, 2025

their exist- ence, still the appellant bank by virtue of possession of the actual title deeds to the said
Flat in the form of the share certificate of ownership would be accorded priority in charge for the
sole reason that the charge created by it is a legal mortgage in terms of Section 58 of the Act, 1882.
At this stage, we may clarify that deposit of part-deeds of title would not constitute a mort- gage in
terms of Section 58 sub-section (e) of the Act, 1882 unlike English Law, because under the latter
such deposit is only an equitable mortgage and thus, the strict rigidities may not be imposed or
insisted upon whereas in India mortgage by deposit of title deeds is a legal mortgage which in ef-
fect would defeat any equitable mortgage, and thus, the requirement to de- posit all title deeds
would have to mandatorily be required except those deeds which despite best of efforts of the
mortgagee could not have been deposited or known to be outstanding.

53.The underlying reason behind why an equitable mortgage would be subser- vient to a legal
mortgage, even where proper notice was effectuated may be understood in many different ways, we
have already discussed one of them in the foregoing paragraphs, particularly that the former does
not create any de jure charge or right in the subject property and rather is only a right in personam,
however, the short answer to the above is that equity cannot sup- plant the law and can only
supplement it. Thus, where the law is unambigu- ous and clear, equity will always yield to the law.
However, when it comes to equitable mortgages, we may rephrase the above to only say that equity
will yield to the law only to the extent provided by the law. Thus, although the legal mortgage would
have assumed priority in charge, yet an equitable mortgage may still be enforceable as secondary
charge, provided the other considerations such as notice of such mortgage is fulfilled.

54.This Court in K.J. Nathan v. S.V. Maruthi Rao reported in AIR 1965 SC 430 has explained the
fine distinction between an equitable mortgage as un- derstood in the English law and the mortgage
by deposit of title deed. K. Suba Rao J. (as His Lordship then was) speaking for Court observed as
un- der: -

“Under this definition (referring to section 58(f) of the Transfer of Property Act) the
essential requisites of mortgage by deposit of title deeds are, (i) debt), (deposit of
title-deeds, and (iii) an intention that the deeds shall be security for the debt. Though
such a mortgage is often described as an equitable mortgage, there is an essential
distinction between an equitable mortgage as understood in English Law and the
mortgage by deposit of title deeds recognized under the Transfer of Property Act in
India. In England an equitable mortgage can be created either, (1) by actual deposit
of title deeds, in which case collateral evidence is admissible to show the meaning of
the deposit and the extent of the security created, or (2) if there be no deposit of title
deeds, then by a memorandum in writing, purporting to create a security for money
advanced; See White and Tudor's Leading Case in Equity, 9th Edition, Vol. II, at p.
77. In either case it does not operate as an actual conveyance though it is enforceable
in equity; whereas under the Transfer of Property Act a mortgage by deposit of title
deeds is one of the modes of creating a legal mortgage whereunder there will be
transfer of interest in the property mortgaged to the mortgagee. This distinction will
have to be borne in mind in appreciating the scope of the English decisions cited at
the Bar. This distinction is also the basis for the view that for the purpose of priority

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144487932/

28

The Cosmos Co Operative Bank Ltd vs Central Bank Of India on 4 February, 2025

it stood on the same footing as a mortgage by deed. […]” (Emphasis supplied)

55.However, in order to obviate any confusion, we may clarify that the afore-

said observations in K.J. Nathan (supra) must not be understood to mean that equitable mortgage
has no valid basis or is not recognized in toto in In- dia. Any act of the parties that evinces a clear
intention of the parties to cre- ate a mortgage though the same might not have been created in terms
of Section 58 of the Act, 1882, may still be a valid charge in terms of Section 100 of the Act, 1882.
The said provision reads as under: -

“100. Charges.— Where immoveable property of one person is by act of parties or
operation of law made security for the payment of money to another, and the
transaction does not amount to a mort- gage, the latter person is said to have a
charge on the prop- erty; and all the provisions hereinbefore contained which ap- ply
to a simple mortgage shall, so far as may be, apply to such charge.

Nothing in this section applies to the charge of a trustee on the trust-property for
expenses properly incurred in the exe- cution of his trust, and, save as otherwise
expressly provided by any law for the time being in force, no charge shall be en-
forced against any property in the hands of a person to whom such property has been
transferred for consideration and without notice of the charge.”

56.Section 100 of the Act, 1882 provides that where a transaction does not amount to
a mortgage i.e., not a mortgage in terms of Section 58 of the said Act, the person to
whom the immovable property is offered as a security would still nevertheless be said
to have a “charge” in terms of the said pro-

vision, and that all provisions under the Act, 1882 as applicable to simple mortgage envisaged under
Section 58 sub-section (b) of the said Act shall apply to such “charge” insofar as possible. The key
distinction is that any mortgage which is not created in terms of Section 58 of the Act, 1882 i.e., all
equitable mortgages are still nevertheless a “charge” to such property. The expression “and all the
provisions hereinbefore contained which apply to a simple mortgage shall, so far as may be, apply to
such charge” assumes significance as it is not suggestive that such charge would be deemed a simple
mortgage, rather it only goes so far as to provide that the provisions that apply to simple mortgage
will also apply to such “charges” so far as possible but by no means does it provide that such
“charge” is to be treated as a simple mortgage in terms of Section 58 of the Act, 1882 i.e., as a legal
mortgage. The last part of Section 100 of the Act, 1882 further statutorily recognizes the in
personam nature of such “charge” and provides that they shall not be enforced against any person to
whom such property or interest therein has been transferred i.e., to whom it has been mortgaged in
terms of Section 58 of the said Act or any other bona-fide transferee who does not have notice of the
said charge. Thus, what may be discerned is that, ‘equit- able mortgages’ are very much recognized
in India under the nomenclature of “charge” in terms of Section 100 of the Act, 1882, and the same
will be enforceable as far as possible in terms of the procedure and provisions applicable to a simple
mortgage except those without notice of such charge.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144487932/

29

The Cosmos Co Operative Bank Ltd vs Central Bank Of India on 4 February, 2025

57.We are conscious of the decision of this Court in J.K. (Bombay) (P) Ltd. v. New Kaiser-I-Hind
Spg. and Wvg. Co. Ltd. reported in 1968 SCC OnLine SC 32 which held that an agreement to create a
mortgage only gives rise to perform such an agreement and does not amount to either a mortgage or
a charge and the decision in Haryana Financial Corpn. v. Gurcharan Singh reported in (2014) 16
SCC 722 wherein it was held that since all provisions applicable to a simple mortgage shall, as far as
possible, also apply to a charge, Section 59 of the Act, 1882 which requires a simple mortgage to be
compulsorily be registered would also be applicable and as such the cre- ation of a charge under
Section 100 of the Act, 1882 must be compulsorily registered. However, a close reading of the
decision in J.K. (Bombay) (P) Ltd. (supra) will reveal that this Court never held that any agreement
to mortgage will be incapable of creating a charge in terms of Section 100 of the Act, 1882, rather
what was held is that only those agreement to mort- gage where the intention to create a charge in
praesenti is absent will be in- capable of creating either a mortgage or a charge, but where such
intention of parties is there, the same will definitely tantamount to a ‘charge’ under Section 100 of
the Act, 1882 as held in ONGC Ltd. v. Official Liquidator reported in (2015) 5 SCC 300. Similarly,
the decision of Haryana Finan- cial Corpn (supra) holding that registration in terms of Section 59 of
the Act, 1882 is mandatory in order to create a charge prima facie appears to be incorrect in view of
an earlier decision of a larger bench of this Court in M.L. Abdul Jabbar Sahib v. M.V. Venkata Sastri
& Sons reported in (1969) 1 SCC 573 which in clear terms held that the second part of Section 100 of
the Act, 1882 does not attract the provisions of Section 59 of the said Act and that a charge may be
made without any writing and there is no provision of law which require that such an instrument
must be attested or registered. We are also in agreement with the decision of M.L. Abdul Jab- bar
Sahib (supra) as to hold otherwise would result in absurd consequences which could not have been
intended by the legislature. We say so because, if a charge can be made only by a registered
instrument in accordance with Section 59 of the Act, 1882, then the subsequent transferee will
always have notice of the said charge in view of Section 3 Explanation I which stipulates that “where
any transaction relating to immoveable property is required by law to be and has been effected by a
registered instrument, any person ac- quiring such property or any part of, or share or interest in,
such property shall be deemed to have notice of such instrument as from the date of regis- tration
[...]”. This would effectively render the second part of Section 100 of the Act, 1882 which mandates
requirement of notice to all subsequent transferees before the enforcement of a ‘charge’ as otiose
and redundant, as the moment when such instrument is registered, notice is deemed to have been
made. The very idea behind stipulating the requirement of notice under Section 100 of the Act, 1882
seems to be to save even those transactions which are not registered and do not amount to a
mortgage yet in equity may still be enforceable provided the subsequent transferee has notice of
such charge. We do not intend to dwell any further on the decisions of this Court in J.K. (Bombay)
(P) Ltd. (supra) and Haryana Financial Corpn (supra) as the present case does not require
examining whether the respondent no. 1 bank could be said to have an enforceable charge against
the appellant bank, and even otherwise if an ‘equitable mortgage’ cannot be construed as a ‘charge’
in terms of Section 100 of the Act, 1882, the former may still be permitted to be enforceable in the
extant of equity in the peculiar facts of each case. This is because the enforcement of an ‘equitable
mortgage’ being a by-product of the doctrine of equity is purely a matter of discretion that a court of
conscience may grant keeping in mind the principles of fair-play, good conscience and justice.
Where any ‘equitable mortgage’ is found to be unenforceable, the same though neither a ‘legal
mortgage’ nor a ‘charge’ may still nevertheless entitle a lender to seek other reliefs such as specific

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144487932/

30

The Cosmos Co Operative Bank Ltd vs Central Bank Of India on 4 February, 2025

performance of the contract or a suit for recovery on the strength of the ab inito intention of the
parties to create a security evident from such ‘equitable mortgage’.

58.We are conscious of the decision of this Court in Kedar Lal v. Hari Lal re- ported in AIR 1952 SC
47 wherein it was held that the whole of law of mortgage in India, including the law of contribution
arising out of a transac- tion of mortgage, is now statutory and is embodied in the Act, 1882 read
with the Civil Procedure Code, 1908 and that the courts cannot travel be- yond these provisions. The
relevant observations read as under: -

“27. So far as Section 43 is concerned, I am not prepared to apply it unless Sections
82 and 92 can be excluded. Both Sec- tions 43 and 82 deal with the question of
contribution. Sec- tion 43 is a provision of the Contract Act dealing with con- tracts
generally. Section 82 applies to mortgages. As the right to contribution here arises
out of a mortgage, I am clear that Section 82 must exclude Section 43 because when
there is a general law and a special law dealing with a par- ticular matter, the special
excludes the general. In my opin- ion, the whole law of mortgage in India, including
the law of contribution arising out of a transaction of mortgage, is now statutory and
is embodied in the Transfer of Property Act read with the Civil Procedure Code. I am
clear we cannot travel beyond these statutory provisions.”

59.However, a close reading of the aforesaid paragraph of Kedar Lal (supra) would reveal that the
observations were made in light of the question whether Section 43 of the Indian Contract Act, 1882
which deals with right to contribution would be applicable to such a right which is arising out of a
mortgage to the exclusion of Section 82 of the Act, 1882 which deals with mortgages. It was in this
context this Court held that when it comes to mort- gages it will not be permissible to travel beyond
the scheme of Act, 1882 and venture into the provisions contained in other laws.

60.However, this by no stretch means that the concept of equitable mortgage has no place in the
Indian jurisprudence. The concept of equitable mortgage is purely a creation and by-product of the
doctrine of equity, and thus, the absence of any specific provision under the Act, 1882 providing for
such a mortgage will not run to the detriment of something which is essentially de- signed to ensure
that principles of fair-play, good conscience and justice en- dure. There is no decision which either
specifically excludes or outrightly rejects the application of this doctrine. Rather, the subsequent
decision of this Court in K.J. Nathan (supra) it was specifically stated that although the concept of
equitable mortgage as evolved under the English Law cannot be considered to be a rule of law,
which as also discussed by us in the forego- ing paragraphs is by-product of doctrine of equity and
not the law of the land, yet they may serve as a guide. The relevant observations read as un- der: -

10. The foregoing discussion may be summarized thus :

Under the Transfer of Property Act a mortgage by deposit of title deeds is one of the
forms of mortgages whereun- der there is a transfer of interest in specific immovable
property for the purpose of securing payment of money advanced or to be advanced
by way of loan. Therefore, such a mortgage of property takes effect against a mort-

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144487932/

31

The Cosmos Co Operative Bank Ltd vs Central Bank Of India on 4 February, 2025

gage deed subsequently executed and registered in re- spect of the same property.
The three requisites for such a mortgage are, (i) debt, (ii) deposit of title deed; and
(iii) an intention that the deeds shall be security for the debt. Whether there is an
intention that the deeds shall be secu- rity for the debt is a question of fact in each
case. The said fact will have to be decided just like any other fact on presumptions
and on oral, documentary or circum- stantial evidence. There is no presumption of
law that the mere deposit of title deeds constitutes a mortgage, for no such
presumption has been laid down either in the Evi- dence Act or in the Transfer of
Property Act. But a court may presume under Section 114 of the Evidence Act that
under certain circumstances a loan and a deposit of title deeds constitute a mortgage.
But that is really an infer-

ence as to the existence of one fact from the existence of some other fact or facts. Nor
the fact that at the time the title deeds were deposited there was an intention to exe-
cute a mortgage deed in itself negatives, or is inconsis- tent with, the intention to
create a mortgage by deposit of title deeds to be in force till the mortgage deed was
exe- cuted. The decisions of English courts making a distinc- tion between the debt
preceding the deposit and that fol- lowing it can at best be only a guide; but the said
distinc- tion itself cannot be considered to be a rule of law for ap- plication under all
circumstances. Physical delivery of documents by the debtor to the creditor is not the
only mode of deposit. There may be a constructive deposit. A court will have to
ascertain in each case whether in sub- stance there is a delivery of title deeds by the
debtor to the creditor. If the creditor was already in possession of the titledeeds, it
would be hypertechnical to insist upon the formality of the creditor delivering the
title deeds to the debtor and the debtor redelivering them to the credi- tor. What
would be necessary in those circumstances is whether the parties agreed to treat the
documents in the possession of the creditor or his agent as delivery to him for the
purpose of the transaction.” (Emphasis supplied)

61.Thus, in such a situation where a transaction does not amount to a mortgage but nevertheless can
be construed as a preliminary step towards the prepara- tion of a mortgage which will be security
thereafter with nothing else done for conveyance or transfer of title or interest, there three recourses
may be available to the lender: -

(i) He may simply claim that the transaction amounts to an equitable mortgage as it
was for the purpose of creating a present or immediate security which a court of
equity ought to consider; or

(ii) He may claim that there has been a sufficient part performance of the contract,
with attending circumstances which a court ought to relieve by permitting the lender
to ‘perfect its mortgage’ i.e., to take further steps for the transfer of conveyance of
title or interest in order to cre-

ate a mortgage; or

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144487932/

32

The Cosmos Co Operative Bank Ltd vs Central Bank Of India on 4 February, 2025

(iii) He may bring a suit for recovery of money and base his claim simply on the ab
initio intention of the parties to create a security in the first place and the resultant
part-performance of the contract insofar as the loan was extended based on such
promise or consideration of secu-

rity.

62.Before we close this judgment, we must look into the observations made by the High Court in
para 8 of its impugned order. In para 8 the High Court has recorded that at the time of sanction and
grant of the loan by the appellant- bank herein i.e. sometime in November, 1998 the flat in question
was in custodia legis of the court receiver appointed in the year 1994. What weighed with the High
Court was the submission canvassed on behalf of the Central Bank that the validity of the mortgaged
flat in question in favour of the appellant bank was also questionable. The reason why the High
Court said so is because both the agreements are unregistered. According to the learned counsel
appearing for the Central Bank, the agreement which appel- lant bank accepted was also
unregistered. Then both the banks are sailing in the same boat. However, what seems to have been
overlooked by the Cent- ral Bank is the fact that when the borrowers approached the appellant bank
for loan they had a valid title deed i.e., the original share certificate issued by the society. The
issuance of the original share certificate was also con- firmed by the society vide letter dated
13.11.1998, which forms a part of the record.

63.The original share certificate which was produced before the appellant-bank as availed Title deed
assumes significance in view of the provisions of Sec- tion 11 of the Act 1963, more particularly,
sub-section (1) of Section 11 of Act which reads thus: -

"11. Promoter to convey title, etc., and execute documents, according to agreement.—
(1) A promoter shall take all necessary steps to complete his title and convey, to the
organisation of persons, who take flats, which is registered either as a co-operative
society or as a company as aforesaid, or to an association flat-takers or apartment
owners his right, title and interest in the land and building, and execute all relevant
documents therefor in accordance with the agreement executed under Section 4 and
if no period for the execution of the conveyance is agreed upon, he shall execute the
conveyance within the prescribed period and also deliver all documents of title
relating to the property which may be in his possession or power."

(Emphasis supplied)

64.In para 8 of the impugned judgment, the High Court has recorded that the appellant bank herein
had sought to rely upon the original share certificate issued by the Society as a valid piece of title
deed. However, the High Court got carried away by the fact that the first charge was that of the
Central Bank and not of the appellant bank, and failed to notice the distinction that exists between
an ‘equitable mortgage’ and a ‘legal mortgage’.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144487932/

33

The Cosmos Co Operative Bank Ltd vs Central Bank Of India on 4 February, 2025

65.The proposition of law is that though the transaction evidenced by the prior unregistered
document is valid in itself, yet any title or interest created by it is liable to be defeated under the rule
of priority by a valid later and legal sale or mortgage evidenced by a duly registered document. The
reason is, otherwise, no effect can be given to the rule which implies that the later re- gistered title is
intended to prevail against an earlier unregistered title. No weight can, therefore, be attached to the
contention that by a valid unre- gistered agreement of sale, the vendor's title is exhausted, he has,
after- wards, nothing to sell, and the later registered sale deed gives nothing to the predecessor. The
fallacy in the contention lies in ignoring the reason of the rule, namely that as between the registered
and unregistered transactions, the registered transaction creates the dominant right or title.

E. CONCLUSION

66.In view of the aforesaid, we have reached the conclusion that the impugned order passed by the
High Court is not correct and it deserves to be set aside.

67.In the result the appeal succeeds and is hereby allowed. The impugned Or- der passed by the
High Court is hereby set aside. Since, the respondent no. 1 had failed in bringing the factum of its
‘equitable mortgage’ to the notice of the appellant bank, the respondent no. 1 bank is not entitled to
enforce the same qua the recovery proceeds of the appellant bank herein.

68.We are informed that an amount of Rs. 51 lakh is lying deposited with the DRT maintained in an
escrow account. The same now be disbursed along with interest in favour of the appellant bank.

69.We direct the Registry to send one copy each of this judgment to all the High Courts with further
request to each of the High Courts to forward the judgment to the DRTs and DRAT benches.

70.Pending application(s), if any, stand disposed of.

.......................................................... J.

(J.B. Pardiwala) .......................................................... J.

(R. Mahadevan) New Delhi;

04th February, 2025

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144487932/

34

