The Secretary All India Shri Shivaji ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 1 April, 2025

T h e   S e c r e t a r y   A l l   I n d i a   S h r i   S h i v a j i   . . .   v s   T h e   S t a t e   O f
Maharashtra on 1 April, 2025

Author: Sudhanshu Dhulia

Bench: Sudhanshu Dhulia

                                                                  REPORTABLE
2025 INSC 422
                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

              CIVIL APPEAL NO(S)._______________ OF 2025
      [@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO(S). 7058-7061 OF 2019]

     THE SECRETARY, ALL INDIA SHRI SHIVAJI
     MEMORIAL SOCIETY (AISSMS) AND ORS.    …APPELLANT(S)

                                              Versus

     THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA AND ORS.                       …RESPONDENT(S)

                                              WITH

                      CIVIL APPEAL NO(S)._______________ OF 2025
               [ @ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO(S). 4787 OF 2025]

     THE SECRETARY, ALL INDIA SHRI SHIVAJI
     MEMORIAL SOCIETY (AISSMS)            …APPELLANT(S)

                                              Versus

             LAXMAN SHIVAJI GODSE & ORS.                  …RESPONDENT(S)

                                          JUDGMENT

SUDHANSHU DHULIA, J.

1. Leave granted.

2. By means of the Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61248775/

1

The Secretary All India Shri Shivaji ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 1 April, 2025

7058-7061 of 2019, the appellant-Society seeks to challenge the order of the Division Bench of the
Bombay High Court dated 17.07.2017 as well as the order dated 22.12.2018, passed in review later.
The impugned orders of the High Court direct the appellant-Society to extend the benefit of revised
pay scales under the 6 th Central Pay Commission to the Respondent-teachers, who were the
original Writ Petitioners before the Bombay High Court. The Respondent-teachers are the ones who
are presently teaching in engineering and technical institutes run and managed by the
Appellant-Society, which is a private body and is not under the grant in aid of the Government.

3. Brief facts of the case are that the Respondent-teachers, who possess a Master’s degree in their
field, were appointed as Lecturers/Assistant Professors by the appellant-Society in the institutes
between 1995 and 2009. Requisite approval for their appointment was taken from the concerned
Universities to which the said institutes were affiliated. It is also an admitted fact that the
Respondent-teachers, with the exception of one teacher, were not able to acquire Ph.D.’s within
seven years of their appointment in service, as was required.

4. At this stage, we may need to refer to the prescribed qualification of teachers in an Engineering
Institute, which is laid down by the All India Council for Technical Education (hereinafter referred
to as ‘AICTE’). AICTE is a body which was initially constituted in the year 1945 as an advisory body
to the Government of India but was given a statutory status under the All India Council for
Technical Education Act of 1987 (for short ‘1987 Act’) and we now can trace its formation as a
Statutory Body under Section 3 of the 1987 Act. Its powers and functions are given under Section 10
of the 1987 Act, which read as under:

“10. Functions of the Council.— (1) It shall be the duty of the Council to take all such
steps as it may think fit for ensuring coordinated and integrated development of
technical education and maintenance of standards and for the purposes of
performing its functions under this Act, the Council may—

-----x-----x-----x-----

(i) lay down norms and standards for courses, curricula, physical and instructional
facilities, staff pattern, staff qualifications, quality instructions, assessment and
examinations;”

5. Thus, under the powers referred above, AICTE is mandated to provide qualifications for teachers
that would include Lecturers, Assistant Professors, Associate Professors and Professors, of
Engineering and Technical Colleges.

6. It is an admitted position by both the sides here that the crucial date when Ph.D. was prescribed
for the first time as a qualification for Lecturers/Assistant Professors is 15.03.2000. Prior to
15.03.2000, Ph.D. was not an essential and mandatory qualification for Lecturers/Assistant
Professors. Out of the nine private respondents before us, who were also petitioners before the High
Court, four were appointed prior to 15.03.2000 and the remaining five were appointed post
15.03.2000, when the notification dated 15.03.2000 had come into effect.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61248775/

2

The Secretary All India Shri Shivaji ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 1 April, 2025

7. The subject matter of the notification dated 15.03.2000 reads as under:

“AICTE NOTIFICATION ON REVISION OF PAY-SCALES AND ASSOCIATED
TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE OF TEACHERS, LIBRARIANS AND
PHYSICAL EDUCATION PERSONNEL FOR DEGREE LEVEL TECHNICAL
INSTITUTIONS.” The above notification of AICTE prescribed minimum qualification
for various teaching posts in degree level technical institutes and further prescribed
qualifications for Assistant Professor as follows:

Appendix-E Table E-1 MINIMUM QUALIFICATION AND EXPERIENCE
P R E S C R I B E D   F O R   T E A C H I N G   P O S T   I N   D E G R E E   L E V E L   T E C H N I C A L
INSTITUTIONS ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY DISCIPLINES SI. No. CADR
QUALIFICATION EXPERIENCE QUALIFICATION AND E EXPERIENCE FOR
CANDIDATES FROM INDUSTRY & PROFESSION 2 Assista PhD degree with the 3
years experience in Candidates from nt first class Degree at Teaching/Industry/Rese
Industry/Profession Profess Bachelor’s or Master’s arch at the level of with First
Class or level in appropriate Lecturer or equivalent Bachelor’s Degree in branch of
the appropriate branch Engineering/Technolog of y Engineering/Technolog y or First
Class Master’s Degree in the appropriate branch of Engineering/Technolog y And
Professional work which is significant and can be recognized as equivalent to Ph.D.
degree and with 5 years experience would also be eligible.

Under the “CAREER ADVANCEMENT” heading of the notification dated 15.03.2000, Clause 7 (b)
was as follows:

(b) For movement into grades of Assistant Professor and above, the minimum
eligibility criterion would be Ph.D. Those teachers without Ph.D. can go upto the level
of lecturer (Selection grade).

8. Then comes AICTE notification of 2005 issued on 28.11.2005, which again prescribes the
following minimum qualification for various teaching posts in degree-level technical institutes and
further prescribed qualifications for Assistant Professor as follows:

      SL. CADRE                     PRESCRIBED
      NO                            QUALIFICATIONS                 AND
      .                             EXPERIENCE
      2.  ASSISTANT
          PROFESSOR
          QUALIFICATION &           Ph.D degree with the first
          EXPERIENCE FOR            class at Bachelor’s or Master’s
          CANDIDATES                level in the appropriate branch
          FROM TEACHING             of      Engineering/Technology
                                    with 2 years experience in
                                    Teaching      /    Industry    /
                                    Research at the level of
                                    Lecturer or equivalent.
                                                    OR

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61248775/

3

The Secretary All India Shri Shivaji ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 1 April, 2025

                                    First Class at Master’s level in
                                    the appropriate branch of
                                    Engineering / Technology with
                                    5     years     experience    in
                                    teaching / industry /Research
                                    at the level of lecturer or
                                    equivalent. Such candidates
                                    will be required to obtain Ph.D
                                    degree within a period of 7
                                    years from the date of
                                    appointment      as    Assistant

(cid:12)                                Professor.     In the case of
                                Universities      /      University
                                departments           and       the
                                institutions       offering     PG
                                programmes / Research, Ph.D
                                is a must.       For candidates
                                from Industry, professional
                                experience      in     R&D     and
                                patents would be desirable
                                requirement failing which the
                                increments will be stopped
                                until Ph.D is earned.

Thus, there can be no doubt that a candidate could be appointed as an Assistant Professor after
15.03.2000, only if he/she had a Ph.D. degree with a first class at Bachelor’s or Master’s level in
their appropriate branch of Engineering and two years of teaching experience. A candidate could
also be appointed Assistant Professor if he/she had a first class at Master’s level in their appropriate
branch of Engineering and five years of teaching experience but such a candidate will be required to
obtain a Ph.D. within a period of seven years from the date of appointment as Assistant Professor.

9. We are presently concerned with such teachers amongst the respondents who were neither Ph.D.
at the time of their appointment nor have they acquired Ph.D. within seven years.

10. After the two notifications referred above comes the AICTE notification of 05.03.2010. This
notification again prescribes qualification for teachers in technical institutes and reiterates the same
qualification. In addition, the notification also prescribes “the pay structure for different categories
of teachers and equivalent positions”. With this notification, the designation of lecturers was
changed to Assistant Professors, and consequent to this notification there would now be only three
categories of teachers in universities and colleges (including technical institutions) i.e. Assistant
Professor, Associate Professor, and Professor, which becomes clear from a perusal of the following
portion of the notification:

“General

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61248775/

4

The Secretary All India Shri Shivaji ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 1 April, 2025

(i) There shall be only three designations in respect of teachers in universities and
colleges, namely, Assistant Professors, Associate Professors and Professors…..”

11. Further, the pay structure and re-designation of Assistant Professors is prescribed in the 2010
AICTE notification and the provision with which we are presently concerned is as below:

“Revised Pay Scales, Service conditions and Career Advancement Scheme for
teachers and equivalent positions:

The pay structure for different categories of teachers and equivalent positions shall
be as indicated below:

(a) Assistant Professor/Associate Professor/ Professors in Technical Institutions

(i) …

(ii) … ...

(ix) Incumbent Assistant Professor and Incumbent Lecturers (Selection Grade) who
have completed 3 years in the pre-revised pay scale of Rs.12000-18300 on
01.01.2006 shall be placed in Pay Band of Rs.37400-

67000 with AGP Pay of Rs.9000 and shall be re-designated as Associate Professor.”

12. The respondent-teachers claim the benefits of the above provision. The Assistant Professors i.e.,
the respondents who had completed three years of service in pre-revised pay scale of
Rs.12000-18300 on 01.01.2006 wanted to be placed in the Pay Band of Rs.37400-67000 with AGP
of Rs.9000 and to be designated as Associate Professor. This was denied to them by the
appellant-Society for the reason that they did not possess a Ph.D. degree which was a mandatory
requirement to be an Assistant Professor. The respondents had filed a Writ Petition before the High
Court, as they were being denied this by the present Appellant.

This is the precise dispute in the present case, and the question to be decided by this Court is
whether the respondents who have admittedly completed three years of service in the pre-revised
pay scale of Rs.12000-18300 (on 01.01.2006) are now entitled for pay band of Rs.37400- 67000
and AGP of Rs.9000 and also whether they are liable to be redesignated as Associate Professors.

13. Relying upon the decision of the co-ordinate Bench of the Bombay High Court at Aurangabad in
Sanjay Shrirangrao Surwase and Ors v. State of Maharashtra and Ors (WP No. 6001 of 2013), same
relief was given in favour of the respondents herein as well by the Bombay High Court in the
impugned order dated 17.07.2017, and they were to be re-designated as Associate Professor and be
given a higher pay scale as per the 6th Pay Commission. When the present appellant had challenged
the impugned order dated 17.07.2017 (of the Bombay High Court) before this Court, the question
which had come up before this court was whether the teachers were qualified enough to be given the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61248775/

5

The Secretary All India Shri Shivaji ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 1 April, 2025

benefit as they had sought for. The appellant before this Court had argued that the decision of the
Aurangabad Bench of the Bombay High Court in the earlier petition cannot be applicable in the case
of present respondents as it has been made applicable in the impugned order dated 17.07.2017 for
the reason that whereas the petitioners before the Aurangabad Bench were qualified, the
respondents in the present case lack the requisite qualifications. The obvious indication of the
Appellant was on the Ph.D. degree. The petition was, therefore, disposed of by this Court in Special
Leave Petition (Civil) Nos. 27975-27976 of 2017 by granting liberty to the appellant to file a Review
Petition before the Bombay High Court. The following order was passed:

“Mr. Ravindra Shrivastava, learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioners
submits that the present case is not covered in terms of the decision in Sanjay
Shrirangrao Surwase & Ors. v. State of Maharashtra & Ors. rendered in Writ Petition
No. 6001/2013 on the file of the Division Bench of the High Court of Bombay at
Aurangabad. One main distinction pointed out is that, it was a case of qualified
teachers whereas in this case the teachers are not qualified as per A.I.C.T.E. and not
entitled to the benefit of designation and consequent benefit of Sixth Pay
Commission.

We do not find that this aspect has been addressed before the High Court and nor has
the High Court dealt with it. In the event of filing such a review within thirty days
from today the same may not be dismissed on the ground of delay.

The special leave petitions are, accordingly, disposed of.

We make it clear that we have not considered the matter on merits.” (Emphasis
provided)

14. In terms of the liberty granted by this Court vide the above-

quoted order, the Appellant-Society then filed Review Petitions before the Bombay High Court. The
High Court, while dismissing the review petitions took note of the fact that the issue of the earlier
Bombay High Court (Aurangabad Bench) judgment in Sanjay Shrirangrao Surwase being
distinguishable on facts was not raised by the Appellant-Society earlier. The High Court took note of
the submissions on behalf of the Respondent-teachers to the effect that the teachers who were
petitioners in the Sanjay Shrirangrao Surwase also did not have a Ph.D., and a specific averment in
that regard was made in the Reply Affidavit before the High Court. The High Court dismissed the
review petitions filed by the Appellant, as there was no difference between the two batch of
petitioners regarding their qualifications.

15. Be that as it may, these are the two orders (dated17.07.2017 and 22.12.2018) which are presently
under challenge before this Court. Since the decision of this Court dated 03.11.2017 wherein liberty
was given to the appellant to file a review clearly states that this Court had not expressed anything
on the merit of the case, we have heard the matter in its entirety on every aspect of the matter
argued from both the sides.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61248775/

6

The Secretary All India Shri Shivaji ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 1 April, 2025

16. As we have already indicated above, there are two different categories of teachers before us as
respondents. We have one set who were appointed prior to 15.03.2000 when Ph.D. was made a
minimum qualification for the first time; and then the other class of teachers who were appointed
after 15.03.2000, when Ph.D. was an essential qualification.

17. As far as such teachers are concerned who were appointed prior to 15.03.2000, we do not see any
reason to disturb the findings of the High Court regarding their entitlements under the 6th Pay
Commission, etc. All the same, the other half of respondents, who were appointed post the AICTE
notification dated 15.03.2000 had come into force, they fall in a different category altogether. These
are the teachers who were appointed after 15.03.2000 and were not having Ph.D. qualification
though it was mandatory and moreover had also failed to acquire a Ph.D. within seven years as
stipulated in the AICTE notification of 2005 as well as their appointment order. At this juncture, we
would like to record the submission made at the Bar that one of these respondents i.e., Dr. Madhavi
Ajay Pradhan who though was appointed as Assistant Professor on 14.06.2004 (i.e. after 2000
AICTE Notification) has gone ahead and completed her Ph.D. She also cannot be denied the benefit
of the Bombay High Court decision presently under challenge before this Court.

18. The learned Counsel for the private respondents Sri Abhay Atul Anturkar would, however, argue
that the powers vested with AICTE were statutory in nature under Section 23 of the 1987 Act, which
reads as follows:

23. Power to make regulations.—(1) The Council may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, make regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, and the
rules generally to carry out the purposes of this Act.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations
may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—

(a) regulating the meetings of the Council and the procedure for conducting business thereat;

(b) the terms and conditions of service of the officers and employees of the Council;

(c) regulating the meetings of the Executive Committee and the procedure for conducting business
thereat;

(d) the area of concern, the constitution, and powers and functions of the Board of Studies;

(e) the region for which the Regional Committee be established and the constitution and functions
of such Committee.

19. Learned Counsel for the private respondents would further argue that notification which is
clarificatory in nature had come out on 4th January, 2016, issued by the AICTE in exercise of
powers under the above-quoted Section 23 of the 1987 Act . The notification dated 04.01.2016 was
to clarify “on certain issues / anomalies pertaining to qualifications, pay scales, service conditions,

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61248775/

7

The Secretary All India Shri Shivaji ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 1 April, 2025

career advancement schemes (CAS) etc. for teachers and other academic staff of technical
institutions (degree /diploma)” The clarification with which we are presently concerned, and it is in
the form of a questionnaire is as follows:

      S.No. Issue                          Clarification

(cid:12)      53     Whether Asst. Professor      Such candidates will
             (Re-designated          as   be      required    to

Associate Professor w.e.f. complete Ph.D. within 1-1-2006), who are not 7 years from the date able to
complete the Ph.D. of Joining, failing in seven years from the which increments date of Joining shall
be stopped until (Direct/CAS) will be Ph.D. is earned.

reverted back.

20. The learned Counsel for the respondents then relies upon the judgment of this Court in Christy
James Jose and Ors v. State of Kerala and Ors 2016 SCC OnLine SC 1817 and would argue that the
AICTE clarification of 04.01.2016 has a statutory status, and in terms of the same, the only
consequence of non-completion of Ph.D. within seven years would be the stoppage of increments.
We have gone through the above decision. The above case does not hold that the 2016 clarification
has statutory status. In fact, while interpreting Clause 53 of the 2016 clarification (on which the
respondents also rely), the decision only says that the failure to acquire a Ph.D. within seven years
can result in stoppage of increments but cannot result in termination of services. The above decision
is silent on the aspect of movement to a higher pay scale, which is the primary issue in the present
case.

21. In any case, the interpretation of the 2016 clarification has been settled by a subsequent
three-judge bench decision of this Court in Gelus Ram Sahu v. Surendra Kumar Singh (2020) 4 SCC
484, which has been placed before us by Sri Ravindra Shrivastava, the learned Senior Counsel
appearing for the Appellant. He would argue that the clarificatory notification of 2016 is of no
relevance as it only reiterates the position regarding qualification, re- designation, and pay scales of
Assistant Professors and Associate Professors which were already provided in the AICTE
notification of 2010. The learned Senior Counsel for the appellant also argues that the 2016
notification does not have statutory status, as is being projected by the respondents. As stated above,
he relies upon the later three-judge Bench decision of this Court in Gelus Ram Sahu (supra) where it
was observed that:

“24. “Clarificatory” legislations are an exception to the general rule of presuming
prospective application of laws, unless given retrospective effect either expressly or
by necessary implication. In order to attract this exception, mere mention in the title
or in any provision that the legislation is “clarificatory” would not suffice. Instead, it
must substantively be proved that the law was in fact “clarificatory”…..

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61248775/

8

The Secretary All India Shri Shivaji ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 1 April, 2025

25. The present case is one where except for the title, nothing contained therein
indicates that the 2016 AICTE Notification was clarificatory in nature. The said
Notification is framed in a question-answer style and merely restates what has
already been made explicit in the 2010 AICTE Regulations. There seems to be no
intent to alter the position of law but instead only to simplify what the AICTE had
resolved through its original regulation. The 2016 AICTE Notification is a response to
the doubts put forth to AICTE by the public. This is evident from the stand put forth
by AICTE before us in its reply as well as during the course of hearing, namely, that
there is no retrospective alteration in the qualification prescribed for the post of
Principal.

26. Even if the 2016 AICTE Notification was clarificatory, it must be demonstrated
that there was an ambiguity in the criteria for appointment to the posts of Principal,
which needed to be remedied. Clarificatory notifications are distinct from
amendatory notifications, and the former ought not to be a surreptitious tool of
achieving the ends of the latter. If there exists no ambiguity, there arises no question
of making use of a clarificatory notification. Hence, in the absence of any omission in
the 2010 AICTE Regulations, the 2016 AICTE Notification despite being generally
clarificatory must be held to have reiterated the existing position of law.

22. We must note that this Court in the above case has not given its findings in general terms
between clarificatory notifications as distinct from statutory amendments, what it was actually
comparing were the precise two notifications with which we are presently concerned i.e.,
notification dated 05.03.2010 and clarificatory notification dated 04.01.2016. It was in that context
that it was held that a clarificatory notification cannot be a surreptitious tool for achieving the ends
of an amending notification. “If there exists no ambiguity, there arises no question of making use of
a clarificatory notification. Hence, in the absence of any omission in the 2010 AICTE Regulations,
the 2016 AICTE Notification despite being generally clarificatory must be held to have reiterated the
existing position of law”.

23. Moreover, the provision on which the private respondents are relying upon clearly stipulates
that such assistant professors who are not having Ph.D. qualification shall acquire the same within
seven years failing which they will not be given their increment. Now when the provision even in its
clarificatory notification denies an increment, then by logic such teachers cannot be given the higher
pay scale. In any case, the notifications of 2005 and 2010 leaves nothing in doubt that such teachers
will not be given the higher pay scale.

24. To clarify, the phrase “incumbent Assistant Professors and incumbent Lecturers” given in Clause
(ix) of 2010 Notification of AICTE would mean such Assistant Professors and Lecturers who have
the essential qualifications including Ph.D. or those who were appointed prior to 15.03.2000
without Ph.D. This is the only meaningful manner in which the above provision can be read. AICTE
which is an expert body mandated by law, inter alia, to prescribe essential qualifications for a
teaching post, and hence we cannot question the logic and wisdom of this expert body which
prescribes the essential qualifications for these posts. No one has challenged such a qualification,

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61248775/

9

The Secretary All India Shri Shivaji ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 1 April, 2025

which is Ph.D. in the present case, on the ground that it should not have been made an essential
qualification. Further in the present case, the law not only prescribes qualifications but also gives
the consequences of not having these qualifications. We find nothing arbitrary in such prescriptions.

25. This Court time and again has reiterated that the responsibility, of fixing qualifications for
purposes of appointment, promotion etc. of staff or qualifications for admissions, is that of expert
bodies (in the present case, the AICTE), and so long as qualifications prescribed are not shown to be
arbitrary or perverse, the Courts will not interfere. In All India Council for Technical Education v.
Surinder Kumar Dhawan & Ors. (2009) 11 SCC 726, this Court while dealing with the question
regarding decision taken by AICTE whether a bridge course should be permitted to make
diploma-holders eligible for engineering course, observed as under:

“15. … AICTE consists of professional and technical experts in the field of education
qualified and equipped to decide on those issues. In fact, a statutory duty is cast on
them to decide these matters.

16. The courts are neither equipped nor have the academic or technical background
to substitute themselves in place of statutory professional technical bodies and take
decisions in academic matters involving standards and quality of technical
education…

17. The role of statutory expert bodies on education and the role of courts are well
defined by a simple rule. If it is a question of educational policy or an issue involving
academic matter, the courts keep their hands off. If any provision of law or principle
of law has to be interpreted, applied or enforced, with reference to or connected with
education, the courts will step in…” In other words, normally, courts should not
interfere with the decisions taken by expert statutory bodies regarding academic
matter: may it relate to qualification for admission of students or qualification
required by teachers for appointment, salary, promotion, entitlement to a higher pay
scale etc. However, this does not mean that Courts are deprived of their powers of
judicial review. It only means that courts must be slow in interfering with the opinion
of experts in regard to academic standards and powers of judicial review should only
be exercised in cases where prescribed qualification or condition is against the law,
arbitrary or involves interpretation of any principle of law [Also see: Medical Council
of India v.

Sarang & Ors. (2001) 8 SCC 427]. Consequently, where a candidate does not possess the minimum
qualifications, prescribed by an expert body, for appointment or promotion to a particular post in an
educational institution, such a candidate will not be entitled to get appointed or will be deprived of
certain benefits, which is the case we have in hand.

26. We also have to take into account the fact that in the present situation the law itself creates two
different classes, an Assistant Professor with Ph.D. and another Assistant Professor without Ph.D. If
the salary, designation, etc. would remain unchanged for the two irrespective of whether one has

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61248775/

10

The Secretary All India Shri Shivaji ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 1 April, 2025

Ph.D. or not, as the private respondents would like us to accept then it may have a negative fallout in
the quality of teaching. Our focus is as much with the quality of teaching as with the equity in service
conditions.

27. Under the circumstances, and in terms of what we have held above, the respondents who were
appointed after 15.03.2000, who were non-Ph.D. and had also failed to acquire the same within
seven years of appointment as was required, cannot be given the benefit of 2010 notification
inasmuch as they cannot be given a higher pay scale or re-designated as an Associate Professor. The
phrase ‘incumbent Assistant Professor’ in the 2010 notification, to our mind, would only include
such Assistant Professors working on the post who had a Ph.D. qualification at the time of their
appointment or who though did not have a Ph.D. qualification at the time of their appointment but
subsequently in terms of the notification dated 15.03.2000 read with subsequent notification dated
28.11.2005 acquired Ph.D. within seven years of their appointment or those appointed prior to
15.03.2000; when Ph.D. was not an essential qualification, continued uninterruptedly. Those
teachers who were appointed after 15.03.2000 and had failed to acquire Ph.D. qualification even
thereafter will not be entitled to the benefits of the 2010 notification given in Clause (ix).

28. The appellant shall release the higher pay scale to those respondents who are appointed prior to
15.03.2000 with an interest of 7.5% per annum on the arrears within a period of four weeks from
today failing which the interest shall be calculated at the rate of 15% per annum. These are Mr.
Pandurang Abhimanyu Patil, Mrs. Mangal Hemant Dhend, Mr. Diwakar Haribhau Joshi, Mr.
Shivanandgouda Kallanagouda Biradar. Since we have been apprised at the Bar that one of the
respondents (Dr. Madhavi Ajay Pradhan), though appointed after the AICTE notification of 2000,
has acquired Ph.D., the above direction is also applicable in her case and appellant shall release
benefits in her favour subject to proper verification of her Ph.D. degree by the appellant. The rest of
the private respondents since they have failed to acquire Ph.D. within seven years as required,
cannot be designated as Associate Professors or be entitled for the higher pay scale.

29. As and when, these teachers acquire a Ph.D. they would be at liberty to move an application
before their respective institutions and AICTE for grant of higher pay scale and designation of
Associate Professor, which shall be considered by them in accordance with law.

30. Consequently, the Civil Appeal arising out of SLP(C) No.7058-7061 of 2019 is partly allowed in
the above terms.

31. Insofar as Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No.4787 of 2025 is concerned, the amount of Rs.30
lakhs deposited by appellant before the High Court shall not be disbursed till the final disposal of
review petitions pending before the High Court which shall now be decided in the light of this
judgment as expeditiously as possible. The impugned order of the High Court is modified to that
extent and the appeal is disposed of in the above terms.

32. Interim order(s), if any, stand(s) vacated.

33. Pending application(s), if any, stand(s) disposed of.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61248775/

11

The Secretary All India Shri Shivaji ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 1 April, 2025

………………………………, J.

[SUDHANSHU DHULIA] ………………………………, J.

[K. VINOD CHANDRAN] NEW DELHI, APRIL 01, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61248775/

12

