The Secretary To Government Department ... vs K. C. Devaki on 25 March, 2025

The Secretary To Government Department ... vs K. C. Devaki on
25 March, 2025

Author: Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha

Bench: Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha

2025 INSC 389                                                            REPORTABLE

                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4356 OF 2025
                                ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) No. 2793 OF 2023

             THE SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT
             DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & FAMILY
             WELFARE & ANR.                                          ...APPELLANT(S)

                                                  VERSUS

             K.C. DEVAKI                                           …RESPONDENT(S)

                                              JUDGMENT

PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA, J.

1. Leave granted.

2. Does the transfer or reappointment of a government employee from one post to another impact
his/her seniority in the new post, and if so, is such seniority contingent upon whether the transfer
was made in public interest or at the employees own request? This is the short question that has
arisen for our consideration.

3. The fundamental principle underlying the relationship between the State and its employee is that
it is governed by Date: 2025.03.25 16:20:57 IST Reason:

administrative rules, rather than contractual agreements. In view of the power of the
State to modify the terms and conditions of services by unilaterally amending the
Rules, this kind of employment is defined as status. 1 Therefore, when grievance of an
employee is brought to a Court or a Tribunal, the primary question is about the Rule
that governs the services. At this stage there is no value judgment about the executive

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159389955/

1

The Secretary To Government Department ... vs K. C. Devaki on 25 March, 2025

action, unless of course when the Rule itself is challenged on the ground of invalidity
or arbitrariness. So, we simply look at the Rule that governs the services and
determine whether the action is in consonance with the mandate of the Rule.

4. The Rules that govern the service of the respondent are the Karnataka Civil Services (General
Recruitment) Rules, 1977 2 and Karnataka Government Servants (Seniority) Rules, 19573. The
context in which interpretation and application of these Rules are to be found in the facts of the
case, which, to the extent that they are relevant for our consideration, are as follows. 1 State of
Himachal Pradesh and Ors. v. Raj Kumar and Ors., (2023) 3 SCC 773 declared the consequence of
status as, “(iii) The hallmark of status is in the legal rights and obligations imposed by laws that may
be framed and altered unilaterally by the Government without the consent of the employee.

(iv) In view of the dominance of rules that govern the relationship between the Government and its
employee, all matters concerning employment, conditions of service including termination are
governed by the rules. There are no rights outside the provision of the rules.” 2 Hereinafter referred
to as the ‘1977 Recruitment Rules’. 3 Hereinafter referred to as the ‘1957 Seniority Rules’.

5. The respondent was appointed as a Staff Nurse in the Department of Indian System of Medicine
and Homeopathy, State of Karnataka in the year 1979. She submitted a representation to the
government and requested to change her cadre to First Division Assistant on medical grounds.
Following her request, the government sought opinion of the Director of the Department who asked
the respondent to appear before the medical board for examination. The board submitted its report
on 22.04.1985 indicating that the respondent was in fact suffering from bronchitis and that she will
not be able to carry out the duties of a Staff Nurse.

6. Following the decision of the government accepting her request change of cadre, the respondent
was asked to submit a consent letter, which she did on 03.06.1985 indicating that “with reference to
the above subject, I hereby give my consent for the offer to change designation to clerical nature of
work in the pay scale of Rs.630-1200 and to take seniority below the last person”. Accepting her
consent to be placed below the last person in the transferred post, orders of temporary posting,
followed by final order dated 19.04.1989 was issued by the government changing the cadre of the
respondent from Staff Nurse to First Division Assistant on medical grounds and to take the position
below the last candidate. The relevant portion of the order is as under:

“PROCEEDINGS OF THE KARNATAKA GOVERNMENT Subject: Change in cadre to
Smt. K.C. Devaki from the post of Staff Nurse to First Division Assistant post on
medical grounds-reg.

In the letter dated: 8.7.85 read at (1) above, the Director, Department of Indian
Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy, Bengaluru has stated that Smt. K.C. Devaki,
Staff Nurse, Sri. Jayachamarajendra Institute of Indian Medicine, Bengaluru has
requested for cadre change on medical grounds and the Medical Board has
recommended in this regard. Along with the copy of the same, he has recommended
for cadre change from the post of staff Nurse to First Division Assistant post.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159389955/

2

The Secretary To Government Department ... vs K. C. Devaki on 25 March, 2025

On examining the proposal in detail, an instruction has been given vide the
Government letter dated: 11.2.86 read at (2) above to issue a cadre change order after
determining whether the cadre changing employees are eligible or not to perform the
duties prescribed to changed post.

As per the Government letter dated: 11.2.86, vide O.M. dated:

24.4.86 Smt. K.C. Devaki, Devaki, Staff Nurse, Sri. Jayachamarajendra Institute of
Indian Medicine, Bengaluru has been appointed temporarily for three months at the
post of First Division Assistant at Government College of Indian Medicine, Mysuru,
so as to examine her performance. Thereafter continued in the same post, till now.

Vide letter dated: 3.12.88 read at (4) above, it is reported that Smt. K.C. Devaki, Staff Nurse, is
performing duties satisfactorily temporarily in the post which is to be cadre changed and passed the
departmental examinations prescribed for the said post. As per rule..16(a) of the Karnataka Civil
Services (General Recruitment) Rules, 1977, while changing from one cadre to another cadre,
educational qualification, prescribed for the post to be cadre changed should be attained. But, since
Smt. K.C. Devaki did not attain degree, clarification has sought whether cadre could be changed as
per the Government Letter No. HFW 158 PIM 84, dated:

11.2.86. Since it is not mentioned in General Recruitment rule 16(a) (111) about
minimum eligibility and since the Director has stated that Smt. K.C. Devaki has
performed satisfactorily as First Division Assistant for three years, the Government
has decided to change the cadre of Smt. K.C. Devaki from the Staff Nurse post to First
Division Assistant.

Government Order No. HFW 536 PIM 88, Bengaluru, dated: 19.4.1989 On examining the proposal
in detail, the Government has ordered by changing the cadre of Smt. K.C. Devaki /from the post of
Staff Nurse to First Division Assistant post as per rule 16(a) (111) of the Karnataka Civil Services
(General Recruitment) Rules, 1977, subjecting to following conditions:-

1) She shall be passed departmental examination prescribed to the changed post
within 2 years from the date of cadre change.

2) In the cadre of changing, she shall get the service seniority below the last candidate
on that date.

3) No any travel allowance is available to her.

4) Hereafter such cadre change could not be given to her in her service.”

7. The Government of Karnataka, the appellant herein, submits that the respondent
continued in the new position as First Division Assistant at the place as was accepted
by her from 1989 to 2007.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159389955/

3

The Secretary To Government Department ... vs K. C. Devaki on 25 March, 2025

However, when the seniority list was released in 2007, she approached the Karnataka
Administrative Tribunal 4 challenging the final seniority list dated 01.10.2007 on the ground that
her seniority must be fixed as per her initial appointment as Staff Nurse on 05.01.1979 and not on
the basis of her entry into the new cadre on 19.01.1989 as First Division Assistant.

8. The Tribunal allowed the Original Application by following the decision of the High Court in the
State of Karnataka v. Sri. K. Seetharamulu5. The writ petition filed by the State of Karnataka 4
Hereinafter referred to as the ‘Tribunal’.

5 W.P. No. 65474 of 2010 dated 17.09.2010, hereinafter, ‘ K. Seetharamulu’ challenging the decision
of the Tribunal was dismissed by the order impugned before us. This is how the State is in appeal.
We heard Mr. V. N. Raghupathy, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the State and Mr.
Siddharth Garg for the respondent.

9. Analysis: The factual background, as indicated hereinabove clearly establishes that the change of
cadre from Staff Nurse to First Division Assistant occurred due to a request by the respondent and
the same was considered under the 1977 Recruitment Rules. To consider whether the final seniority
list dated 01.10.2007 is legal or not, we need to examine the mandate of Rule 16 which is extracted
herein for ready reference:

“Rule 16. Relaxation of rules relating to appointment and qualifications:-
Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules or the rules of recruitment
specially made in respect of any service or post, the Government may, for reason to
be recorded in writing-

(a) appoint to a post-

(i) an officer of the Defence Services, an All India Services or a Civil Service of the
Union, or the Civil Service of any other State;

(ii) an officer holding a post of an equivalent grade by transfer or by deputation from
any other service of the State for recruitment to which these rules apply:

Provided that appointment by transfer under this sub- clause shall not be made
unless the officer has passed the examination prescribed under the Karnataka Civil
Services (Service and Kannada Language Examinations) Rules, 1974 for the post to
which he is proposed to be transferred.

Provided further that where it is necessary in public interest to appoint an officer
belonging to a service where has no equivalent grade, an officer holding a post in the
next lower grade in such service may be appointed by deputation for a period not
exceeding two years. Provided also that no such appointment shall be to a post which
is equivalent to or higher than the next promotional post to such officer in such other
service.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159389955/

4

The Secretary To Government Department ... vs K. C. Devaki on 25 March, 2025

(iii) an officer who by bodily infirmity is permanently incapacitated for the post
which he holds;

Provided that appointment under this sub-clause shall not be:-

(1) to a post lower than that held by such officer save with his consent;

(2) to a post higher than the post held by such officer except when the Government is
of the opinion that there is no other equivalent post to which such officer can be
appointed.

[(iiia) an officer who by bodily infirmity is temporarily incapacitated for the post which he holds:

Provided that the duration of appointment under this sub- clause shall not be for a
period longer than the duration of the bodily infirmity on account of which he is held
to be incapacitated to hold the post in the service to which he belongs.]

(iv) in the State Civil Services Group-A on deputation, a person with specialised
qualifications in the service of a University established by law in India and holding an
equivalent post for such period not exceeding five years and on such terms as the
Government may in each case determine;

Provided that, whereas the Government is of the opinion that in view of the special circumstances of
a case the period of deputation has to be extended beyond five years as stipulated under this clause,
it may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the same for a further period of one year at a
time subject to a maximum of three years, so however, that the total period of deputation including
the extended period shall not exceed eight years.

(b) relax, by notification for such period as may be specified therein, the qualifications prescribed
for purposes of direct recruitment in the rules of recruitment specially made in respect of any service
or post, if candidates possessing the prescribed qualifications are not available :

Provided that in the case of a post for which recruitment is required to be made in
consultation with the Commission, such relaxation shall not be made except after
consulting the Commission.”

10. The 1977 Recruitment Rules govern the process of recruitment to post under State civil services.
While Rule 3 provides the method of recruitment, Rule 4 prescribes the procedure of appointment,
Rule 5 specifies disqualifications for appointment, and Rule 7 prescribes the procedure for
promotion. Rules 3A and 15 provide for appointment of ex-servicemen and retired government
servants.

11. Rule 16, with which we are concerned, prescribes relaxation of rules relating to appointment and
qualifications. This Rule is in recognition of exigencies of public service which may require

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159389955/

5

The Secretary To Government Department ... vs K. C. Devaki on 25 March, 2025

employment of certain persons who may not possess the prescribed qualifications. It is therefore in
the form of an exception, which is the reason it provides that “notwithstanding anything contained
in the rules or recruitment specially made in respect of any service or post”. It is also provided that
for invoking this Rule, the government must record its reasons in writing.

12. Rule 16 is in two parts: Rule 16(a) enables the government to make appointments of certain
officers and Rule 16(b) empowers such appointments by relaxing the qualifications prescribed. We
are concerned with Rule 16(a), which in turn comprises three categories of officers in whose favour
the relaxation could be made. The first relates to appointment of officers who worked in Defence
Service, All-India Service or a Civil Service of the Union, or the State. The second relates to
appointment of an officer holding a post of an equivalent grade by transfer or by deputation. The
third, with which we are concerned, relates to appointment of an officer who by bodily infirmity is
permanently incapacitated for the post he holds. For appointment of such an officer, the Rule
prescribes two conditions and they are indicated in the proviso. The first condition is that the said
officer should not be appointed to a post lower than the post held by him or her. The second
condition is that if the officer consents, he can be appointed to a post lower than the one that was
held by him or her. This is the crucial facet of the Rule that has fallen for our consideration.

13. Having analysed the Rule in detail, we can re-state its application and operation in the following
manner. i. Invocation of Rule 16 is an exception. However, if the power is exercised, it will operate
notwithstanding anything contained in the 1977 Recruitment Rules or other rules and reason for
exercise for such a power must be evidenced in the written text of the record.

ii. An officer who by bodily infirmity is permanently incapacitated can be appointed to the new post
in relaxation of the existing Rules. However, such appointment shall not be lower than the one he
holds.

iii. The prescription that such an officer cannot be appointed to a post lower than that held by him
or her can be waived or deviated from if the officer himself consents for the same.

14. We will now refer to next set of Rules that govern fixation of seniority of government employees
and they are the 1957 Seniority Rules. We are concerned with Rule 6 which is extracted herein
below:

“Rule 6. The transfer of a person in public interest from one class or grade of a service
to another class or grade carrying the same pay or scale of pay shall not be treated as
first appointment to the later for purposes of seniority; and the seniority of a person
so transferred shall be determined with reference to his first appointment to the class
or grade from which he was transferred;

Provided that, where the transfer is made at the request of the officer, he shall be
placed in the seniority list of the class or grade of service to which he is transferred
below all the officers borne on that class or grade of service on or before the date of
the transfer.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159389955/

6

The Secretary To Government Department ... vs K. C. Devaki on 25 March, 2025

Provided further, that the seniority of a person transferred in public interest vis a vis
the persons actually holding the post in the Class or Grade to which he is transferred
shall be determined on the date of such transfer with reference to his first
appointment to the class or grade from which he was transferred.

Explanation.- For the purpose of the above proviso, the persons actually holding the
post do not include the persons who have before the date of such transfer been
promoted, whether in an officiating or substantive capacity to a higher class or
grade.”

15. The above rule contemplates transfers under two contingencies, the first is when the transfer is
made in public interest and the second is when transfer is made at the request of the officer. The
purpose of transfer, considerations that weigh, the consequences that follow a transfer made in
public interest, as against a transfer made at the request of the officer, vary substantially.

16. The purpose and object of transfer in public interest is singular and straightforward, i.e., to
ensure effective and efficient administration. This is for the reason that administration and
provisioning goods and services in a welfare State requires the government to deploy officers at
different places and the exigencies of service take within its sweep the need to redeploy or transfer
them from one place to another for myriad reasons, all intended to subserve the purpose of the
State. All these decisions are transfers in public interest.

17. On the other hand, where a transfer is sought at the request of the officer and if the government
is satisfied with the genuineness of the request, it may accept the request and direct transfer. This is
fairness in action as governmental power accommodates, as it must, human needs and
vulnerabilities. However, this kind of transfer, effected at the request of the officer, does not partake
the character of a transfer made in the public interest. 6

18. Transfers characterised as in public interest are founded, sourced, and rooted in administrative
exigencies and nothing else. Effecting or transferring employees at their behest is equally important
but exercise of that power and discretion is to subserve a different cause or a value, which is distinct
from transfer in public interest. It is necessary to draw a clear distinction between these two, as their
purpose, procedure, and consequence are distinct. This distinction is in fact recognised and
incorporated in the Rules.

19. If a government employee holding a particular post is transferred on public interest, he carries
with him his existing status including seniority to the transferred post. However, if an officer is
transferred at his own request, such a transferred employee will have to be accommodated in the
transferred post, subject to the claims and status of the other employees at the 6 Geetha V.M. v.
Rethnasenan K. 2025 SCC OnLine SC 35. transferred place, as their interests cannot be varied
without there being any public interest in the transfer. Subject to specific provision of the Rules
governing the services, such transferees are generally placed at the bottom, below the junior-most
employee in the category in the new cadre or department. The rationale in assignment of such
seniority is to avoid heartburn of existing employees in the transferred cadre. 7 In K.P. Sudhakaran

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159389955/

7

The Secretary To Government Department ... vs K. C. Devaki on 25 March, 2025

v. State of Kerala 8, this Court held:

“11. In service jurisprudence, the general rule is that if a government servant holding
a particular post is transferred to the same post in the same cadre, the transfer will
not wipe out his length of service in the post till the date of transfer and the period of
service in the post before his transfer has to be taken into consideration in computing
the seniority in the transferred post. But where a government servant is so
transferred on his own request, the transferred employee will have to forego his
seniority till the date of transfer, and will be placed at the bottom below the
juniormost employee in the category in the new cadre or department. This is because
a government servant getting transferred to another unit or department for his
personal considerations, cannot be permitted to disturb the seniority of the
employees in the department to which he is transferred, by claiming that his service
in the department from which he has been transferred, should be taken into account.
This is also because a person appointed to a particular post in a cadre, should know
the strength of the cadre and prospects of promotion on the basis of the seniority list
prepared for the cadre and any addition from outside would disturb such prospects.
The matter is, however, governed by the relevant service rules.”

20. In the order impugned before us, the High Court has fallen into an error by
blurring the distinction between the two functions and treating transfer made at the
request of the officer on medical

7 Surendra Singh Beniwal v. Hukam Singh, (2009) 6 SCC 469 (2006) 5 SCC 386.

grounds as equivalent to transfer in public interest. Keeping the distinction is essential since origin
and the consequences that follow are distinct.

21. We will now refer to the precedents cited by the Tribunal and the High Court. The High Court
referred to its own decision in K. Seetharamulu (supra). Having examined the said decision, we are
of the opinion that it does not lay down the correct principle. In fact, the applicable Rule is not
analysed and the decision is based on the facts and circumstances of the case, where the employee is
said to have suffered injury during the course of employment. However, a sweeping observation in
that judgment that “change of cadre was accorded pursuant to the report of the medical board and
therefore it has to be treated as change of cadre in the public interest” is unsustainable as change of
cadre pursuant to report of medical board is not determinative of whether the transfer is for public
interest or effected at the request of the officer.

22. Having considered Rule 16 of the 1977 Rules, as per which the respondent accepted the
appointment after consenting to be placed before the last person in the transferred post, which
position is recorded in the order dated 19.04.1989 itself, we are of the opinion that seniority has to
be with effect from 1989 only. The decision of the government in issuance of final seniority list dated
01.10.2007 granting seniority w.e.f. 19.04.1989 is in consonance with Rule 16 of 1977 Recruitment
Rules. This decision is also in consonance with Rule 6 of the 1957 Seniority Rules which specifically

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159389955/

8

The Secretary To Government Department ... vs K. C. Devaki on 25 March, 2025

provide that where transfers are made at the request of the officer, the employee shall be placed
below all the officers borne in that class in the transferred post.

23. Before we conclude, we may also refer to another Division Bench judgment of the Karnataka
High Court in M K Jagadeesh v. The Registrar General, High Court of Karnataka9 which examined
the Rule 16(a)(iii) in the context of an undertaking given by the employee to work as a junior-most
in the transferred post. The facts in our case are identical to the decision in M K Jagadeesh (supra)
in as much as the change of cadre occurred under the same Rule, and in fact, the employee was
transferred to a similar post i.e. the First Division Assistant. Further, the officer also gave an
identical undertaking that he will occupy the junior-most position in the transferred post. The
decision in M K Jagadeesh (supra) is unfortunately not referred in Seetharamulu (supra) and has
also been missed by the High Court in the order impugned before us. 9 Writ Appeal No. 1263 of
2007 dated 25.07.2007, hereinafter, ‘MK Jagadeesh’ The relevant portion of the decision in M K
Jagadeesh is extracted hereinbelow:

“2. While the appellant was working as Stenographer in the Court of Civil Judge
(Jr.Dn.) & JMFC, Tumkur he applied for change of cadre and requested for
appointment as First Division Assistant on medical grounds. In his representation
requesting for change of cadre and appointment as First Division Assistant he gave
an undertaking that he was willing to become junior to the juniormost First Division
Assistant in the unit. Rule-16(a)(iii) of the Karnataka Civil Services (General
Recruitment) Rules, 1977 permitted such change of cadre if the employee was willing
to become junior to the juniormost in the new cadre. Hence the request of the
appellant was granted and he was appointed by transfer to the post of First Division
Assistant on medical grounds subject to the condition that he shall become junior to
the juniormost official in the changed cadre in Tumkur unit. The request was granted
as per Annexure-A order dated 19.8.2000. After accepting the above mentioned
change of cadre on the basis of Annexure-A order, the appellant submitted a
representation in the year 2007 requesting that his seniority in the cadre of First
Division Assistant may be reckoned from 23.7.1992 instead of 19.8.2000, the date of
Annexure-A order.” 23.1 Dismissing the writ appeal filed by the said employee, the
Division Bench of the High Court held as under:

“3…. Having sought change of cadre giving an undertaking to become the junior to
the juniormost in the new cadre and having accepted the appointment to the new
cadre with the condition that he would be junior to the juniormost First Division
Assistant in the unit, it is not open to the appellant to request that his seniority must
be reckoned from the original date of appointment as stenographer….” 23.2
Interestingly the Division Bench of the High Court also refer to the relevant Rules
relating to fixation of seniority and held as under:

“3. …the 1st proviso to Rule-6 of the Karnataka Government Servants’ (Seniority)
Rules, 1957 clearly stipulated that where the transfer is made at the request of the
officer, he shall be placed in the seniority list of the class or grade of service to which

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159389955/

9

The Secretary To Government Department ... vs K. C. Devaki on 25 March, 2025

he is transferred below all the officers borne on that class or grade of service on or
before the date of the transfer. There is no challenge against the said statutory
provision in the Writ Petition. … the 1st proviso to Rule-6 of the Karnataka
Government Servants’ (Seniority) Rules, 1957 is incorporated to recognise the service
of the employees in the new cadre who have already been appointed and to protect
their seniority in that cadre. If the appellant's request is allowed, the persons who
were already working as First Division Assistants in the Tumkur unit before the
appointment of the appellant as First Division Assistant will be adversely affected,
but they are not made parties to the Writ Petition.”

24. In view of the above, we are of the opinion that the Tribunal as well as the High
Court committed an error in directing the appellant to grant seniority to the
respondent in the cadre of First Division Assistant with effect from the date in which
the said respondent has entered service in the cadre of Staff Nurse from 05.01.1979,
instead of 19.04.1989, when she was appointed in the new cadre of First Division
Assistant.

25. For the reasons stated above, we allow the appeal and set aside the order passed
by the High Court of Karnataka dated 25.10.2021 in W.P. No. 42244 of 2019.

26. No order as to costs.

………………………………....J. [PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA] ………………………………....J.
[MANOJ MISRA] NEW DELHI;

MARCH 25, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159389955/

10

