The State Of Goa vs Namita Tripathi on 3 March, 2025

The State Of Goa vs Namita Tripathi on 3 March, 2025

Author: Sanjay Karol

Bench: B.R. Gavai, Sanjay Karol

2025 INSC 306                                             REPORTABLE

                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.        OF 2025
           (@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (Crl.) NO. 1959 OF 2022)

      THE STATE OF GOA & ANR.                             APPELLANT(s)

                                   VERSUS

      NAMITA TRIPATHI                                   RESPONDENT(s)

                               JUDGMENT

K.V. Viswanathan, J.

1. Leave granted.

2. The present Appeal calls in question the correctness of the judgment dated 06.09.2021 passed by
the High Court of Bombay at Goa in Stamp Number Main No. 944 of 2020 (F). By the said
judgment, the High Court allowed the prayer of the respondent herein and quashed the order dated
04.12.2019 passed by the learned Judicial Magistrate First Class (JMFC) at Panaji in Criminal Case
No. LC/19/2019/C. By the said order, the Ld. JMFC had issued process to the respondent pursuant
to the complaint filed by the appellants alleging violation by the respondent of the provisions of the
Factories Act, 1948 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Act of 1948’) and thereby committing offences
punishable under Section 92 thereof. FACTS:-

3. The facts lie in a narrow compass. Pursuant to the inspection conducted on 20.05.2019 in the
premises of the respondent wherein the business of Professional Laundry Service was carried on, it
was found that the respondent did not possess factory approved plans as required under Rule 3 of
the Goa Factories Rules, 1985 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Rules’) read with Section 6 of the Act of
1948; that the premises were being used as a factory without obtaining a valid factory licence in
violation of Rule 4 of the Rules read with Section 6 of the Act of 1948 and that the respondent had
not submitted any application for registration and grant of licence in violation of Rule 6 of the Rules
read with Section 6 of the Act of 1948. An inspection report was drawn up and the same was

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174327794/

1

The State Of Goa vs Namita Tripathi on 3 March, 2025

furnished by a covering letter dated 24.05.2019 with the “occupier of the respondent” to report
compliance within 15 days.

4. The inspection report set out that at the time of inspection there were more than 9 workers
employed; that there was no muster roll maintained for the month of May 2019; and that the
manufacturing process of cleaning and washing of clothes was carried on. The report set out the
details of the machinery/equipments and the total installed power and set out that the premises
amounted to a factory within the purview of Section 2(m)(i) of the Act of 1948 and also observed
about the violation, as set out hereinabove, with regard to the absence of registration and licence for
use of the premises as factory. The occupier was advised to submit an application for due
compliance of the Act failing which they were warned that it will constitute criminal offence
punishable under the Act of 1948.

5. The complaint alleged that by the letter of 30.05.2019 signed by the authorized signatory of the
respondent a reply was furnished, setting out that the respondent who operated under the name and
style of “White Cloud” is a professionally set up laundry comprising of six collection centres around
Goa and one central processing unit; that it had 58 employees in the collection centres including 10
workers at the central processing unit; that a similar inspection had been carried out in October
2005 and no further action was taken; that under the Act of 1948, washing and dry cleaning would
not constitute “manufacturing process”; that “laundry business” is a service and not a
manufacturing activity since the “product” of the business is intangible; that what is rendered is a
service and that they are duly registered under the Shops And Establishments Act.

6. The letter also annexed certain judgments to contend that the activity did not constitute the
“manufacturing process”. It was contended that in view of the above there is no contravention of any
of the legal provisions.

7. It transpires that pursuant to the request of 17.06.2019 by the respondent, a personal hearing was
also afforded to them and a hearing was indeed given by Shri Vivek Marathe, Chief Inspector,
Inspectorate of Factories and Boilers. The complaint further averred that after further
correspondence with the respondent since their reply was unsatisfactory, the complainant wrote and
obtained information from the Regional Director, Employees State Insurance Corporation (ESIC)
that the respondent unit was indeed covered under Section 2(12) of the Employees State Insurance
Act (hereinafter referred to as the ‘ESIC Act’) and have ESIC code no. 32000025050000909
assigned to them. The complaint concluded by stating that since no satisfactory reply was
forthcoming the respondent was liable for offences punishable under Section 92 of the Act of 1948.

8. On 04.12.2019, the JMFC Panaji issued summons by recording the following :-

“Criminal Case No. LC/19/2019/C Perused.

The material on record makes out a prima facie case against the accused. Hence,
issue process.”

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174327794/

2

The State Of Goa vs Namita Tripathi on 3 March, 2025

9. Aggrieved, the respondent herein moved the High Court of Bombay at Goa seeking to quash and
set aside the summons as well as the complaint, primarily on two grounds alleged namely, that the
order issuing summons is unreasoned and suffers grave errors of facts and law and it does not
reflect application of mind; and that the process of “Dry cleaning of clothes” does not constitute
“manufacturing process” as defined under the Act of 1948. It was also averred that business of
laundry is in the nature of service and the premises are not manufacturing unit for the purpose of
the Act of 1948.

10. By the impugned order, the High Court has quashed the order issuing process after holding that
a perusal of the order issuing process, did not reflect any application of mind, and further relying on
certain precedents, held as under:-

“22. In view of this position, the definition of manufacturing process would show that
the washing and cleaning has to be with a view to its use, sale, transport delivery or
disposal. Whenever any washing or cleaning is done of any article or substance with a
view to its use, that is, of use in such a way that a new marketable commodity would
come into being known commercially for being used as such or for selling the same
and so on, then the process would certainly come within the definition of
m a n u f a c t u r i n g   p r o c e s s .   T o   c o n s t i t u t e   o r   m a n u f a c t u r e   t h e r e   m u s t   b e   a
transformation. Mere labour bestowed on an article even if the labour is applied
through machinery, will not make it a manufacture, unless it has progressed so far
that transformation ensues and the article becomes commercially known as another
and different article from that as which it begins its existence. Once it is confirmed
that dry cleaning is not within the definition of manufacturing process, Factories Act
will not apply.”

11. Aggrieved, the appellants are before us in Appeal.

12. We have heard Ms. Ruchira Gupta, learned Advocate for the appellants and Mr. Shivan Desai,
learned counsel for the respondent. We have also perused the records including the written
submissions filed by the parties.

13. In the above factual background, the question that arises for consideration is, was the High Court
justified in quashing the process issued?

ANALYSIS:-

14. The averments in the complaint allege that the respondent has violated the provisions of the Act
of 1948 inasmuch as being a factory they have not complied with the provisions of the Act of 1948 on
matters set out hereinabove. This position is disputed by the respondent on the ground that their
premises do not constitute a factory as defined in the Act of 1948. To answer this question, an
examination of the scheme of the Act of 1948 with particular focus on the definition of “factory”
under Section 2(m) as well as the definition of “manufacturing process” under Section 2(k) is
essential. STATUTORY DEFINITION:-

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174327794/

3

15. Sections 2(m) and 2(k) of the Act of 1948 read as under.-

The State Of Goa vs Namita Tripathi on 3 March, 2025

“2. Interpretation.—In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,-

(m) “factory” means any premises including the precincts thereof—

(i) whereon ten or more workers are working, or were working on any day of the preceding twelve
months, and in any part of which a manufacturing process is being carried on with the aid of power,
or is ordinarily so carried on, or

(ii) whereon twenty or more workers are working, or were working on any day of the preceding
twelve months, and in any part of which a manufacturing process is being carried on without the aid
of power, or is ordinarily so carried on,— but does not include a mine subject to the operation of the
Mines Act, 1952 (35 of 1952) or a mobile unit belonging to the armed forces of the Union, a railway
running shed or a hotel, restaurant or eating place;

(k) “manufacturing process” means any process for—

(i) making, altering, repairing, ornamenting, finishing, packing, oiling, washing, cleaning, breaking
up, demolishing, or otherwise treating or adapting any article or substance with a view to its use,
sale, transport, delivery or disposal; or

(ii) pumping oil, water, sewage or any other substance; or

(iii) generating, transforming or transmitting power; or

(iv) composing types for printing, printing by letter press, lithography, photogravure or other
similar process or book binding; or

(v) constructing, reconstructing, repairing, refitting, finishing or breaking up ships or vessels; or

(vi) preserving or storing any article in cold storage;” (Emphasis supplied)

16. A perusal of the definition of “factory” in the Act of 1948 would reveal that any premises
including the precincts thereof where ten or more workers are working and in any part of which a
manufacturing process is being carried on with the aid of power would be covered therein. The Act
of 1948 defines “manufacturing process” to mean any process for making, altering, repairing,
ornamenting, finishing, packing, oiling, washing, cleaning, breaking up, demolishing, or otherwise
treating or adapting any article or substance with a view to its use, sale, transport, delivery or
disposal.

17. On a plain reading, it is clear that any process involving washing or cleaning any article or
substance with a view to its use, sale, transport, delivery or disposal would be covered within the
meaning of manufacturing process. The High Court has, on this issue, after relying on the judgment

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174327794/

4

The State Of Goa vs Namita Tripathi on 3 March, 2025

of Punjab and Haryana High Court in Employees’ State Insurance Corporation, Jullundur Vs.
Triplex Dry Cleaners and Others, (1982) ILR 2P&H 291 gone on to conclude that the use has to be in
such a way that a new marketable commodity should come into being and it should be known
commercially for being used as such or for selling the same. According to the High Court, only if
these ingredients are fulfilled would the definition of manufacturing process be attracted. The High
Court has further held that mere labour bestowed on an article even if the labour is applied through
machinery will not make it a manufacturing process unless it has progressed so far, that a
transformation ensues and the article becomes commercially known as another and different article
from that as which it begins its existence.

OBJECT AND REASONS OF THE ACT OF 1948:-

18. To appreciate the correctness of this finding, we need to examine the object and purpose of the
Act of 1948. The Act of 1948 was enacted to regulate the labour employed in the factories. Originally,
the Act that was in vogue was the Factories Act of 1934. However, as the Statement of Objects and
Reasons of the Act of 1948 indicates the experience of working of the 1934 Act revealed the number
of defects and weaknesses. One of the reasons for enactment of the Act of 1948 was to reinforce the
provisions with regard to safety, welfare and health of the workers. It was expressly noticed in the
Statement of Objects and Reasons that under the 1934 Act, several undertakings were excluded from
its scope and it was felt that provisions relating to health, working hours, holidays, lighting and
ventilation ought to be extended to all workplaces in view of the unsatisfactory state of affairs as was
then prevailing in unregulated factories.

19. The defects in the 1934 Act were sought to be remedied by laying down clearly in the Bill itself
the minimum requirements regarding health (cleanliness, ventilation and temperature, dangerous
dust and fumes, lighting and control of glare, etc.) safety (eye protection, control of explosive and
inflammable dusts, etc.) and general welfare of workers (washing facilities, first-aid, canteens,
shelter rooms, creches, etc.). The Act provided formulation of Rules by the State Government to the
effect that every factory should be registered and should take license for working, which is to be
renewed at periodic intervals; approval of plans, designs and specifications of the proposed
construction of factory and so on. The Act of 1948 was further amended in 1976 to strengthen the
provisions with regard to the safety measures to promote the health and welfare of the workers
employed in factories. A further amendment was made in 1987 for dealing with safeguards to be
adopted against use and handling of hazardous substances by the occupiers of factories and the
laying down of emergency standards and measures.

20. The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Act of 1948 along with the amendments are
extracted hereinbelow:-

“Statement of Objects and Reasons.- The existing law relating to the regulation of
labour employed in factories in India is embodied in the Factories Act, 1934.
Experience of the working of the Act has revealed a number of defects and
weaknesses which hamper effective administration. Although the Act has been
amended in certain respects in a piecemeal fashion whenever some particular aspect

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174327794/

5

The State Of Goa vs Namita Tripathi on 3 March, 2025

of labour safety or welfare assumed urgent importance, the general framework has
remained unchanged. The provisions for the safety, health and welfare of workers are
generally found to be inadequate and unsatisfactory and even such protection as is
provided does not extend to the large mass of workers employed in work places not
covered by the Act. In view of the large and growing industrial activities in the
country, a radical overhauling of the Factories law is essentially called for and cannot
be delayed.

The proposed legislation differs materially from the existing law in several respects.
Some of the important features are herein mentioned. Under the definition of
"Factory" in the Act of 1934, several undertakings are excluded from its scope but it is
essential that important basic provisions relating to health, working hours, holidays
lighting and ventilation, should be extended to all workplaces in view of the
unsatisfactory state of affairs now prevailing in unregulated factories. Further, the
present distinction between seasonal and perennial factories which has little
justification has been done away with. The minimum age of employment for children
has been raised from 12 to 13 and their working hours reduced from 5 to 4½ with
powers to Provincial Governments to prescribe even a higher minimum age for
employment in hazardous undertakings.

The present Act is very general in character and leaves too much to the rule making
powers of the Provincial Governments. While some of them do have rules of varying
stringency, the position on the whole is not quite satisfactory. This defect is sought to
be remedied by laying down clearly in the Bill itself the minimum requirements
regarding health (cleanliness, ventilation and temperature, dangerous dusts and
fumes, lighting and control of glare, etc.) safety (eye protection, control of explosive
and inflammable dusts. etc.), and general welfare of workers (washing facilities,
first-aid, canteens, shelter rooms, creches, etc.) amplified where necessary, by rules
and regulations to be prescribed by Provincial Governments. Further, the present Act
leaves important and complex points to the discretion of inspectors placing heavy
responsibility on them. In view of the specialised, and hazardous nature of the
processes employed in the factories it is too much to expect Inspectors to possess an
expert knowledge of all these matters. The detailed provisions contained in the Bill
will go a long way in lightening their burden.

Some difficulties experienced in the administration of the Act, especially relating to
hours of employment, holidays with pay, etc., have been met by making the
provisions more definite and clearer. The penalty clauses have also been simplified.
An important provision has also been made in the Bill empowering Provincial
Governments to require that every factory should be registered and should take a
license for working to be renewed at periodical intervals. Provincial Governments are
further being empowered to require that before a new factory is constructed or any
extensions are made to an existing one, the plans designs and specifications of the
proposed construction should receive their prior approval.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174327794/

6

The State Of Goa vs Namita Tripathi on 3 March, 2025

It is expected that the Bill, when enacted into law, will considerably advance the
condition of workers in factories. The substantial changes made in the existing law
are also indicated in the Notes on Clauses [omitted] Opportunity has also been taken
to arrange the existing law and to revise expressions, where necessary.

Statement of Objects and Reasons of Amending Act 94 of 1976.- The main object of
the Factories Act, 1948 is to ensure adequate safety measures and to promote the
health and welfare of the workers employed in factories, Government are, therefore,
initiating various measures from time to time to ensure that adequate standards of
safety, health and welfare are achieved at all work places. In particular, in the context
of the need to secure maximum production and productivity an appropriate work
culture conducive to safety, health and happiness of workers has to be evolved in the
factories.

To achieve these objectives more effectively it has become necessary to amend the
Factories Act. The amendments proposed to be made in the Act by the Bill mainly
relate to (1) the modification of the definition of the term "worker", so as to include
within its meaning contract labour employed in any manufacturing process, (2)
improvement of the provisions in regard to safety and appointment of safety officers,
(3) reduction of the minimum number of women employees, for the purpose of
providing creches by employers, from fifty to thirty and (4) provisions for inquiry in
every case of a fatal accident.

Statement of Objects and Reasons of Amending Act 20 of 1987.-The Factories Act, 1948 provides for
the health, safety, welfare and other aspects of workers in factories. The Act is enforced by the State
Governments through their Factory Inspectorates. The Act also empowers the State Governments to
frame rules, so that the local conditions prevailing in the State are appropriately reflected in the
enforcement. The Act was last amended in 1976 for strengthening the provisions relating to safety
and health at work, extending the scope of the definition of "workers", providing for statutory health
surveys, and requiring appointment of safety officers in large factories.

2. After the last amendment to the Act, there has been substantial modernisation and innovation in
the industrial field. Several chemical industries have come up which deal with hazardous and toxic
substances. This has brought in its train problems of industrial safety and occupational health
hazards. It is, therefore, considered necessary that the Act may be appropriately amended, among
other things, to provide specially for the safeguards to be adopted against use and handling of
hazardous substances by the occupiers of factories and the laying down of emergency standards and
measures. The amendments would also include procedures for sitting of hazardous industries to
ensure that hazardous and polluting industries are not set up in areas where they can cause adverse
effects on the general public. Provision has also been made for the workers' participation in safety
management.

3. Opportunity has been availed of to make the punishments provided in the Act stricter and certain
other amendments found necessary in the implementation of the Act

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174327794/

7

4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.” (Emphasis supplied) THE ACT OF 1948:-

The State Of Goa vs Namita Tripathi on 3 March, 2025

A STATUTE TO AMELIORATE THE CONDITIONS OF WORKMEN

21. This Court dealing with the legislative intent of the Act of 1948 in Balwant Rai
Saluja & Anr. v. Air India Ltd. & Ors., (2014) 9 SCC 407 held as under:-

“28. The 1948 Act is a social legislation and it provides for the health, safety, welfare,
working hours, leave and other benefits for workers employed in factories and it also
provides for the improvement of working conditions within the factory premises.
Section 2 of the 1948 Act is the interpretation clause. Apart from others, it provides
the definition of “worker” under Section 2(l) of the 1948 Act, to mean a person
employed, directly or through any other agency, whether for wages or not, in any
manufacturing or cleaning process.” (Emphasis supplied)

22. In S.M. Datta v. State of Gujarat & Anr., (2001) 7 SCC 659, this Court held as
under:-

“19. … The Factories Act, 1948 cannot but be ascribed to be a beneficial piece of
legislation and the requirement of Section 61, in particular, sub-sections (1) and (2) of
Section 61 can be easily deciphered since the intent stands clear enough to indicate
that an adult worker must know his daily placement and daily workings beforehand
— this placement beforehand is the requirement of the statute in Section 63 and in
the event of non-compliance, there is a liability for being prosecuted. We have in the
complaint a statement that Form 14 does not stand completed. We have also in the
complaint the number of working hours on a day but the requirement of Form 14, the
Inspector alleges does not stand fulfilled. It is too early at this stage, however, to
contend that the aforesaid statement does not stand to reason and the complaint
needs to be quashed at this stage of the proceeding.” (Emphasis supplied) SOME
RELEVANT PROVISIONS FROM THE ACT OF 1948:-

23. A bare perusal of the Act of 1948 would also reveal that Section 6 provided for the
approval, licensing and registration of factories in accordance with the Rules made by
the State Government, the obligation of the occupier to issue notice was provided
under Section 7; the prescription of general duties of the occupier was provided
under Section 7A; the general duties of manufacturers were provided under Section
7B; the provisions for appointment of inspectors were made under Section 8 and
their powers specified in Section 9.

24. Chapter III of the Act of 1948 deals with health and obliges the factories premises
to be kept clean (Section 11), disposal of wastes and effluents (Section 12), ventilation
and temperature (Section 13), regulation of dust and fume (Section 14), artificial
humidification (Section 15), regulations of overcrowding in rooms (Section 16),
provision for lighting (Section 17), provision for drinking water (Section 18) and

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174327794/

8

provision for latrines and urinals (Section 19).

The State Of Goa vs Namita Tripathi on 3 March, 2025

25. Chapter IV deals with safety aspects, namely, fencing of machinery (Section 21),
regulation of work on or near machinery in motion (Section 22), provision with
regard to employment of young persons on dangerous machines (Section 23) and so
on. Apart from other salient features in Chapter IV, precautions in case of fire
(Section 38), safety of buildings and machinery (Section 40), maintenance of
buildings Section 40A are provided for. An exclusive Chapter IV-A deals with
provisions relating to hazardous processes.

26. Chapter V deals with welfare measures for workers; Chapter VI deals with
working hours of adults and provides for weekly hours (Section 51), weekly holidays
(Section 52), daily hours (Section 54) and night shifts (Section 57), extra wages for
overtime (Section 59) and so on. In the same Chapter, Section 62 provides for
maintenance of register of adult workers.

27. Chapter VII deals with the employment of young persons;

Section 67 proscribes employment of any child under the age of 14 years from working in a factory;
Section 71 provides working hours for children above the age of 14 years and Section 73 provides for
maintaining a register of child workers. Chapter VIII deals with annual leave with wages. Thereafter,
in Chapter X dealing with penalties and procedure, general penalty for offences is provided in
Section 92, which reads as under:-

“92. General penalty for offences.- Save as is otherwise expressly provided in this Act
and subject to the provisions of Section 93, if in, or in respect of, any factory there is
any contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or of any rules made thereunder
or of any order in writing given thereunder, the occupier and manager of the factory
shall each be guilty of an offence and punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to two years or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees or with
both, and if the contravention is continued after conviction, with a further fine which
may extend to one thousand rupees for each day on which the contravention is so
continued:

Provided that where contravention of any of the provisions of Chapter IV or any rule
made thereunder or under Section 87 has resulted in an accident causing death or
serious bodily injury, the fine shall not be less than twenty- five thousand rupees in
the case of an accident causing death, and five thousand rupees in the case of an
accident causing serious bodily injury.”

28. Section 93 deals with liability of owner of premises in certain circumstances
provided therein. Section 105 provides for cognizance of offences and states that no
Court shall take cognizance of any offence except on complaint by, or with the
previous sanction in writing of, an inspector and Section 105(2) provides that no

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174327794/

9

The State Of Goa vs Namita Tripathi on 3 March, 2025

Court below that of a Presidency Magistrate or of a Magistrate of the first class shall
try any offence punishable under this Act.

29. The above conspectus of the legal provisions, discussed hereinabove, clearly
demonstrate that the Act of 1948 is a welfare statute aimed at ameliorating the
conditions of the workmen employed in factories. It is a beneficial legislation
intended to protect workers from occupational hazards by seeking to impose upon
owners and occupiers certain obligations for protecting the workers and securing
their employment in conditions conducive to their health and safety.

APPLICABLE RULES OF INTERPRETATION: -

30. Acts of this nature which are social welfare legislation and intended to benefit the
large community of workers ought to be interpreted in a manner to give efficacy to
legislative intent. This approach has been adopted in catena of judgments by this
Court. This Court in Works Manager, Central Railway Workshop, Jhansi v.

Vishwanath & Ors., (1969) 3 SCC 95 held as under:-

“11. The Factories Act was enacted to consolidate and amend the law regulating
labour in factories. It is probably true that all legislation in a welfare State is enacted
with the object of promoting general welfare; but certain types of enactments are
more responsive to some urgent social demands and also have more immediate and
visible impact on social vices by operating more directly to achieve social reforms The
enactments with which we are concerned, in our view, belong to this category and,
therefore, demand an interpretation liberal enough to achieve the legislative purpose,
without doing violence to the language. The definition of “worker” in the Factories
Act, therefore, does not seem to us to exclude those employees who are entrusted
solely with clerical duties, if they otherwise fall within the definition of the word
“worker”. Keeping in view the duties and functions of the respondents as found by
the learned Additional District Judge, we are unable to find anything legally wrong
with the view taken by the High Court that they fall within the definition of the word
“worker”. Deletion of the word “whatsoever” on which the appellant's counsel has
placed reliance does not seem to make much difference because that word was, in our
view, redundant.” (Emphasis supplied)

31. This Court in Allahabad Bank & Anr. v. All India Allahabad Bank Retired
Employees Association, (2010) 2 SCC 44 held as under:-

“16. We shall proceed to examine the point urged by the learned counsel for the
appellant. Remedial statutes, in contradistinction to penal statutes, are known as
welfare, beneficent or social justice oriented legislations. Such welfare statutes always
receive a liberal construction. They are required to be so construed so as to secure the
relief contemplated by the statute. It is well settled and needs no restatement at our

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174327794/

10

The State Of Goa vs Namita Tripathi on 3 March, 2025

hands that labour and welfare legislation have to be broadly and liberally construed
having due regard to the directive principles of State policy. The Act with which we
are concerned for the present is undoubtedly one such welfare oriented legislation
meant to confer certain benefits upon the employees working in various
establishments in the country.” (Emphasis supplied)

32. In Lanco Anpara Power Ltd. v. State of U.P. & Ors., (2016) 10 SCC 329, this Court
held as under:-

“44. The sentiments were echoed in Bombay Anand Bhavan Restaurant v. ESI
Corpn., (2009) 9 SCC 61, in the following words: (SCC p. 66, para 20) “20. The
Employees' State Insurance Act is a beneficial legislation. The main purpose of the
enactment as the Preamble suggests, is to provide for certain benefits to employees of
a factory in case of sickness, maternity and employment injury and to make provision
for certain other matters in relation thereto. The Employees' State Insurance Act is a
social security legislation and the canons of interpreting a social legislation are
different from the canons of interpretation of taxation law. The courts must not
countenance any subterfuge which would defeat the provisions of social legislation
and the courts must even, if necessary, strain the language of the Act in order to
achieve the purpose which the legislature had in placing this legislation on the statute
book. The Act, therefore, must receive a liberal construction so as to promote its
objects.” RULE OF ‘PLAIN MEANING’:-

33. Reverting to the statutory provisions, it is clear on a plain reading of Section 2(k)
of the Act of 1948 that ‘washing or cleaning’ of any article or substance with a view to
its delivery is clearly covered by the phrase “manufacturing process”. Where the
words of statute are clear, the plain meaning has to be given effect. We have no doubt
in our mind that the business of laundry carried on by the respondent involving
cleaning and washing of clothes including dry cleaning would be squarely covered by
the expression “manufacturing process”. Admittedly, they employed more than 9
workers in the centralized processing unit and also used the aid of power.

34. The plain meaning rule was explained by this Court in Jeewanlal Ltd. & Ors. v.
Appellate Authority under the Payment of Gratuity Act & Ors., (1984) 4 SCC 356,
which reads as under:-

“11. In construing a social welfare legislation, the court should adopt a beneficent rule
of construction; and if a section is capable of two constructions, that construction
should be preferred which fulfils the policy of the Act, and is more beneficial to the
persons in whose interest the Act has been passed. When, however, the language is
plain and unambiguous, the Court must give effect to it whatever may be the
consequence, for, in that case, the words of the statute speak the intention of the
Legislature. When the language is explicit, its consequences are for the Legislature
and not for the courts to consider. The argument of inconvenience and hardship is a

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174327794/

11

The State Of Goa vs Namita Tripathi on 3 March, 2025

dangerous one and is only admissible in construction where the meaning of the
statute is obscure and there are two methods of construction. In their anxiety to
advance beneficent purpose of legislation, the courts must not yield to the temptation
of seeking ambiguity when there is none.” (Emphasis supplied) APPLICATION OF
THE MISCHIEF RULE:-

35. To reinforce our holding, we may usefully refer to the definition of
“manufacturing process” as was defined in the Factories Act of 1934 under Section
2(g) thereof which reads as follows.

“2(g) "manufacturing process" means any process-

(i) for making, altering, repairing, ornamenting, finishing or packing, or otherwise treating any
article or substance with a view to its use, sale, transport, delivery or disposal, or

(ii) for pumping oil, water or sewage, or

(iii) for generating, transforming or transmitting power.”

36. It is very clear that Section 2(g) of the 1934 Act did not have the words ‘washing, cleaning’ and
they have been specifically brought in the Act of 1948 with a clear object of bringing into the fold of
the Act undertakings excluded from the scope of the 1934 Act as discussed in the Statement of
Objects and Reasons set out hereinabove.

37. Dealing with the mischief rule, this Court in Steel Authority of India Ltd. & Ors. v. National
Union Waterfront Workers & Ors., (2001) 7 SCC 1 held as under:-

“66. For a proper examination of these issues, a reference to Section 10 which
provides for prohibition of employment of contract labour and clauses (b), (c), (e), (g)
and (i) of Section 2(1) of the CLRA Act which define the terms “contract labour”,
“contractor”, “establishment”, “principal employer” and “workman” respectively will
be apposite. To interpret these and other relevant provisions of the CLRA Act, to
which reference will be made presently, we may, with advantage, refer to Craies on
Statute Law [ 6th Edn., by S.G.G. Edgar, p. 96] quoting the following observation of
Lindley, M.R. in Mayfair Property Co., Re [(1898) 2 Ch 28, 35 in regard to the rule in
Heydon's case [(1584) 3 Co Rep 7a : 76 ER 637] :

“In order to properly interpret any statute it is as necessary now as it was when Lord
Coke reported Heydon's case [(1584) 3 Co Rep 7a : 76 ER 637] to consider how the
law stood when the statute to be construed was passed, what the mischief was for
which the old law did not provide, and the remedy provided by the statute to cure
that mischief.” (Emphasis supplied) ERROR IN EXTRAPOLATING THE MEANING
FROM THE CENTRAL EXCISE ACT:-

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174327794/

12

The State Of Goa vs Namita Tripathi on 3 March, 2025

38. The reasoning of the High Court that a transformation has to ensue and the new article must
come into being and that it should be commercially known as another and different article is a
totally erroneous finding. The High Court has clearly ignored the plain language of the Section and
has been completely oblivious about the welfare nature of the Statute. The High Court has
extrapolated the definition of “manufacture” as is in vogue in the Central Excise Act 1944. Under the
Central Excise Act of 1944, a statute traceable to the definition of “manufacture” in Section 2(f)
reads as under:

“(f) “manufacture” includes any process—

(i) incidental or ancillary to the completion of a manufactured product;

(ii) which is specified in relation to any goods in the Section or Chapter Notes of the
Fourth Schedule as amounting to manufacture; or

(iii) which, in relation to the goods specified in the Third Schedule, involves packing
or repacking of such goods in a unit container or labelling or re-labelling of
containers including the declaration or alteration of retail sale price on it or adoption
of any other treatment on the goods to render the product marketable to the
consumer;

and the word “manufacture” shall be construed accordingly and shall include not only a person who
employs hired labour in the production or manufacture of excisable goods, but also any person who
engages in their production or manufacture on his own account;” The High Court has been carried
away by the interpretation given by courts while interpreting the Central Excise Act.

39. Dealing with the features of manufacture under the Central Excise Act, 1944, this Court in Crane
Betel Nut Powder Works vs. Commr. of Customs & Central Excise, Tirupathi & Anr., (2007) 4 SCC
155 observed as under:-

“31. In our view, the process of manufacture employed by the appellant Company did
not change the nature of the end product, which in the words of the Tribunal, was
that in the end product the “betel nut remains a betel nut”. The said observation of
the Tribunal depicts the status of the product prior to manufacture and thereafter. In
those circumstances, the views expressed in Delhi Cloth & General Mills Co. Ltd.
[AIR 1963 SC 791 and the passage from the American judgment (supra) become
meaningful. The observation that manufacture implies a change, but every change is
not manufacture and yet every change of an article is the result of treatment, labour
and manipulation is apposite to the situation at hand. The process involved in the
manufacture of sweetened betel nut pieces does not result in the manufacture of a
new product as the end product continues to retain its original character though in a
modified form.” [See also in this Context Kores India Ltd., Chennai v. Commissioner
of Central Excise, Chennai, (2005) 1 SCC 385 (paras 11 and 12)]

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174327794/

13

The State Of Goa vs Namita Tripathi on 3 March, 2025

40. However, the above judgments under the Central Excise Act can have no application since the
Act of 1948 defines the expression “manufacturing process” which definition is different from the
one under the Central Excise Act.

41. Where a statute under consideration itself defines for the purposes of the said Act a certain
phrase, a court of law is bound to apply the term as defined except in exceptional cases where the
opening part of a definition, ‘anything repugnant in the subject or context’ applies. Recently, this
Court in Independent Sugar Corporation Ltd. v. Girish Sriram Juneja & Ors., 2025 SCC OnLine SC
181 held as under:-

“49. Lord Atkinson in Corp. of the City of Victoria v. Bishop of Vancouver Island
[1921 SCC OnLine PC 75] observed:

“In the construction of statutes, their words must be interpreted in their ordinary
grammatical sense, unless there be something in the context, or in the object of the
statute, in which they occur, or in the circumstances in which they are used, to show
that they were used in a special sense different from their ordinary grammatical
sense.”

50. That words in the statute are to be understood in their natural, ordinary and
popular sense. This has been underscored by Justice Frankfurter, in the following
opinion:

“After all legislation when not expressed in technical terms is addressed to common
run of men and is therefore to be understood according to sense of the thing, as the
ordinary man has a right to rely on ordinary words addressed [Wilma E. Addison v.
Holly Hill Fruit Products, 322 US 607 (1944)].”

51. The above pronouncements make it clear that when the words used are clear,
plain and unambiguous, the courts are duty-bound to give effect to the meaning
emerging out of such plain words. The intention of the legislature must be gathered
from the language used and also, the words not used. It becomes imperative to
understand those words in their natural and ordinary sense, and any interpretation
requiring for its support addition or substitution or rejection of words as
meaningless, must ordinarily be avoided.” ACTIVITY OF THE RESPONDENT – A
MANUFACTURING PROCESS:-

42. The Act of 1948 defines “manufacturing process” and we clearly find that “washing, cleaning”
and the activities carried out by the respondent with a view to its use, delivery or disposal are
squarely attracted. The contention of the respondent that dry cleaning does not make any product
usable, saleable or worthy of transport, delivery or disposal has only to be stated to be rejected.
“Manufacturing process” has been defined to mean any process for washing or cleaning with a view
to its use, sale, transport, delivery or disposal. The linen deposited with the launderer is, after
washing and cleaning, delivered to the customer for use. The ingredients of the section are fully

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174327794/

14

The State Of Goa vs Namita Tripathi on 3 March, 2025

satisfied. There is nothing in the Act of 1948, which is repugnant in the subject or context,
constraining us to jettison the definition. Hence, we reject the findings of the High Court and hold
that the activity carried out which on facts is not disputed is clearly covered by the definition of
“manufacturing process” under Section 2(k) which, in turn, would bring the premises in question of
the respondent under the definition of “factory” under Section 2(m). If that were so, the complaint
lodged against the respondent could not have been quashed.

43. The High Court has been carried away by the holding of the Punjab and Haryana High Court in
Triplex Dry Cleaners (Supra). The said case has no application for the following reasons: Firstly, that
case was under the Employees State Insurance Corporation Act, and that too before the definition of
“manufacturing process” as defined in the Act of 1948 was incorporated in the ESIC Act. The
definition under the ESIC Act prior to 1989 merely defined a “factory” under Section 2(12) in the
following terms.

“(12) "factory" means any premises including the precincts thereof-

(a) whereon ten or more persons are employed or were employed for wages on any day of the
preceding twelve months, and in any part of which a manufacturing process is being carried on with
the aid of power or is ordinarily so carried on, or

(b) whereon twenty or more persons are employed or were employed for wages on any day of the
preceding twelve months, and in any part of which a manufacturing process is being carried on
without the aid of power or is ordinarily so carried on. but does not include a mine subject to the
operation of the Mines Act, 1952 or a railway running shed”

44. It was only with effect from 20.10.1989, Section 2(14AA) was introduced in the ESIC Act which
reads as under:-

“(14AA) "manufacturing process" shall have the meaning assigned to it in the
Factories Act, 1948;”

45. Triplex Dry Cleaners (Supra) was decided by a learned Single Judge of the High Court of
Judicature at Punjab and Haryana on 22.10.1981 when Section 2(14AA) was not in the statute. This
is precisely why this Court in Employees’ State Insurance Corporation Vs. Triplex Dry Cleaners and
Others, (1998) 1 SCC 196 held as under in Para 6 while dismissing the appeal of the Employees’
State Insurance Corporation.

“6. We, however, hasten to point out that we are here concerned with the show-cause notice dated
21-1-1978. At that point of time, Section 2(14-AA) had not been inserted in the Act which defines
manufacturing process as having the same meaning which is assigned to it under the Factories Act,
1948. This provision was inserted with effect from 20-10-1989. We, therefore, express no opinion
with regard to the applicability of the Act to an establishment engaged in the business of dry
cleaning after 20-10-1989 inasmuch as Section 2(14-AA) attracts the applicability of Section 2(k) of
the Factories Act, 1948 which defines manufacturing process which may conceivably include the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174327794/

15

The State Of Goa vs Namita Tripathi on 3 March, 2025

process of repairing, washing or cleaning of any article with a view to its use. However, insofar as
this appeal is concerned, inasmuch as it relates to a period prior to 20-10-1989 when there was no
such definition of manufacturing process applicable to the Act, it must fail and is accordingly,
dismissed. There will be no order as to costs.” (Emphasis supplied) This present case arises squarely
under the Act of 1948 and hence with the definition of the Statute in the Act of 1948 clearly
contemplating ‘washing, cleaning’ there is no scope for applying Triplex Dry Cleaners (Supra).
Equally the judgment in Super Cleaners Vs. Employees State Insurance Corporation, 2006 SCC
OnLine Bom 1660, will have no application since, it stands similar to the situation in Triplex Dry
Cleaners (Supra).

46. Recently in J.P. Lights India v. Regional Director E.S.I. Corporation, Bangalore, 2023 SCC
OnLine SC 1271, applying the amended Section 2(14 AA), this Court, while dealing with servicing of
electrical goods, had the following to say. This Court, speaking through Hima Kohli J, pithily set out
the statement of law as under.

“7. It is apparent from a perusal of the definition of the word “Factory”, as used in the ESI Act that it
means any premises including precincts wherein ten or more persons are employed or were
employed on any day of the preceding twelve months, and in any part of which a manufacturing
process was being carried out or ordinarily so carried out, with an exception of a mine or a railway
running shed.

8. Section 2(14AA) of the ESI Act defines the expression “manufacturing process” as one, defined
under the Factories Act, 1948. The said Act defines the expression “manufacturing process” under
Section 2(k) that is sub- divided into six sub-heads. For the purposes of the present case, Section
2(k)(i) is relevant which makes it clear that a “manufacturing process” may include ‘any process
amongst others for altering or repairing or treating/adapting any article for its use or disposal’.

9. In the instant case, the appellant-firm is in the business of selling electrical goods in a shop.
Admittedly, the shop premises is used not only for selling goods, but also to service electrical goods.
That being the position, it is clear that the appellant-firm falls under the definition of a “Factory”
and is using a “manufacturing process”, as contemplated under both the Statutes.”

47. One additional factor to be noticed in this case is that the respondent is registered as a factory
under the ESIC Act for the same premises. We have, however, not gone by the mere factum of
registration but have independently arrived at the above conclusion based on the interpretation of
the provisions of the Act of 1948.

48. The only other argument advanced is that the order issuing process is a cryptic order and does
not reflect any application of mind. We may have been inclined to consider this submission except
that in view of the categorical findings rendered by us hereinabove any exercise of remitting the
complaint and asking the Magistrate to exercise his powers afresh, would be futile. Hence, we have
refrained from adopting that course of action.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174327794/

16

The State Of Goa vs Namita Tripathi on 3 March, 2025

49. For the reasons set out hereinabove, we allow the appeal and set aside the order of the High
Court in Stamp Number Main No. 944 of 2020 (F) dated 06.09.2021. The consequence would be
that the complaint filed by the appellants along with the order issuing process of 04.12.2019 would
stand restored to file of the learned JMFC, Panaji and shall be proceeded with in accordance with
law.

……….........................J. [B.R. GAVAI] ……….........................J. [K. V. VISWANATHAN] New Delhi;

3rd March, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174327794/

17

