The State Of Himachal Pradesh vs Rajesh Kumar @ Munnu on 20 February, 2025

The State Of Himachal Pradesh vs Rajesh Kumar @ Munnu on
20 February, 2025

Author: Surya Kant

Bench: Surya Kant

                                                                                     REPORTABLE
2025 INSC 331
                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                            CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.2097/2014

                         THE STATE OF HIMACHAL PRADESH                          APPELLANT

                                                        VERSUS

                         RAJESH KUMAR @ MUNNU                                   RESPONDENT

                                                       J U D G M E N T

SURYA KANT, J.

1. The instant criminal appeal is directed against the impugned judgment dated 01.03.2012 passed
by a Division Bench of the High Court of Himachal Pradesh, whereby the criminal appeal preferred
by the respondent had been allowed. The High Court, while acquitting him under Sections 376 and
452 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (in short, the “IPC”), has set aside the judgment and order of the
Trial Court dated 02.01.2009, holding the respondent guilty of the aforementioned offences with a
sentence of 10 years of rigorous imprisonment.

2. We have heard learned counsel for the State at a ARJUN BISHT Date: 2025.03.06 17:12:17 IST
Reason:

considerable length. The record has been perused.

3. The prosecution case is that on 13.08.2007, the prosecutrix (PW-10) through her father lodged
FIR No. 346/2007 under Sections 452 and 376 of IPC at Police Station Sadar Hamirpur against the
accused-respondent. It was alleged therein that when her parents (PW-8 & PW-9) had gone to the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/107341267/

1

The State Of Himachal Pradesh vs Rajesh Kumar @ Munnu on 20 February, 2025

hospital for purchasing medicines around noon, the respondent came to the varandah of her house
and asked for a match box. Finding her alone, the accused allegedly caught her from the arm and
took her inside the room. Thereafter, he forcibly committed sexually intercourse with her. This
incident was apparently narrated by the prosecutrix to her parents when they returned, who
subsequently lodged the FIR.

4. The prosecutrix was medically examined by Dr. Sunita Galodha (PW-7) at Regional Hospital,
Hamirpur, where she was found to be of unsound mind as she did not cooperate in her medical
examination. As the factum of sexual intercourse could not be ascertained, the prosecutrix was
further referred to the RPMC Hospital at Tanda (Dharamshala) for the opinion of their Gynecologist
and Psychiatrist. However, the father of the prosecutrix did not allow for any medical examination
to happen. Nevertheless, the initial vaginal swab collected by the police was sent to Forensic Science
Laboratory for medical analysis.

5. The Trial Court on the basis of examination of prosecution evidence, consisting of 14 witnesses
besides statement of the accused under Section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
convicted him under Sections 452 and 376 of IPC; and sentenced him to undergo rigorous
imprisonment for 10 years, besides the requisite fine.

6. Against this, the respondent preferred an appeal before the High Court, which has been allowed
vide the impugned judgment. The High Court has succinctly demonstrated some of the glaring
lacunae in the prosecution case, which even the learned State counsel before us, is unable to
satisfactorily justify. We say so for the reasons set out below.

7. The present case is one where the mother of the prosecutrix (PW-9) entered the witness box and
unfortunately did not support prosecution case. She completely denied that any occurrence, similar
to the one described in the FIR, ever took place. She was, accordingly, declared hostile and
cross-examined by the Public Prosecutor. Of course, nothing material could be extracted from her
cross-examination.

8. The father of the prosecutrix (PW-8) also entered the witness box, and it is an admitted fact that
he, too, made evasive statements, largely restricted to the narration of the events preceding the trial.
We may note at this junction, that his statement fails to explain the delay in reporting the matter,
and the lodging of the FIR. While he submitted that he reported the alleged incident to the police as
soon as he was apprised of the same, we are constrained to note that the such assertion does not
inspire much confidence. We say so, keeping in mind the statement made by Nirmala Devi, Pradhan
of Gram Panchayat (PW-1), who simply deposed that the father of the prosecutrix came to her house
after three days of the incident, i.e. on 13.08.2007, and informed her about the occurrence. She then
advised him to report the matter to the police, he finally went and lodged the police report. While it
is trite law that unexplained delay in lodging FIRs is commonly considered fatal to the prosecution’s
case,1 we observe that in the instant case the delay was never even acknowledged – much less
explained. Thus, it is our considered opinion that the necessary benefit of such an omission must
accrue to the accused-respondent.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/107341267/

2

The State Of Himachal Pradesh vs Rajesh Kumar @ Munnu on 20 February, 2025

9. The other significant evidence on record comprises the statement of Dr. Sunita Galodha of
Regional Hospital of Hameerpur, who issued the medico-legal certificate (Ext.PW7/B) based on the
Chemical Examiner’s Report (Ext.PW6/A). The High Court has referred to the statement of Dr.
Sunita Galodha and both the above-mentioned reports in extenso, in paragraph 10 of the impugned
judgment, which reads as under:

1 Ramdas v. State of Maharashtra, (2007) 2 SCC 170; Parminder Kaur v. State of
Punjab, (2020) 8 SCC 811; Fateh Chand v. State of Haryana, (2009) 15 SCC 543;

State of Uttar Pradesh v. Chhotey Lal, (2011) 2 SCC 550. “10. Each case has to be determined on its
own circumstances and law laid down by the Apex Court with regard to delay has to be applied to
the given facts. Coming to the medical evidence, we find that prosecutrix was examined by Dr.
Sunita Galodha (PW-7) who issued· MLC (Ex.PW7/B) based on the chemical examiner's report
(Ex.PW6/A). This witness found that prosecutrix was having a normal gait. There were no marks of
injury on any part of her body. Clothes which she was wearing had been washed and changed.
However, when it came for physical examination of her private parts, prosecutrix did not co-operate.
She did not allow even a tip of a little finger to be inserted inside her vagina. Also no blood or semen
was found on her private parts or the vaginal swab. Since prosecutrix resisted physical examination,
including that of hymen, this witness could not give any final opinion about the commission of
sexual intercourse. The report of the Forensic Science Laboratory also does not link the accused to
the alleged crime. Semen was not found on the clothes of the prosecutrix or the vaginal swab.
Eventually the ground that blood & semen was not found on the pubic hair & vaginal slides of Veeja
Kumari. Blood in track was found on swab, but semen could not be detected on exhibit. Further, the
opinion regarding occurrence of act, as asked in police docket cannot be given as the girl has been-
referred to RPMC, Dharamshala.”

10. The afore-extracted portions make it amply clear that the prosecutrix and her parents
themselves never fully co-operated with the medical staff, thereby adversely impacting the
credibility of their version of events. It is a well-settled proposition of law that non- allowance of
medical examination by an alleged rape- victim raises negative inferences against them.2 We cannot
ascribe any good reason to the complete lack of 2 Assessment of the Criminal Justice System in
Response to Sexual Offences, In re, (2020) 18 SCC 540; Dola v. State of Odisha, (2018) 18 SCC 695.
assistance that the complainants tendered to the authorities, apart from their contradictory stances
before the Court. We are further doubtless in this regard as the High Court, while discussing the
prosecutrix’s testimony, has come to the invariable conclusion that she was not mentally unsound –
g i v e n   t h a t   s h e   w a s   a b l e   t o   c l e a r l y   c o m p r e h e n d   t h e   q u e s t i o n   a n d   a n s w e r   d u r i n g   t h e
cross-examination.

11. As regard to the age of the prosecutrix, she has categorically admitted as has been otherwise
proved that she was 19 years old at the time of the alleged occurrence. The prosecution has not
opposed this factum as well.

12. We are cognizant of the jurisdictional limitations that normally restrict interference in settled
criminal appeals,3 especially wherein the High Court has acquitted the accused. It is equally

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/107341267/

3

The State Of Himachal Pradesh vs Rajesh Kumar @ Munnu on 20 February, 2025

well-established that save and except where this Court finds that the conclusion drawn by the High
Court is based upon a complete misreading of the evidence on record, or where its conclusions are
so perverse that the same cannot be sustained, then only might a judgment of acquittal warrant
interference. On the contrary, in the instant case the High Court has microscopically examined the
entire evidence before 3 Sham Sunder v. Puran, (1990) 4 SCC 731; Ramaniklal Gokaldas v. State of
Gujarat, (1976) 1 SCC 6; Gosu Jayarami Reddy v. State of Andhra Pradesh, (2011) 11 SCC 766; State
of Uttar Pradesh v. Dharmendra Singh, (1999) 8 SCC 325. firmly opining that the present
accused-respondent deserves the benefit of the doubt.

13. Consequently, we refuse to interfere with the judgment of acquittal passed by the High Court.
The appeal is, accordingly, dismissed.

..........................J. (SURYA KANT) ..........................J. (NONGMEIKAPAM KOTISWAR SINGH) New
Delhi;

February 20, 2025

(cid:12)ITEM NO.104                COURT NO.3                SECTION II-C

                 S U P R E M E C O U R T O F     I N D I A
                         RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

Criminal Appeal No(s).2097/2014

THE STATE OF HIMACHAL PRADESH                        Appellant(s)

                                  VERSUS

RAJESH KUMAR @ MUNNU                                 Respondent(s)

Date : 20-02-2025 This appeal was called on for hearing today. CORAM : HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE
SURYA KANT HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE NONGMEIKAPAM KOTISWAR SINGH For Appellant(s) :
Mr. Vikrant Narayan Vasudeva, AOR Mr. Sarthak Chiller, Adv.

Mr. Rohit Lochav, Adv.

For Respondent(s) :Mr. Jogy Scaria, AOR Mrs. Beena Victor, Adv.

Ms. M. Priya, Adv.

Mr. Ashwani Kumar Soni, Adv.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/107341267/

4

The State Of Himachal Pradesh vs Rajesh Kumar @ Munnu on 20 February, 2025

UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following O R D E R

1. The appeal is dismissed in terms of the signed reportable judgment.

2. All pending applications, if any, also stand disposed of.

(ARJUN BISHT)                                   (PREETHI T.C.)
ASTT. REGISTRAR-cum-PS                        ASSISTANT REGISTRAR

(signed reportalbe judgment is placed on the file)

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/107341267/

5

