The State Of Jharkhand vs Nishkant Dubey on 21 January, 2025

The State Of Jharkhand vs Nishkant Dubey on 21 January, 2025

Author: Dipankar Datta

Bench: Dipankar Datta

2025 INSC 94                                                                       REPORTABLE
                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                         CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 5475 OF 2024
                                 (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.7844/2023

            STATE OF JHARKHAND                                                 .…. APPELLANT

                                                 VERSUS

            DR. NISHKANT DUBEY & ORS.                                          ..…RESPONDENTS

                                                                        WITH

                                        CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 5476 OF 2024
                                 (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.7816/2023

                                                                    AND

                                        CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 5477 OF 2024
                                 (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.7706/2023

                                                             JUDGMENT

MANMOHAN, J

1. Present appeals have been filed challenging the judgment and order dated 13th March, 2023
passed by the High Court of Jharkhand at Ranchi allowing the writ petitions filed by the
Respondents herein and quashing the First Information Report (‘FIR’) being Deoghar Kunda P.S.
Case No.169 of 2022 registered against the Respondents-accused persons for commission of alleged
offences under Sections 336, 447 and 448 of Indian Penal Code, 1860 (‘IPC’) and Sections 10 and
11A of the Aircraft Act, 1934 holding that the FIR is vitiated by mala fides and allowing the
proceedings to continue would amount to abuse of law. The High Court of Jharkhand at Ranchi
while quashing the FIR has held as under:-

Reason:

“26. In view of the above facts, reasons and analysis and considering that Aircraft
took off after permission of the ATC, Aircraft Act, 1934 is itself complete code and
there are procedure prescribed therein to lodge the complaint and of the enquiry, in

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143483899/

1

The State Of Jharkhand vs Nishkant Dubey on 21 January, 2025

view of the Act, the competent authority has not complained anything, even Airport
Director has been made accused and even the two sons of the petitioner no. 1 has not
been spared and considering that when the Special Act is there, Sections of Indian
Penal Code are not attracted, petitioner no.1 and 4 in W.P.(Cr.) No. 448 of 2022 are
Member of Parliament and petitioner no.1 is Chairman of the Airport Advisory
Committee of Deoghar Airport and petitioner no.4 is also a member of the Standing
Committee, Civil Aviation, further considering the materials on record which
suggests that several cases have been lodged against the petitioner no.1 in W.P.(Cr.)
No. 448 of 2022 which have been quashed by this Court and some judgments are
affirmed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court, it transpires that F.I.R. has been lodged
malafidely and allowing to continue the proceeding will amount the abuse of process
of law, accordingly, the F.I.R. bearing Deoghar Kunda P.S. Case No. 169 of 2022
including the entire criminal proceeding registered under sections 336, 447 and 448
of the Indian Penal Code and section 10 and 11A of the Airport Act, 1934, pending in
the Court of learned Sub Divisional Magistrate, Dumka, is hereby quashed.” FACTS

2. The facts, as mentioned in the FIR, are that on 31st August, 2022 at 17:25 hours, the
Respondents-accused persons boarded a chartered plane to travel from Deoghar Airport. After some
time, the door of the plane opened and the pilot came down and moved towards the Air Traffic
Control (‘ATC’) room as the Air Traffic Controller had denied permission for take-off. Learned
counsel for Appellant- State of Jharkhand stated that the first informant who was Security-in-charge
in Deoghar Airport followed the pilot and when he entered the ATC room, he saw that the pilot was
creating pressure for giving Respondents-accused persons clearance for take-off at the earliest.
Thereafter, the other Respondents-accused persons also barged into the ATC room and created
pressure for the clearance to be given to them. According to the learned counsel for the
Appellant-State of Jharkhand, pursuant to the pressure exerted by the Respondents-accused
persons, the ATC clearance was given and the chartered flight took-off at 18:17 hours even when the
sunset time on that day was 18:03 hours.

ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF APPELLANT-STATE OF JHARKHAND

3. Learned counsel for the Appellant-State of Jharkhand stated that the ATC room is a restricted
area and the Respondents-accused persons forcefully trespassed and entered the ATC room which
was a serious security breach and the Respondents-accused persons threatened the ATC officers and
c o e r c e d   t h e m   t o   g i v e   p e r m i s s i o n   f o r   t a k e - o f f .   H e   s t a t e d   t h a t   t h e   A T C   h a d   d e n i e d
clearance/permission to chartered flight to take-off from Deoghar Airport due to low visibility and
bad weather conditions. He pointed out that the Deoghar Airport does not have the facility of night
operation. He stated that by forcefully obtaining the ATC clearance by threatening and creating
pressure on the ATC officers, the chartered flight with the Respondents-accused persons on board,
took-off at 18:17 hours i.e., after sunset.

4. He submitted that there was a clear violation of Rule 14(ix) of Airport (Security) Rules, 2011
which empowers the Security Officer to supervise the movement of persons in the restricted areas.
He contended that the said Rules of 2011 have been promulgated in exercise of powers under

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143483899/

2

The State Of Jharkhand vs Nishkant Dubey on 21 January, 2025

Section 4 read with Section 5 of the Aircraft Act, 1934. Section 5(2)(gc) of the Aircraft Act, 1934
permits the Central Government to make rules to provide for “the measures to safeguard civil
aviation against acts of unlawful interference”.

5. He submitted that the High Court of Jharkhand failed to appreciate that the bar under Section
12B of the Aircraft Act, 1934 will get triggered and come into play only after the investigation is
complete and the result of investigation in the form of the Final Report/Chargesheet is filed before
the competent Court. According to him, Section 12B does not bar the police from registering an FIR
and consequently conducting investigation arising out of the FIR.

6. He pointed out that in the context of prosecution under the Environment Protection Act, 1986
which, by virtue of Section 19, mandates that no Court shall take cognizance of an offence under this
Act except on complaint made by the officers specified therein, the Division Bench of the Bombay
High Court in Navi Mumbai Environment Preservation Society and Anr. vs. Ministry of
Environment (PIL No.218/2013) dated 22nd December, 2016 has after considering the judgment of
this Court in State (NCT) of Delhi vs. Sanjay, (2014) 9 SCC 772 held that the offence under Section
15(1) of the Environment Protection Act, 1986 is a cognizable offence and therefore, the police can
register the FIR under Section 154(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short ‘Code’). The
Division Bench of the Bombay High Court (speaking through one of us Hon’ble Mr. Justice A.S. Oka
as his Lordship then was) held, “Therefore, if FIR is registered by the Police for the offence
punishable under Section 15 of the Act of 1956, the registration of offence and investigation carried
out by the police is not per se vitiated. A complaint can be made/filed by authorized officer under
Clause (a) of Section 19 before the concerned Court. While filing a complaint, the authorized officer
can always rely upon the material collected by the police during the investigation. The Complaint
can include the material collected by the police during the investigation carried out on the basis of
the FIR.” He pointed out that the High Court of Bombay in the said case, inter alia, issued the
following interim direction at para 15(iii):-

“(III) We clarify that registration of offences by the Police under Sub-Section (1) of
Section 15 of the said Act of 1986 and the investigation carried out thereon is not per
se illegal. The officers authorized under clause (a) of Section 19 can always file
complaints in accordance with the said Code by relying upon the material collected
during the investigation and material forming part of the charge sheet prepared by
the Police.”

7. He further submitted that the finding of the High Court of Jharkhand in the
impugned judgment that the Aircraft Act, 1934 is a Special Act and a complete Code
in itself and therefore, IPC offences are not attracted, is erroneous and is in the teeth
of the law laid down by this Court in State (NCT of Delhi) Vs. Sanjay (supra) and in
Jayant & Ors. Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh, (2021) 2 SCC 670.

The relevant portion of the judgment relied upon in State (NCT of Delhi) Vs. Sanjay (supra) is
reproduced herein below:-

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143483899/

3

The State Of Jharkhand vs Nishkant Dubey on 21 January, 2025

“69. Considering the principles of interpretation and the wordings used in Section 22,
in our considered opinion, the provision is not a complete and absolute bar for taking
action by the police for illegal and dishonestly committing theft of minerals including
sand from the riverbed….

xxx xxx xxx xxx

72. From a close reading of the provisions of the MMDR Act and the offence defined
under Section 378 IPC, it is manifest that the ingredients constituting the offence are
different. The contravention of terms and conditions of mining lease or doing mining
activity in violation of Section 4 of the Act is an offence punishable under Section 21
of the MMDR Act, whereas dishonestly removing sand, gravel and other minerals
from the river, which is the property of the State, out of the State's possession without
the consent, constitute an offence of theft. Hence, merely because initiation of
proceeding for commission of an offence under the MMDR Act on the basis of
complaint cannot and shall not debar the police from taking action against persons
for committing theft of sand and minerals in the manner mentioned above by
exercising power under the Code of Criminal Procedure and submit a report before
the Magistrate for taking cognizance against such persons.

In other words, in a case where there is a theft of sand and gravel from the government land, the
police can register a case, investigate the same and submit a final report under Section 173 CrPC
before a Magistrate having jurisdiction for the purpose of taking cognizance as provided in Section
190(1)(d) of the Code of Criminal Procedure.

73. After giving our thoughtful consideration in the matter, in the light of the relevant provisions of
the Act vis-à-vis the Code of Criminal Procedure and the Penal Code, we are of the definite opinion
that the ingredients constituting the offence under the MMDR Act and the ingredients of
dishonestly removing sand and gravel from the riverbeds without consent, which is the property of
the State, is a distinct offence under IPC. Hence, for the commission of offence under Section 378
IPC, on receipt of the police report, the Magistrate having jurisdiction can take cognizance of the
said offence without awaiting the receipt of complaint that may be filed by the authorised officer for
taking cognizance in respect of violation of various provisions of the MMDR Act. Consequently, the
contrary view taken by the different High Courts cannot be sustained in law and, therefore,
overruled. Consequently, these criminal appeals are disposed of with a direction to the Magistrates
concerned to proceed accordingly.”

8. He also submitted that in the impugned judgment, the High Court of Jharkhand erroneously
adjudicated upon disputed questions of facts even when the investigation was at a nascent stage.

9. He lastly submitted that the High Court of Jharkhand had conducted a mini trial while deciding
the writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.

ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENTS-ACCUSED

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143483899/

4

The State Of Jharkhand vs Nishkant Dubey on 21 January, 2025

10. Per contra, learned senior counsel for the Respondents-accused persons stated that the
Respondent No.1 is a sitting and three-time Member of Parliament and Chairman of the Airport
Advisory Committee, Deoghar Airport. He stated that Respondent No.1 was accompanied amongst
others by Respondent No.4 (also a sitting Member of Parliament and a Member of Standing
Committee, Civil Aviation) when his flight landed from New Delhi at Deoghar Airport. He stated
that in his capacity as Chairman of the Airport Advisory Committee, Respondent No.1 disembarked
from the aircraft, met the Director of the Deoghar Airport and reviewed the functioning of the
airport and operational issues like night landing.

11. He contended that this routine meeting has been falsely represented by the Appellant-State of
Jharkhand as a forcible trespass of the ATC room at the Deoghar Airport. He further contended that
the FIR was premised on completely incorrect facts, was illegal and mala fide for the following
reasons:

S.NO. REASON PARTICULARS

1. Alleged offence governed by Procedure under Section 12B of the Aircraft Act, the provisions of
Section 12B 1934 – Precondition of complaint to be made of the Aircraft Act. by/with sanction of the
relevant Aviation Authorities has been completely bypassed.

2. FIR premised on an incorrect The basis of the FIR was that the Aircraft could legal basis. be
operated only till 17:30 hrs. This position is legally flawed and completely incorrect.

Rule 4 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937 clearly defines flight by night as, inter alia, a flight performed
between the period of half an hour after sunset.

As per FIR, on the day of alleged incident, i.e., 31st August, 2022, the sunset was at 18:03 hours.

As per the Petitioner’s own affidavit before the High Court (para 6 at page 128 of SLP), the flight
took off at 18:17 hours after the clearance from Kolkata ATC.

Therefore, the flight take-off, being within the period of half an hour after sunset, was legal and
proper.

3. Allegation in FIR of forcible The clearance for take-off was given by the ATC, entry into the ATC
Room, Kolkata. The ATC at Deoghar Airport neither Deoghar Airport and pressure had the
authority nor the control to grant take-off exerted to obtain ATC clearance. There is no allegation
that the clearance. answering Respondent tried to influence take-off clearance from the
ATC-Kolkata.

12. Learned senior counsel for the Respondents-accused persons submitted that the provisions of
the Aircraft Act, 1934 being special law shall prevail over the Code being the general law. He pointed
out that Entry 29 of the List I of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India states as follows:-

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143483899/

5

The State Of Jharkhand vs Nishkant Dubey on 21 January, 2025

“29. Airways; aircraft and air navigation; provision of aerodromes; regulation and
organization of air traffic and aerodromes; provision for aeronautical education and
training and regulation of such education and training provided by States and other
agencies.”

13. He pointed out that Section 4A of the Aircraft Act, 1934 prescribes for the constitution of a body
to be known as the “Directorate General of Civil Aviation”. Under sub-Section (2) thereof, it is
provided that:

“(2) The Directorate General of Civil Aviation shall be responsible for carrying out the
safety oversight of regulatory functions in respect of matters specified in this Act or
the rules made thereunder.”

14. Similarly, under Section 4B of the Aircraft Act, 1934 a “Bureau of Civil Aviation Security” has
been constituted. Under sub-section (2) thereof, it is stated that:

“(2) The Bureau of Civil Aviation Security shall be responsible for carrying out the
regulatory and oversight functions in respect of matter relating to civil aviation
security specified in this Act or the rules made thereunder.”

15. He stated that under Section 4C of the Aircraft Act, 1934, a provision has been made for
constituting a body named as “Aircraft Accidents Investigation Bureau”. Under sub-Section (2)
thereof, it is provided that:

“(2) The Aircraft Accidents Investigation Bureau shall be responsible for carrying out
the functions in respect of matters relating to investigation of aircraft accidents or
incidents specified in this Act or the rules made thereunder.”

16. Further, under Section 5 of the Aircraft Act, 1934, the Central Government may make rules for
regulating the manufacture, possession, use, operation, sale, import or export of any aircraft or class
of aircraft and for securing the safety of aircraft operations. Among several subjects, the Central
Government can frame rules in relation to:

i. the measures to safeguard civil aviation against acts of unlawful interference, under
sub-clause (gc) of Section 5;

ii. safety oversight and regulatory functions, under sub-clause (qb); and iii. regulatory
and oversight functions in respect of matters relating to civil aviation security, under
sub-clause (qc).

17. According to learned senior counsel for the Respondents-accused persons, a necessary
concomitant which flows from the combined reading of the above is that the safety and security of
the civil aviation is completely governed under the Aircraft Act, 1934 and the Rules framed
thereunder. At this stage, he referred to Rule 90 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937, which reads as under:-

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143483899/

6

The State Of Jharkhand vs Nishkant Dubey on 21 January, 2025

“90. Entry into public aerodromes. – (1) No person shall enter or be in the terminal
building of any Government aerodrome or public aerodrome or part of such building
or any other area in such aerodrome notified in this behalf by the Central
Government unless he holds an admission ticket issued by the aerodrome operator or
an entry pass issued by the Commissioner of Security (Civil Aviation) or any person
authorized by the Central Government in this behalf.”

18. Therefore, according to him, the access to an aerodrome and any activities thereafter are
completely governed by the Act and/or the Rules framed thereunder.

19. He pointed out that similarly, Parts II, III, IV and V of the Aircraft (Security) Rules, 2011
prescribe the security measures at aerodromes, the access control, security checks and the other
security measures by aircraft operators. Rule 18 under the above stated Part III regulates the entry
into aerodrome. Further, under the said Aircraft (Security) Rules, 2011, Rule 2(y) defines “security
incident” which includes the contravention of breach of security laws etc.

20. Further, Rules 45 and 46 of the Aircraft (Security) Rules, 2011 prescribe that any accident /
incident has to be reported to the Commissioner, who shall order an inquiry to be conducted by a
competent officer. Rules 45 and 46 are reproduced herein below:-

“45. Reporting of security accident or incident. -

Every aircraft operator, aviation security group, aerodrome operator, regulated agent
and owner or operator of catering establishment shall report the security accident or
security incident to the Commissioner immediately on the occurrence of the security
accident or security incident.

46. Investigation of security accident or incident. -

(1) The Commissioner may order investigation of any security accident or security
incident and appoint an officer not below the rank of Assistant Commissioner of
security as Inquiry Officer.

(2) The Inquiry Officer shall, after affording an opportunity of being heard to the
defaulting person, make a report to the Commissioner who should forward the same
to the Central Government.”

21. Thus, according to him, even the power of inquiry and investigation at aerodromes is only vested
with authorities as prescribed under the aforesaid Rules.

22. Since learned senior counsel for the Respondents-accused persons repeatedly emphasised
Section 12B of the Aircraft Act, 1934, the same is reproduced hereinbelow:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143483899/

7

The State Of Jharkhand vs Nishkant Dubey on 21 January, 2025

“12B. Cognizance of offences – (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence
punishable under this Act, save on a complaint made by or with the previous sanction
in writing by the Director General of Civil Aviation or Director General of Bureau of
Civil Aviation Security or Director General of Aircraft Accidents Investigation
Bureau, as the case may be.”

23. According to him, admittedly, the procedure under the Special Act, i.e. the Aircraft Act, 1934 was
not followed in the present case. He submitted that it is a settled principle of law that the provisions
of the special law will prevail over the provisions of the general law, i.e. the Code. Consequently,
according to learned senior counsel for the Respondents-accused persons, the very power of the
State Police to investigate / inquire has been curtailed by the aforementioned special procedure.

24. He emphasised that the essence of the entire FIR dated 02nd September, 2022 was that the
Respondent No.1 had forcibly entered the ATC at the Deoghar Airport and pressurized the personnel
therein to grant permission for take-off of their aircraft. He stated that nothing could be further
from the truth as in the present case, admittedly, the clearance for take-off was given by the ATC,
Kolkata Region due to infrastructural reasons. The take-off was completely within the permissible
limits as regulated by Rule 4 of Schedule II of the Aircraft Rules, 1937 which states as under:-

“4. Flight by Night –Flight by night for the purpose of this Schedule, except where
otherwise stated, means, a flight performed between the period of half an hour after
sunset and half an hour before sunrise.”

25. He pointed out that the Appellant’s own Affidavit dated 12th November, 2022 filed by the
investigating agency, viz., the Crime Investigation Department, P.S. Dumka, Jharkhand before the
High Court admits as under:-

“6……..These witnesses have stated that clearance to any flight for take off from
Deoghar Airport is granted by them after getting clearance from Kolkata region. After
getting clearance from Kolkata Region, the chartered flights was given ATC clearance
at about 18:15 hrs and the flight took off at about 18:17 hrs.”

26. He stated that it is inconceivable as to why the Respondents-accused persons would attempt to
exert undue influence over the ATC officials at Deoghar Airport when the ultimate power to grant
ATC clearance was in the hands of the ATC Kolkata authorities.

27. He repeatedly emphasised that none of the allegations in the FIR made out the offences alleged
under IPC. He stated that as the ATC clearance was granted by the ATC Kolkata Region which is
more than 300 Kms. from the Deogarh Airport, the Respondent No.1 cannot be said to have
committed any act endangering the life or safety of anyone at the Deogarh Airport under Section
336 IPC.

28. He further stated that the allegation that Respondent No.1 pressurized the officials of ATC
Deoghar is proven false by the Appellant-State’s own Affidavit, inasmuch as, the actual clearance

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143483899/

8

The State Of Jharkhand vs Nishkant Dubey on 21 January, 2025

was given by ATC Kolkata. Thus, there is no question of the Respondent No.1 intimidating the ATC
Deogarh officials under Section 447 IPC.

29. He lastly contended that the FIR is one of the many instances, where the Appellant-State of
Jharkhand has filed false FIRs against the Respondent No.1 and his family. Among others, on three
such occasions, those FIRs have been quashed by the High Court and the said orders have been
upheld by this Court.

COURT’S REASONING UNDER ARTICLE 226 AND/OR SECTION 482 CODE, HIGH COURT CAN
QUASH AN FIR

30. It is settled law that in exercise of the extraordinary power under Article 226 of the Constitution
of India or the inherent powers under Section 482 of the Code, it is open to the High Court to quash
an FIR either to prevent abuse of the process of any Court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice.
Though it is not possible to lay down any precise or rigidly defined formula, yet in State of Haryana
& Ors. vs. Bhajan Lal & Ors., 1992 Suppl.(1) SCC 335, this Court has held that an FIR can be
quashed if the allegations made in the FIR or the complaint, even if they are taken at their face value
and accepted in their entirety, do not prima facie constitute any offence or make out a case against
the accused or where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any of the provisions of the Code or
the concerned Act (under which a criminal proceeding is instituted) to the institution and
continuance of the proceedings.

SECTIONS 336, 447 AND 448 IPC ARE NOT MADE OUT IN THE PRESENT CASE

31. Consequently, it is important to examine the allegations in the impugned FIR. Accordingly, the
FIR in question is reproduced in its entirety hereinbelow:-

No.JH 713487 FIRST INFORMATION REPORT (Under Section 154 Cr.P.C.)

1. District: Deoghar, P.S.: Kunda, Year 2022, FIR No.: 0169 Date and Time of FIR:
02/09/2022 00:00 hrs

2. S. No. Acts Sections (5) Aircrafts Act, 1934 11A

3. (a) Occurrence of Offence:

         Day: Wednesday, Date from: 31.08.2022 Date                      to:
         31.08.2022          Time Period: 6 pahar,           Time              from:
         17.25 hrs Time to: 18:00 hrs
         (b)        Information received at P.S.:
         Date: 02.09.2022            Time 00.05 hrs.

         Date & Time: 02.09.2022
         4.         Type of Information (Written/Oral): Written

1 (a) Direction and distance from P.S.: South-East 8, Beat No.:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143483899/

9

The State Of Jharkhand vs Nishkant Dubey on 21 January, 2025

(b) Address: Deoghar Airport, P.S. Kunda

(c) In case, Outside the limit of the Police Station Name of P.S. District:

6 Complainant/ Informant:

         (a)        Name: Suman Anan
         (b)        Father's/Husband's Name: Late Rajeshwar Sharma
         (c)        Date of Birth: 1963
         (d)        Nationality: Indian
         (e)        UID No.

(cid:12)         (f)      Passport No.
                  Date of Issue:                       Place of Issue:
         (g)      Id details (ration Card, Voter ID Card, Passport, UID No., Driving License,
         PAN)
                  S.No.              ID Type                  ID Number
         (h)      Address:

1. Present Address: Deoghar Airport, Kunda, Deoghar, Jharkhand, India

2. Permanent Address: Deonagar, Shastrinagar, Girideah Nagar, Girideah,
Jharkhand, India.

7. Details of the known/suspected/unknown accused with full particulars:

        S.N.     Name                        Alias           Relative’s   Present Address
                                                             Name
        1        Chartered    Plane                                       1,    Unknown        Kunda,
                 Pilot                                                    Deoghar, Jharkhand, India
        2        Shree     Nishikant                                      1, MP Godda Lokshabha
                 Dubey                                                    Godda Magar, Jharkhand,
                                                                          India
        3        Shree Kanishk Kant                                       1,    Unknown,       Kunda,
                 Dubey                                                    Deoghar, Jharkhand, India
        4        Shree    Mahikant                                        1,    Unknown,       Kunda,
                 Dubey                                                    Deoghar, Jharkhand, India
        5        Shree Manoj Tiwari                                       1, MP North-East, Delhi
                                                                          Lokshabha, New Delhi
        6         Shree      Mukesh                                       1,    Unknown,       Kunda,
                 Pathak                                                   Deoghar, Jharkhand, India
        7        Shree        Deota                                       1,    Unknown,       Kunda,
                 Pandey                                                   Deoghar, Jharkhand, India
        8        Shree Pintu Tiwari                                       1,    Unknown,       Kunda,
                                                                          Deoghar, Jharkhand, India
        9        Shree           Sandip                                   1, Airport Director, Kunda,
                 Dhingra                                                  Deoghar, Jharkhand, India

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143483899/

10

8. Reason of delay in giving the complaint/information…….

The State Of Jharkhand vs Nishkant Dubey on 21 January, 2025

9. Details of properties of interest:

S.No. Properties Category Property Type Description Value (In Rs.)

10. Total value of property (In Rs.)

11. Inquest Report/U.D. Case No., if any:

S.NO. UIDB Number:

12. First Information contents:

To, P.S. In charge, Kunda P.S. District Deoghar, Sub: On 31.08.2022 in the Deoghar Airport Shri
Nishikant Dubey, Hon'ble Member of Parliament Godda and his two sons, Shri Manoj Tewari,
Hon'ble Member of Parliament and others without any permission have entered into the ATC and
created pressure by using their influence upon the ATC personnel for obtaining forceful ATC
Clearance. Sir, I, Suman Anan, Aged about 59 years, son of Late Rajeshwar Sharma, Resident of Deo
Nagar Shastri Nagar, P.S. Nagar, District Girideah (Jharkhand), Deputy Superintendent of Police,
presently posted on the post of Security-In-Charge of the entire Deoghar Airport. Since the day of
my posting I am fulfilling my duties with devotion as per rules. With respect to the above subject
this is to inform you that on 31.08.2022 at 13.05 hrs. a chartered plane from Delhi reached Deoghar
Airport. In that chartered plane following persons were found: (1) Shri Nishikant Dubey, Hon'ble
Member of Parliament Godda, (2) Shri Kanishkant Dubey, (3) Shri Mahikant Dubey, (4) Shri Manoj
Tiwari, Hon'ble Member of Parliament. (5) Shri Kapil Mishra, Hon'ble Member of Parliament, (6)
Shri Sheshavri Dubey, (7) Sh. Sunil Tiwari and others. To receive them, huge numbers of people
were there. After receiving them passengers and others came out. In the evening at 17.25 hrs the
passengers of Chartered Plane and persons came to see-off them at Deoghar Airport. All passengers
went inside the chartered plane and the door of the plane was closed. After some time the door of
the plane opened, the pilot came down. After coming down Pilot started moving towards ATC. Upon
seeing him moving towards ATC, I became alert from the point of view of security and started
walking behind the pilot. In this regard I would like to mention that at Deoghar Airport still the
Night Take-off/ Landing and IFR facility are not available. Because of non availability of this facility
due to Low Visibility/ Bad Weather Condition/ After Sunset, generally it was not possible to give
ATC Clearance to Aircraft. On 31.08.2022 the sunset time at Deoghar was 18.03 hrs and as per my
knowledge on that day generally the Aircraft could be operated till 17.30 hrs only. When I reached
the ATC Control Room, there in the Control Room Shri Sandeep Dhingra, Director of Airport and
Pilot of Chartered Plane were already present. At that time the pilot of said Chartered Plane was
creating pressure upon the ATC personnel present at that time and was saying that the passengers of
Chartered Plane necessarily wanted to return back today itself therefore ATC clearance be given to
them. During this discussion ATC personnel were talking on the mobile phone regarding clearance.
After some time Shri Nishikant Dubey, Hon'ble Member of Parliament Godda Parliamentary
Constituency, his both sons Shri Kanishk Kant Dubey, Shri Mahikant Dubey and Shri Manoj Tiwari,

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143483899/

11

Hon'ble Member of Parliament came inside the ATC room.

The State Of Jharkhand vs Nishkant Dubey on 21 January, 2025

I was surprised and shocked to see the passengers in the ATC Room and I was feeling
uncomfortable. Pilot and passengers were creating pressure that the clearance be given to them at
the earliest. Thereafter they get the ATC Clearance. Pilot and passengers departed from the ATC
room. I was observing the Airport security from the ATC Room. After some time the pilot and
passengers again entered into the chartered plane and thereafter chartered plane take-off. Therefore
keeping in view all the above facts it is clear that the above mentioned persons have violated the
security measures of operating the airport and entered into the ATC Room, despite not having
availability of, Night Operation Facility these persons ignoring the security of life and property of
the passengers have created pressure for ATC Clearance. In this regard it is necessary to mention
that through different modes the public was mentioning this incident. Today on 01.09.2022 at about
11.30 hrs, for perusing the entire incident I went into the Control Room. Upon perusal of C.C.T.V. of
the incident I found that on 31.08.2022 Shri Mukesh Pathak, Shri Devta Pandey, Shri Pintu Tiwari
have entered into the ATC building by violating the security measures. Therefore, keeping in view
the above facts, the above mentioned persons have violated the security measures, which includes:
(1) Pilot of Chartered Plane, (2) Shri Nishikant Dubey, Hon'ble Member of Parliament Godda
Constituency, (3) Shri Kanishkant Dubey, (4) Shri Mahikant Dubey, (5) Shri Manoj Tiwari, Hon'ble
Member of Parliament, (6) Shri Mukesh Pathak, (7) Shri Devta Pandey, (8) Shri Pintu Tiwari and
(9) Airport Director Shri Sandeep Dhingra who has committed negligence in fulfilling his duty and
indirectly supported the passengers to enter and remain present in the ATC Room. Therefore, kindly
register a First Information Report against all the above persons in the relevant sections and Acts
and proceed further in the matter. Faithfully Sd/- 01.09.22 Suman Annan, Deputy Superintendent
of Police, Deoghar Airport, Deoghar Copy to: (1) Deputy Commissioner, Deoghar, (2) Deputy
Superintendent of Police, Deoghar, (3) Sub Divisional Police Officer, Sadar, Deoghar

13. Action taken: Since the above information reveals commission of offence(s) u/s as mentioned at
Item No.2.

(1) Registered the case and took up the investigation:

(2) Directed (Name of I.O.): Animanand Roshan Toppo Rank: SI (Sub Inspector) No.
1101324 to take up the investigation or (3) Refused Investigation due to Or (4)
Transferred to P.S. District on point of jurisdiction.

F.I.R. Read over to the complainant/ informant admitted to be correctly recorded and a copy given
to the complainant/ informant free of cost.

14. Signature/thumb impression of complainant/ informant

15. Date and time when dispatched to the court Sd/-02.09.2022 Signature of Officer In-charge
Police Station:

Name: Praveen Kumar Rank: SI (Sub Inspector) No.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143483899/

12

The State Of Jharkhand vs Nishkant Dubey on 21 January, 2025

32. Upon a reading of the aforesaid FIR, this Court is of the view that offences under
Sections 336, 447 and 448 IPC are not made out in the present case.

33. Section 336 IPC seeks to punish a person who does an act rashly or negligently
and endangers human life or personal safety of others. To attract Section 336 IPC,
the prosecution must allege that the accused did the act in question; that it was done
rashly or negligently and that it was such as to endanger the life or personal safety of
others.

34. In the present case, the Respondents-accused persons were only asking the ATC
to grant permission for take-off. This Court is of the view that the action of the pilot
and the passengers talking to ATC officials in the present case cannot be construed as
creating undue or illegal pressure on ATC officials. Moreover, as the aircraft carrying
the Respondents-accused persons had taken off after obtaining ATC permission, it
cannot be said that the Respondents-accused persons acted rashly or negligently so
as to endanger human lives. Consequently, Section 336 IPC is not attracted to the
present case.

35. Further, it is settled law that every trespass by itself is not criminal. To constitute
criminal trespass the prosecution has to allege that the trespass was committed with
one of the intents enumerated in Section 441 IPC. Accordingly, the prosecution has to
prove that the complainant had possession of the property in question and that the
accused entered into or upon the property; or after having lawfully entered
unlawfully remained there with the intention (a) to commit an offence; or (b) to
intimidate, insult, or annoy the person in possession. In the absence of any such
allegation, the offence under Section 441/447 IPC cannot be sustained.

36. In the present case, no allegation of forcible entry or intimidation or insult or
annoyance has been made by any official of ATC. On the contrary, the Director of
Deogarh Airport has been arrayed as an accused in the FIR! Consequently, Section
447 IPC is not attracted to the present case.

37. Also, as the ATC office is not a place used as a human dwelling or a place of
worship or a place for the custody of goods, the ingredients of Section 448 IPC are
not attracted to the present case.

38. Consequently, taking Sections 336, 447 and 448 IPC as distinct offences, no case
is made out against the respondents-accused persons.

SINCE THE AIRCRAFT ACT, 1934 AND THE RULES FRAMED THEREUNDER CONSTITUTE A
COMPLETE CODE AND ITS SECTION 12B IS IN THE NATURE OF A PRE-CONDITION FOR
TAKING COGNIZANCE BY A COURT, THE LOCAL POLICE CAN ONLY FORWARD THE
MATERIAL COLLECTED BY IT TO SUCH AUTHORISED OFFICER.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143483899/

13

The State Of Jharkhand vs Nishkant Dubey on 21 January, 2025

39. This Court is further of the view that the Aircraft Act, 1934 as well as the Rules framed
thereunder [including Rule 14(ix) of Airport (Security) Rules, 2011] is a complete Code which deals
with safety and security of civil aviation and aerodrome. The Aircraft Act, 1934 also prescribes a
special procedure for taking cognizance of any offence punishable under the Aircraft Act, 1934 i.e,
the complaint must be made by or with the prior sanction of the Aviation authorities. Section 12B is
in the nature of a pre-condition for taking cognizance by a Court.

40. Section 5 of the Code stipulates that “if any special law or local law for the time being in force
contemplates any special jurisdiction or power or any special form of procedure prescribed, unless
there is something to the contrary, to be found, it is the provisions of the special law or the local law
which would prevail.” Further, Clause (2) of Section 4, Code mandates that “all offences under any
other law shall be investigated, inquired into, tried, and otherwise dealt with according to the same
provisions, but subject to any enactment for the time being in force regulating the manner or place
of investigation, inquiring into, trying or otherwise dealing with such offences.”

41. Consequently, as a complaint can be made/filed by an authorised officer alone under the Special
Act i.e. the Aircrafts Act, 1934, before the concerned Court, the local police can only forward the
material collected by it during the investigation to such authorised officer. It shall be open to the
authorised officer to take a decision in accordance with law with regard to filing or non-filing of a
complaint.

CONCLUSION

42. Keeping in view the aforesaid findings, the present appeals are dismissed with liberty to the
Appellate-State of Jharkhand to forward the material collected by it during investigation to such
authorised officer under the Aircraft Act, 1934 within four weeks, who shall take a decision in
accordance with law as to whether a complaint needs to be filed under the Aircraft Act, 1934 and the
Rules framed thereunder.

.……………….J. [ABHAY S. OKA] ……………….J. [MANMOHAN] New Delhi;

January 21, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143483899/

14

