The State Of Jharkhand vs Rukma Kesh Mishra on 28 March, 2025

The State Of Jharkhand vs Rukma Kesh Mishra on 28 March,
2025

Author: Dipankar Datta

Bench: Dipankar Datta

2025 INSC 412                                                                       Reportable

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO.………………… OF 2025
                              [ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NO. 19223 OF 2024]

            THE STATE OF JHARKHAND & ORS.                                     APPELLANTS

                                                         VS.

            RUKMA KESH MISHRA                                                 RESPONDENT

                                                     JUDGMENT

DIPANKAR DATTA, J.

1. Leave granted.

THE APPEAL

2. Appellants - the State of Jharkhand and three of its officers – assail the judgment and order dated
24th November, 20231 of a Division Bench of the High Court of Jharkhand at Ranchi2 in this civil
appeal. By the impugned order High Court impugned order, the Division Bench dismissed an
intra-court appeal3 carried by the appellants from the judgment and order dated 20 th April, 2023
of a Single Judge, allowing a writ petition4 instituted by the respondent - Rukma Kesh Mishra.

THE QUESTION

3. We are tasked to decide a solitary legal question: whether the order by which the respondent was
dismissed from service, following disciplinary proceedings, should have been interdicted by the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184156140/

1

The State Of Jharkhand vs Rukma Kesh Mishra on 28 March, 2025

High Court on the specious ground that the charge-sheet had not been approved by the Chief
Minister of Jharkhand5?

BRIEF RESUME OF FACTS

4. Facts giving rise to this appeal are not too complicated. While the respondent had been
functioning as a civil service officer, it came to light that he had indulged in diverse activities of
dishonesty, financial irregularities, forgery of documents, etc. constituting misconduct. It was
proposed to proceed against him departmentally. Along with the proposal dated 13th January, 2014,
which was initiated by the appellant no. 3 – the Deputy Commissioner, Koderma – seeking approval
of initiation of disciplinary proceedings, the draft charge-sheet containing 9 (nine) charges proposed
to be levelled against the respondent (contained in form ‘K’) was placed before the Chief Minister
together with proposals Chief Minister that the respondent be suspended from service with
immediate effect and that in the inquiry to be initiated against the respondent, the officers named
therein be appointed as the inquiry officer and the presenting officer. The Chief Minister approved
all the proposals on 21st March, 2014. On 31st March, 2014, the appellant no.2 – Deputy Secretary
to the Government of Jharkhand (Personnel, Administrative and Rajbhasha Department)6 –
suspended the respondent from service. Appellant no.2 thereafter issued charge-sheet dated 4th
April, 2014 under Rule 55 of the Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 19307 for
the purpose of an inquiry to be conducted into the respondent’s conduct vis- à-vis the 9 (nine)
articles of charges drawn up against him. Respondent having denied and disputed the material
allegations in the charge-sheet, an inquiry came to be conducted with the appellant no.4 – described
in the array of appellants as the Departmental Enquiry-cum-Conducting Officer – as the inquiry
officer. Respondent duly participated in such inquiry whereafter a report of inquiry was submitted
by the appellant no.4 on 31st July, 2015. Appellant no.4 held the respondent guilty of all but 3
(three) of the charges. A second show cause notice was issued to the respondent on 11th April, 2016,
followed by a reminder. Respondent replied to the second show cause notice on 24th September,
2016. Apropos a proposal containing detailed reasons why the report of the appellant no.4 called for
acceptance and the respondent dismissed from service on proof of majority of the charges of
misconduct levelled against relevant department 1930 Rules him, the same was placed before the
Cabinet of the State Government8 in its meeting held on 13th June, 2017. The Cabinet having
approved such proposal, the respondent was dismissed from service vide an order of the Governor
contained in memo dated 16th June, 2017 issued by the Joint Secretary of the relevant department.
The order of dismissal recorded that the Government had taken the decision to dismiss the
respondent based on proof of the charges against him in terms of Rule 14(xi) of the Jharkhand
Government Servants (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules 20169 and that under Rule 18(7)
thereof, due consent of the Jharkhand Public Service Commission for imposing such punishment
had been obtained.

5. After obtaining information through the machinery provided by the Right to Information Act,
2005 that approval of the Chief Minister being the competent authority has not been “accorded at
the time of issuing/signing of the memo of charge”, the respondent challenged the order of dismissal
from service before the High Court by invoking its writ jurisdiction primarily on the ground of
absence of approval by the Chief Minister at or about the time of issuance of the charge-sheet. He

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184156140/

2

The State Of Jharkhand vs Rukma Kesh Mishra on 28 March, 2025

also challenged the disciplinary proceedings on the grounds that there was no application of mind
and the appellants had failed to take into consideration the entire facts and circumstances of the
case; also, that the punishment imposed was excessive and disproportionate to the Cabinet 2016
Rules allegations levelled and gravity of the misconduct found proved. Accordingly, the respondent
prayed that by issuing a writ of certiorari, the order of dismissal dated 16th June, 2017 be quashed
and a mandamus be issued directing the appellants to reinstate him in service. THE JUDGMENTS
OF THE HIGH COURT

6. Perusal of the writ petition (Annexure P22 of the paper book) does not reveal reference to any
provision of law premised whereon the respondent contended that the charge-sheet could not have
been issued without the approval of the Chief Minister, being the competent authority in case of the
respondent.

7. Be that as it may, it is only on this ground that the writ petition of the respondent succeeded. The
Single Judge, who heard the writ petition, unequivocally recorded that initiation of disciplinary
proceedings against the respondent was duly approved by the competent authority but “nowhere
from the counter affidavit it appears that Chargesheet was ever approved by the competent
authority”. Placing reliance on the decisions of this Court in Union of India v. B.V. Gopinath10 and
State of Tamil Nadu v. Promod Kumar, IAS11, the Single Judge held that it is the “requirement of
law that charge has to be approved by the competent authority and the same was not done here,
which is dehorse (sic, dehors) the Rule”. Based on such findings, while quashing the order of
dismissal 2014 (1) SCC 351 2018 (17) SCC 677 the Single Judge directed reinstatement of the
respondent in service with all consequential benefits. The writ petition, thus, stood allowed.

8. The Division Bench, while dismissing the intra-court appeal of the appellants, proceeded to
record the following findings:

“12. *** However, on scrutiny of the materials on record, we find that before a
decision was taken to start a departmental proceeding against the respondent and
Resolution dated 4th April 2014 was issued thereof, charge memo was already
prepared on 13th January 2014. Not only that, the competent authority had accorded
his approval to the charge memo on 21st March 2014. That is, before a decision was
taken to start the departmental proceeding against the respondent and approval
thereon of the competent authority was taken. Apparently, the charge memo was
incompetent and therefore the subsequent proceedings taken in the departmental
inquiry against the respondent were also rendered illegal.

13. In view of this procedural error which is not a curable irregularity, the writ Court
rightly interfered with the termination order dated 16th June 2017”.

After extracting paragraph 41 of the decision in B. V. Gopinath (supra) and paragraph 21 of the
decision in Promod Kumar (supra), the Division Bench held the writ court’s interference with the
order dated 6th June, 2017 to be perfectly valid and, accordingly, dismissed the intra-court appeal.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184156140/

3

ANALYSIS AND REASONS

The State Of Jharkhand vs Rukma Kesh Mishra on 28 March, 2025

9. We have heard Mr. Rajiv Shankar Dvivedi, learned counsel for the appellants and Dr. Manish
Singhvi, learned senior counsel for the respondent, at some length.

10. Respondent, without exhausting the alternative remedy of appeal/revision challenging the order
of dismissal from service, had invoked the writ jurisdiction before the High Court. For reasons
assigned hereafter, we find that the writ petition could have been entertained by the High Court
having regard to the jurisdictional issue raised by the respondent.

11. A coordinate bench of this Court in Union of India v. Kunisetty Satyanarayana12 has held that
ordinarily no writ lies against a show cause notice or charge-sheet. The reason is that a mere
show-cause notice or charge-sheet does not give rise to any cause of action, because it does not
amount to an adverse order affecting the rights of any party unless the same has been issued by a
person having no jurisdiction to do so (emphasis supplied). Writ jurisdiction is discretionary
jurisdiction and hence such discretion under Article 226 should not ordinarily be exercised by
quashing a show-cause notice or charge-sheet. No doubt, in some very rare and exceptional cases
the High Court can quash a show cause notice or charge-sheet if it is found to be wholly without
jurisdiction or for some other reason it is wholly illegal (emphasis supplied). However, ordinarily
the High Court should not interfere in such a matter.

12. Having read the decision in Kunisetty Satyanarayana (supra), we are of the view that it was open
to the High Court to examine the question of jurisdiction to issue the charge-sheet to the respondent
since he had invoked the writ jurisdiction after suffering the order of dismissal (2006) 12 SCC 28
from service and not at an initial stage of the inquiry. The writ petition, therefore, could not have
been thrown out at the threshold.

13. Now, while addressing the question arising for decision, it would be worthwhile to notice
paragraphs ‘41’ and ‘21’ of the decisions in B. V. Gopinath (supra) and Promod Kumar (supra),
respectively.

14. In B.V. Gopinath (supra), this Court intervened and quashed the charge-sheet on the ground of
want of the Finance Minister’s approval. Paragraph ‘41’ reads as follows:

“41. Disciplinary proceedings against the respondent herein were initiated in terms of
Rule 14 of the aforesaid Rules. Rule 14(3) clearly lays down that where it is proposed
to hold an inquiry against a government servant under Rule 14 or Rule 15, the
disciplinary authority shall draw up or cause to be drawn up the charge-sheet. Rule
14(4) again mandates that the disciplinary authority shall deliver or cause to be
delivered to the government servant, a copy of the articles of charge, the statement of
the imputations of misconduct or misbehaviour and the supporting documents
including a list of witnesses by which each article of charge is proposed to be proved.
We are unable to interpret this provision as suggested by the Additional Solicitor
General, that once the disciplinary authority approves the initiation of the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184156140/

4

The State Of Jharkhand vs Rukma Kesh Mishra on 28 March, 2025

disciplinary proceedings, the charge-sheet can be drawn up by an authority other
than the disciplinary authority. This would destroy the underlying protection
guaranteed under Article 311(1) of the Constitution of India. Such procedure would
also do violence to the protective provisions contained under Article 311(2) which
ensures that no public servant is dismissed, removed or suspended without following
a fair procedure in which he/she has been given a reasonable opportunity to meet the
allegations contained in the charge-sheet. Such a charge-sheet can only be issued
upon approval by the appointing authority i.e. Finance Minister”.

(italics in original)

15. B.V. Gopinath (supra) was followed in Promod Kumar (supra). Paragraph ‘21’ of the latter
decision being relevant, is quoted below:

“21. It is clear that the approval of the disciplinary authority was taken for initiation
of the disciplinary proceedings. It is also clear from the affidavit that no approval was
sought from the disciplinary authority at the time when the charge memo was issued
to the delinquent officer. The submission made on behalf of the appellant is that
approval of the disciplinary authority for initiation of disciplinary proceedings was
sufficient and there was no need for another approval for issuance of charge memo.
The basis for such submission is that initiation of disciplinary proceedings and
issuance of charge memo are at the same stage. We are unable to agree with the
submission in view of the judgment of this Court in B.V. Gopinath. In that case the
charge memo issued to Mr Gopinath under Rule 14(3) of the Central Civil Service
(Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965 was quashed by the Central
Administrative Tribunal on the ground that the Finance Minister did not approve it.
The judgment of the Tribunal was affirmed by the High Court. The Union of India,
the appellant therein submitted before this Court that the approval for initiation of
the departmental proceedings includes the approval of the charge memo. Such
submission was not accepted by this Court on an interpretation of Rule 14(3) which
provides that the disciplinary authority shall “draw up or cause to be drawn up” the
charge memo. It was held that if any authority other than the disciplinary authority is
permitted to draw the charge memo, the same would result in destroying the
underlying protection guaranteed under Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India”.

16. Having read excerpts from the decisions in B. V. Gopinath (supra) and Promod Kumar (supra),
heavily relied on by the High Court for allowing the writ petition of the respondent, we propose to
first examine whether the law laid down therein had any application to the facts pleaded in the writ
petition and how far the same is relevant for deciding this appeal. Next, we propose to consider
whether, on facts, initiation of disciplinary proceedings against the respondent suffered from any
infirmity warranting interference. Finally, we propose to consider the contours of Article 311 of the
Constitution and the legal requirements of who should ‘draw up’ or ‘cause to draw up’ the
charge-sheet signifying initiation of disciplinary proceedings against an officer/employee prima
facie found to be delinquent.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184156140/

5

APPLICABILITY OF B. V. Gopinath (supra) AND Promod Kumar (supra)

The State Of Jharkhand vs Rukma Kesh Mishra on 28 March, 2025

17. It is not in dispute that at the time the appellants resolved to initiate disciplinary proceedings
against the respondent, the 1930 Rules were in force. The Single Judge noticed this fact, although
the Division Bench has not adverted to it. Under the 1930 Rules, disciplinary proceedings could be
initiated in terms of Rule 5513 thereof. The effect that Rule 55 would have on the merits of the plea
raised by the respondent, in the ultimate analysis, is what appears to be clinching.

18. Bare perusal of Rule 55 reveals that it does not expressly specify the authority, who is competent
to issue the charge-sheet. On the contrary, the decisions of this Court in B.V. Gopinath (supra) and
Promod Kumar (supra) dealt with different rules which expressly specified who could issue the
charge-sheet. We have noted with some measure of disappointment that long-standing precedents
of this Court,

55. Without prejudice to the provisions of the Public Servants Inquiries Act, 1850, no order of
dismissal, removal, compulsory retirement Vide Notification no.13213-A, dated the 17th October,
1957 (or reduction) shall be passed on a member of a Service (other than an order based on facts
which have led to his conviction in a criminal court or by a Court-Martial) unless he has been
informed in writing of the grounds on which it is proposed to take action and has been afforded an
adequate opportunity of defending himself. The grounds on which it is proposed to take action shall
be reduced to the form of a definite charge or charges which shall be communicated to the person
charged together with a statement of the allegations on which each charge is based and on any other
circumstances which it is proposed to take into consideration in passing orders on the case. He shall
be required, within a reasonable time, to put in a written statement of his defence and to state
whether he desires to be heard in person. If he so desires or if the authority concerned so direct an
oral inquiry shall be held. At that inquiry oral evidence shall be heard as to such of the allegations as
are not admitted, and the person charged shall be entitled to cross-examine the witnesses, to give
evidence in person and to have such witnesses called, as he may wish, provided that the officer,
conducting the inquiry may, for special and sufficient reasons to be recorded in writing, refuse to
call a witness. The proceedings shall contain a sufficient record of the evidence and a statement of
the findings and the grounds thereof.

*** which did lend sustenance to the impugned charge-sheet, were neither placed before the
Division Bench nor the Single Judge for consideration. This is one reason why we are persuaded to
interfere.

19. Respondent was a member of the civil service of the State. Thus, he could legitimately claim that
the safeguards enshrined in Article 311 of the Constitution be scrupulously followed prior to
ordering his dismissal including drawing up a charge-sheet in the manner required by the relevant
law.

20. It would, therefore, be profitable to note what is the law declared by this Court on the point as to
who can issue the charge-sheet.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184156140/

6

The State Of Jharkhand vs Rukma Kesh Mishra on 28 March, 2025

21. As far back as in 1970, this Court in State of Madhya Pradesh v. Shardul Singh14 held that Article
311(1) does not in terms require that the authority empowered by that provision to dismiss or
remove an officer should initiate or conduct the inquiry. This decision could count as the parent
decision on the topic, declaring the law in paragraphs ‘6’ and ‘10’. The said paragraphs are quoted
below for ease of understanding as to how Article 311(1) was construed:

“6. Article 311(1) provides that no person who is a member of Civil Service of the
Union or of an All-India Service or Civil Service of a State or holds civil post under
the Union or State shall be dismissed or removed by an authority subordinate to that
by which he was appointed. This Article does not in terms require that the authority
empowered under that provision to dismiss or remove an official, should itself
initiate or conduct the enquiry preceding the dismissal or removal of the officer or
even that that enquiry should be done at its instance. The only right guaranteed to a
civil servant under that provision is that he shall not be dismissed or removed by an
authority subordinate to that by which he was appointed.

(1970) 1 SCC 108 But it is said on behalf of the respondent that that guarantee
includes within itself the guarantee that the relevant disciplinary inquiry should be
initiated and conducted by the authorities mentioned in the Article. The High Court
has accepted this contention. We have now to see whether the view taken by the High
Court is correct.

***

10. But for the incorporation of Article 311 in the Constitution even in respect of matters provided
therein, rules could have been framed under Article 309. The provisions in Article 311 confer
additional rights on the civil servants. Hence we are unable to agree with the High Court that the
guarantee given under Article 311(1) includes within itself a further guarantee that the disciplinary
proceedings resulting in dismissal or removal of a civil servant should also be initiated and
conducted by the authorities mentioned in that Article”.

(emphasis supplied)

22. Then came the decision in P. V. Srinivasa Sastry v. Comptroller and Auditor General15, where
this Court reiterated that a departmental proceeding need not be initiated only by the appointing
authority and that initiation by a subordinate authority, in the absence of rules, is not vitiated. We
consider it appropriate to extract paragraph ‘4’ hereunder:

“4. Article 311(1) says that no person who is a member of a civil service of the Union
or an all-India service or a civil service of a State or holds civil post under the Union
or a State “shall be dismissed or removed by an authority subordinate to that by
which he was appointed”. Whether this guarantee includes within itself the guarantee
that even the disciplinary proceeding should be initiated only by the appointing
authority? It is well known that departmental proceeding consists of several stages:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184156140/

7

The State Of Jharkhand vs Rukma Kesh Mishra on 28 March, 2025

the initiation of the proceeding, the inquiry in respect of the charges levelled against
that delinquent officer and the final order which is passed after the conclusion of the
inquiry. Article 311(1) guarantees that no person who is a member of a civil service of
the Union or a State shall be dismissed or removed by an authority subordinate to
that by which he was appointed. But Article 311(1) does not say that even the
departmental proceeding must be initiated only by the appointing authority.
However, it is open to Union of India or a State Government to make any rule
prescribing that even the proceeding against any delinquent officer shall be initiated
by an officer not subordinate to the appointing authority. Any such rule shall not be
inconsistent with Article 311 of the Constitution because it will amount to providing
an additional safeguard or protection to the holder of a civil 1993 (1) SCC 419 post.
But in absence of any such rule, this right or guarantee does not flow from Article 311
of the Constitution. It need not be pointed out that initiation of a departmental
proceeding per se does not visit the officer concerned with any evil consequences, and
the framers of the Constitution did not consider it necessary to guarantee even that to
holders of civil posts under the Union of India or under the State Government. At the
same time this will not give right to authorities having the same rank as that of the
officer against whom proceeding is to be initiated to take a decision whether any such
proceeding should be initiated. In absence of a rule, any superior authority who can
be held to be the controlling authority, can initiate such proceeding”.

(emphasis supplied)

23. Yet again, in Transport Commissioner v. A. Radhakrishna Moorthy16, this Court clearly declared
the law as follows:

“8. Insofar as initiation of enquiry by an officer subordinate to the appointing
authority is concerned, it is well settled now that it is unobjectionable. The initiation
c a n   b e   b y   a n   o f f i c e r   s u b o r d i n a t e   t o   t h e   a p p o i n t i n g   a u t h o r i t y .   O n l y   t h e
dismissal/removal shall not be by an authority subordinate to the appointing
authority. Accordingly it is held that this was not a permissible ground for quashing
the charges by the Tribunal”.

(emphasis supplied)

24. All these decisions were considered by this Court in Inspector General of Police v.
Thavasippan17, and it was ruled as follows:

“9. … Generally speaking, it is not necessary that the charges should be framed by the
authority competent to award the proposed penalty or that the enquiry should be
conducted by such authority. We do not find anything in the rules which would
induce us to read in Rule 3(b)(i) such a requirement. In our opinion, the view taken
by the Tribunal that in a case falling under Rule 3(b) the charge memo should be
issued by the disciplinary authority empowered to impose the penalties referred to

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184156140/

8

The State Of Jharkhand vs Rukma Kesh Mishra on 28 March, 2025

therein and if the charge memo is issued by any lower authority then only that
penalty can be imposed which that lower authority is competent to award, is clearly
erroneous. We, therefore, allow this appeal”. … (emphasis supplied) (1995) 1 SCC 332
(1996) 2 SCC 145

25. Later decisions of this Court in Government of Tamil Nadu v. S. Vel Raj18 and Commissioner of
Police v. Jayasurian19 also declare the law in the same vein, albeit in respect of different discipline
and appeal rules, that a charge-sheet need not be issued by the appointing authority; any other
authority, who is the controlling authority, can initiate departmental proceedings by issuing a
chargesheet.

26. At this stage, we are reminded of the Latin phrase stare decisis et non queta movere meaning,
stand by what has been decided and do not disturb what has been settled. While it is true that courts
are not restrained by any principle of law from expressing a different view on a point of law or to
distinguish precedents (a topic we wish to advert to briefly a little later), stare decisis need not be
disregarded to unsettle settled positions. We would read these precedents (referred to in paragraphs
21 to 25, supra) as settling the law that unless the relevant discipline and appeal rules applicable to
an officer/employee of an authority within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution so require,
disciplinary proceedings by issuance of a charge-sheet cannot be faulted solely on the ground that
either the Appointing Authority or the Disciplinary Authority has not issued the same or approved
it. These precedents have stood the test of time and having full application to the case at hand, could
not have been lightly overlooked. A holistic consideration of all these precedents by the High Court
was certainly the (1997) 2 SCC 708 (1997) 6 SCC 75 need of the hour. Thavasippan (supra) had
considered the precedents in Shardul Singh (supra), P. V. Srinivasa Sastry (supra) and A.
Radhakrishna Moorthy (supra) and P. V. Srinivasa Sastry (supra) was placed before the coordinate
Bench in B.V. Gopinath (supra). We are anchored in a belief that had the High Court looked into
these precedents, the conclusion would have certainly been otherwise.

27. Be that as it may, the governing rules in B.V. Gopinath (supra) and Promod Kumar (supra) being
different, notwithstanding the similarity in language of Rule 14(3) of the Central Civil Services
(Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 196520 and Rule 17(3) of the 2016 Rules, reliance placed
by the Division Bench on the ratio of the said two decisions seems to be wholly inapt. An erroneous
conclusion was arrived at contrary to the settled position of law and we have no hesitation to
conclude that the impugned order is manifestly flawed and hence, unsustainable.

ON FACTS, WAS THERE ANY INFIRMITY IN INITIATION OF DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDINGS?

28. The second reason for which we propose to hold the impugned order to be indefensible turns on
the facts.

29. It is found that during the pendency of the disciplinary proceedings against the respondent, the
2016 Rules came into force with effect from 1965 Rules 3rd February, 2016. Sub-rule (3)21 of rule 32
on ‘Repeal and Savings’ saved actions taken under the 1930 Rules. In the light thereof, although the
disciplinary authority of the respondent had initiated disciplinary proceedings against him under

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184156140/

9

The State Of Jharkhand vs Rukma Kesh Mishra on 28 March, 2025

the 1930 Rules, there was no obligation to take such proceedings to a logical conclusion in terms of
the 2016 Rules. If the 2016 Rules contemplated additional safeguards over and above what were
provided by the 1930 Rules, it is debatable whether the charged officer could, as of right, claim such
safeguards to be extended though nothing prevents the disciplinary authority in its discretion to
extend the same. Even otherwise, the Division Bench referred to Rule 17(3)22 laying down the
‘Procedure for imposing major penalties’ for the purpose of invalidating the order of the
respondent’s dismissal from service but, in the process, completely overlooked Rule 1623 (which
dealt with ‘Authority to institute proceedings’ and inter alia empowered ‘any 32(3) Anything done or
any action taken in exercise of the powers under the Civil Service (Classification, Control and
Appeal) Rules, 1930 and The Bihar and Orissa Subordinate Services (Discipline and Appeal) Rules,
1935 shall be deemed to have been done or taken in exercise of the powers conferred by or under
those Rule (sic, Rules), as if those Rules were in force on the day on which such thing or action was
done or taken. 17(3). Where it is proposed to hold an inquiry against a Government servant under
this rule, the Disciplinary Authority shall draw up or cause to be drawn up:

i) The substance of the imputations of misconduct or misbehaviour as a definite and
distinct article of charge.

ii) A statement of the imputations of misconduct or misbehaviour in support of each
article of charge, which shall contain:-

***

16. The Government or Appointing Authority or any authority to which the
Appointing Authority is subordinate or any other authority empowered by general or
special order of the Government may – (a) institute disciplinary proceedings against
any Government servant; (b) direct a Disciplinary Authority to institute disciplinary
proceedings against any Government servant on whom that Disciplinary Authority is
competent to impose any of the penalties specified in rule 14 under these Rules.

other authority’ to institute disciplinary proceedings), Rule 2(k)24 defining Disciplinary Authority
as well as Rule 32(3) (supra) of the 2016 Rules. In the first place, the complaint of the respondent
that the charge-sheet had not been issued by the competent authority could not have been decided
looking at the 2016 Rules. Secondly, even if such Rules had any application, still the procedure for
imposing major penalties in Rule 17 could not have prevailed over the provision in rule 16 laying
down the particulars of authorities competent to institute proceedings. As per the scheme of the
2016 Rules and in terms of Rule 16(1) thereof, notwithstanding that the Disciplinary Authority could
be subordinate to an Appointing Authority in a given case, any authority empowered by general or
special order of the Government could have instituted disciplinary proceedings against the
respondent. In any event, assuming that Rule 17(3) was applicable, the Chief Minister himself
having approved initiation of disciplinary proceedings against the respondent, question of absence
of approval of the charge-sheet by the Chief Minister separately was a non- issue.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184156140/

10

The State Of Jharkhand vs Rukma Kesh Mishra on 28 March, 2025

30. Reverting to Rule 55 of the 1930 Rules, it is observed that the same did not specify any particular
authority to be under an obligation to issue the charge-sheet against a civil servant. In such view of
the matter and having regard to the law settled by this Court, it is axiomatic that any 2(ka) Save as
otherwise expressly provided in the rules of a particular cadre, ‘Disciplinary Authority’ means
Appointing Authority or any other Authority authorised by it who shall be competent under these
Rules to impose on a Government Servant any of the penalties specified in rule 14 of these Rules.

officer holding a rank subordinate to the respondent’s appointing authority but superior in rank
than the respondent could have issued the charge-sheet. Admittedly, the facts do reveal initiation of
disciplinary proceedings against the respondent having the approval of the Chief Minister dated 21st
March, 2014. The draft charge-sheet was part of the proposal dated 13th January, 2014. Once the
draft charge-sheet was on record before the Chief Minister, approval of the proposal to initiate
disciplinary proceedings should have been read as including the Chief Minister’s assent not only to
the draft charge-sheet, as drawn up, but also to the other proposals to suspend the respondent as
well as appointment of an inquiry officer and presenting officer. In such circumstances, reference by
the Division Bench to Rule 17(3) of the 2016 Rules appears to be wholly misplaced since the
charge-sheet was not issued under such sub-Rule.

31. In a parliamentary democracy like India where the Constitution permits each of the
Governments – Central as well as the States – to have their own Rules of Business framed, it was
incumbent for the respondent to prove to the satisfaction of the High Court with reference to the
rules prevalent in the State of Jharkhand that the procedure prescribed thereunder for the file to be
placed before the Chief Minister was observed in the breach. Also, by referring to any other relevant
law, it ought to have been shown that the draft charge-sheet should not have been prepared prior to
the date of approval of the proposal to initiate disciplinary proceedings and also that, such
preparation should not have been left to be undertaken by the departmental officers; instead, the
charge-sheet should have been drafted after the proposal were approved and that the competent
authority to initiate disciplinary proceedings should have himself proceeded to draft and issue the
same. No law in this behalf has been shown to have been breached. Therefore, no issue could have
legitimately been urged in relation to the departmental officers entrusted with the work of preparing
papers for seeking approval to initiate disciplinary proceedings against an officer prima facie found
to be delinquent and in drafting the charge-sheet to be issued to him as part of the requisite
groundwork for the Chief Minister to signify his approval to such proposal.

32. We, thus, find an erroneous approach having been adopted by the High Court while dealing with
the writ petition as well as the intra-court appeal rendering its decision liable to interdiction in
appeal. WHAT IS THE REQUIREMENT OF ARTICLE 311 OF THE CONSTITUTION AND WHO
SHOULD ‘DRAW UP’ OR ‘CAUSE TO DRAW UP’ THE CHARGE-SHEET?

33. The final reason for interdicting the impugned order stems from non-consideration of Article
311(1) of the Constitution of India in its correct perspective by the Division Bench. If one looks at
Article 311(1), the sole safeguard that it provides to any member, inter alia, of a civil service of a
State or the holder of a civil post under the State is that he shall not be dismissed or removed by an
authority subordinate to that by which he was appointed (emphasis supplied). Clause (1) does not

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184156140/

11

The State Of Jharkhand vs Rukma Kesh Mishra on 28 March, 2025

on its own terms require that the disciplinary proceedings should also be initiated by the appointing
authority. This is what Shardul Singh (supra) and P.V. Srinivasa Sastry (supra) have articulated,
with which we wholeheartedly agree.

34. The Division Bench noticed that Rule 17(3) of the 2016 Rules were pari materia Rule 14(3) of the
1965 Rules and, therefore, what was held in paragraph ‘41’ of the decision in B.V. Gopinath (supra)
would clearly be applicable to resolve the controversy at hand. In B.V. Gopinath (supra), certain
office memoranda were under consideration apart from Rule 14(3) of the 1965 Rules. Submissions
advanced on behalf of the charged officers, recorded in paragraphs ‘20’ and ‘21’, would reveal that
the Court was addressed with regard to the fact situation where approval to initiate disciplinary
proceedings had been obtained but subsequent thereto, the charge-sheet that was drawn up had not
been approved by the Finance Minister. This is where the Division Bench again committed a clear
error in failing to appreciate the facts, which bear vital importance. As noted above, in the present
case, the draft charge-sheet was there on record when the Chief Minister accorded his approval and
there appears to be no valid reason as to why approval of the proposal to initiate disciplinary
proceedings against the respondent would not be regarded as grant of approval to the draft
charge-sheet too. We are unhesitatingly of the view that according approval to initiate the
disciplinary proceedings against the respondent, in this case, did amount to approval of the draft
charge-sheet.

35. It has been observed by this Court in several decisions that each decision is an authority for what
it decides and not what could logically be deduced therefrom. Mechanical reliance on precedents, as
if they are statutes, has been deprecated. Whenever a precedent is cited laying down a principle of
law having application to the facts of the case in hand and having binding effect, it is customary and
expected of courts to be bound by the law declared by this Court under Article 141 of the
Constitution. However, the courts are free not to place blind reliance on whatever precedent is cited
by the parties since facts of two cases are not seldom alike. It is the duty of the court, if it considers
the precedent not to be applicable, to refer to factual dissimilarities that are found and thereafter to
distinguish the precedent cited before it by assigning brief but cogent reasons. It is always well to
remember in this context the dictum of this Court in Regional Manager, Food Corporation of India
v. Pawan Kumar Dubey25:

“7. ... It is the rule deducible from the application of law to the facts and
circumstances of a case which constitutes its ratio decidendi and not some conclusion
based upon facts which may appear to be similar. One additional or different fact can
make a world of difference between conclusions in two cases even when the same
principles are applied in each case to similar facts”.

36. Since invocation of the provisions in Discipline and Appeal Rules similar to Rule 14(3) of the
1965 Rules or Rule 17(3) of the 2016 Rules and citing failure to adhere to the same to invalidate
orders terminating services of officers/employees is not too infrequent, we consider it proper (1976)
3 SCC 334 to briefly touch upon the requirement thereof. The Disciplinary Authority is mandated by
the law to ‘draw up’ or ‘cause to be drawn up’ the substance of the imputations of misconduct or
misbehavior as a definite and distinct article of charge together with the statement of such

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184156140/

12

The State Of Jharkhand vs Rukma Kesh Mishra on 28 March, 2025

imputations. The phrases ‘draw up’ and ‘cause to be drawn up’ do have different meanings in the
context of disciplinary proceedings, though both relate to drawing up of a charge-sheet. By ‘draw
up’, what is express is that the Disciplinary Authority itself is responsible for preparing the
substance of imputation and the statement of allegations in support thereof, whereas ‘cause to be
drawn up’ would enable the Disciplinary Authority to instruct or direct someone else to prepare the
substance and statement. The effect of it is that the Disciplinary Authority itself may not prepare the
document but rather delegate the task to someone else. If the delegation is proved to have been
made in favour of an authority holding an office superior to that of the officer/employee proposed to
be proceeded against, nothing much is required to be done and the courts ought to exercise
restraint.

37. Lest confusion continues to prevail, thereby obfuscating the course of justice, we also consider it
expedient to clarify as regards the efficacy of the decisions in B.V. Gopinath (supra) and Promod
Kumar (supra) as binding precedents. Both these decisions by coordinate Benches of two Hon’ble
Judges of this Court. All other decisions on the topic are also by Benches of coordinate strength.
Before the Bench in B.V. Gopinath (supra), out of the 6 (six) decisions referred to by us in
paragraphs 21 to 25 (supra), only the decision in Thavasippan (supra) was placed by counsel
wherein one would find reference to the earlier decision in P. V. Srinivasa Sastry (supra). Though
Thavasippan (supra) had considered all the earlier decisions, it was not even distinguished in B.V.
Gopinath (supra). Importantly, the Bench after noting the law laid down in P. V. Srinivasa Sastry
(supra), extracted two sentences from paragraph ‘4’, quoted above, to support the conclusion which
the Bench intended to record. Having read what P. V. Srinivasa Sastry (supra) in paragraph ‘4’ laid
down and our agreement therewith, we see good reason to opine that there could be a healthy
debate on the correctness of the ratio decidendi of the decision in B. V. Gopinath (supra), or for that
matter, Promod Kumar (supra), in the light of the precedents which were binding on the Benches
deciding the same. However, for the purpose of deciding this appeal, we need not venture that far to
declare the decisions in B. V. Gopinath (supra) and Promod Kumar (supra) as not laying down good
law or that its efficacy as binding precedents stands eroded for not considering the law declared in
Shardul Singh (supra) on Article 311(1) of the Constitution, as well as the other decisions that we
have referred to above, speaking in a different voice. Nonetheless, we are of the undoubted view that
whatever be the ratio decidendi of B. V. Gopinath (supra) and Promod Kumar (supra), for its
application in future cases, the same have to be read and understood as confined to interpretation of
the rules governing the disciplinary proceedings in each of the two cases, the facts and law presented
before the coordinate Benches, and the exposition of law by this Court for over half a century till this
date.

38. Turning focus once again to the factual narrative, it is worthy of being noted that it was the
Cabinet which approved the proposal to dismiss the respondent. Respondent’s service having been
terminated based on such approval, the Single Judge as well as the Division Bench should have been
loath to hold the dismissal illegal on acceptance of the specious plea raised by the respondent by its
misplaced reliance on B.V. Gopinath (supra) and Promod Kumar (supra).

39. Viewed from whichever angle, we are unable to support the finding returned by the Single
Judge, since affirmed by the Division Bench, that the charge-sheet did not have the approval of the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184156140/

13

The State Of Jharkhand vs Rukma Kesh Mishra on 28 March, 2025

competent authority though both the Benches indubitably agreed that the proposal to initiate
disciplinary proceedings did have such approval. We repeat, the entire proposal of initiating
disciplinary proceedings inclusive of the draft charge-sheet, to suspend the respondent pending
such proceedings and the names of the officers who would conduct the inquiry and present the case
of the department in such inquiry having been approved by the Chief Minister, the Single Judge
seems to have occasioned a grave miscarriage of justice in interfering with the order of dismissal on
the wholly untenable ground of lack of approval of the charge-sheet by the Chief Minister; and the
Division Bench, by failing to right the wrong, equally contributed to the failure of justice.

40. For the foregoing reasons, there can be and is little hesitation for us to hold that the impugned
order of the Division Bench upholding the judgment and order of the Single Judge of allowing the
writ petition as well as the latter is fundamentally incorrect and patently illegal. The judgments of
the High Court under challenge, thus, cannot be sustained in law, with the result that the writ
petition of the respondent must be and has to be dismissed.

41. Realizing the difficulty in having the impugned order sustained, as a last-ditch effort, Dr. Singhvi
contended that the respondent has been out of service for nearly 8 (eight) years, which is sufficient
punishment for him, and that the direction of the High Court ordering his reinstatement need not be
disturbed upon recording that the respondent would not claim any arrears of salary.

42. We are not impressed, to say the least. Prima facie, at this stage, we see no reason to hold the
order of dismissal to have been vitiated on any count. Directing the respondent’s reinstatement
despite finding no error in the proceedings drawn up against him would render such valid dismissal
order ineffective and inoperative.

RELIEF

43. The impugned order of the Division Bench as well as the judgment and order of the Single Judge
are set aside, resulting in the respondent’s writ petition on the file of the High Court being
dismissed.

44. However, considering the fact that the charge-sheet was interdicted by the High Court, at both
tiers, on the ground of jurisdictional error and the respondent might not have pursued the
appellate/revisional remedy provided under the 1930 Rules/2016 Rules labouring under a
misconception that he was forced to face proceedings and answer a charge-sheet which did not have
the approval of the competent authority, we grant him liberty to appeal against the impugned order
of dismissal or to seek a revision thereof by filing an appeal/memorial, whichever is permissible
under the relevant Rules, within a period of one month from the date of pronouncement of this
judgment. If an appeal/revision is presented by the respondent before the competent
appellate/revisional authority within such period, the same shall be decided on merits and in
accordance with law, as early as possible, waiving the bar of limitation. All points except the point of
validity of the charge-sheet, decided by us, are kept open.

CONCLUSION

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184156140/

14

45. The appeal, accordingly, stands allowed. Parties shall, however, bear their own costs.

The State Of Jharkhand vs Rukma Kesh Mishra on 28 March, 2025

…………………………J. (DIPANKAR DATTA) …………………………J. (MANMOHAN) NEW DELHI;

MARCH 28, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184156140/

15

