The State Of Jharkhand vs Vikash Tiwary @ Bikash Tiwary @ Bikash ... on 17 January, 2025

The State Of Jharkhand vs Vikash Tiwary @ Bikash Tiwary @
Bikash ... on 17 January, 2025

                                                                  1

2025 INSC 79                                                                   REPORTABLE

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                        CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 240 OF 2025
                                     (Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 17026 OF 2024)

             The State of Jharkhand & Others                                           ... Appellant(s)

                                                        VERSUS

             Vikash Tiwary @ Bikash Tiwary @ Bikash Nath                               ... Respondent(s)

                                                      JUDGMENT

R. MAHADEVAN, J.

Leave granted.

2. The present appeal is filed by the State of Jharkhand and others, against the final order dated
21.08.2023 passed by the High Court of Jharkhand at Ranchi1 in Writ Petition (Cr.) No. 318 of
2023, whereby the High Court quashed the order / memo dated 17.05.2023 issued by the Inspector
General of Prisons, Ranchi, Jharkhand, making intra-State transfer of the respondent herein from
Lok Hereinafter shortly referred to as “the High Court” Nayak Jai Prakash Narayan Central Jail,
Hazaribagh, to Central Jail, Dumka, within the State of Jharkhand.

3. It is the words of Fyodor Dostoevsky, “The degree of civilization in a society can be judged by
entering its prisons”. Prisons are considered as the ‘tailend’ of the criminal justice system. They have
existed since ancient times, where anti-social elements were kept in, for deterrence and retribution.
But, in modern days, a prison connotes a correctional mechanism, thereby emphasizing the reform
of inmates. Prison life necessitates certain constraints on the freedom of inmates. Therefore, it is
imperative on the part of the prison authorities to rehabilitate the prisoners into law abiding citizen,
besides maintaining security and rule of law in the prison. With this preface, we will delve into the
issue involved in this appeal.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101570529/

1

The State Of Jharkhand vs Vikash Tiwary @ Bikash Tiwary @ Bikash ... on 17 January, 2025

4. The short facts apropos are that by judgment dated 22.09.2020, the respondent was convicted in
connection with a case in S.T.No.141/2016 arising out of Hazaribagh Sadar P.S. Case No.610/2015,
corresponding to G.R.No.2325/2015 for the alleged offences under sections 302/120-B/34, 353/34,
341/34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, Sections 25(1-A), 26/35, 27(2) of the Arms Act, 1959, r/w
Sections 3/4/5 of the Explosive Substances Act, 1908, and was sentenced to undergo life
imprisonment. He was also implicated as accused in other cases in the Districts of Hazaribagh,
Chatra, Ramgarh and Ranchi. Alleging that without affording any opportunity and in violation of the
principles of natural justice, the respondent was transferred from Lok Nayak Jai Prakash Narayan
Central Jail, Hazaribagh, to the Central Jail, Dumka, by memo dated 17.05.2023 of the Inspector
General of Prisons, he moved the High Court by filing the Writ Petition (Criminal) No.318 of 2023,
to quash the same. It was also stated by the respondent that similar orders of transfer dated
30.10.2015 and 02.11.2015 passed by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Ramgarh, in connection with
Patratu P.S. Case No.309/2014 corresponding to G.R.No.5151/2014, were quashed by the High
Court, vide order dated 08.03.2016 in Crl.M.P.No.2267 of 2015. After hearing both sides, the High
Court set aside the order of transfer dated 17.05.2023 and accordingly, disposed of the writ petition,
by order dated 21.08.2023, which is put to challenge before us, by the State authorities.

5. The learned counsel for the appellants, at the outset, submitted that the respondent is a gangster
and is known across the State of Jharkhand for his notoriety, having stronghold in four Districts
namely, Ranchi, Hazaribagh, Ramgarh and Chatra of the State of Jharkhand. As per the records, the
respondent has been in prison as an undertrial prisoner from 04.08.2015 to 21.09.2020 and as
convict from 22.09.2020 onwards. Despite the same, nearly 10 FIRs were registered against him i.e.,
in the years 2015 (Two FIRs), 2016 (one FIR), 2020 (one FIR), 2021(one FIR), 2022 (Four FIRs)
and 2023 (one FIR). The respondent however did not disclose his entire criminal antecedents and
made a false statement to this effect in paragraph 24 of the writ petition that ‘no new case has been
instituted against him’. The High Court, without appreciating this fact, set aside the order
transferring the respondent to some other jail. While so, it erroneously placed reliance on the
decision of this Court in the State of Maharashtra and Others v. Saeed Sohail Sheikh and others2
and the earlier order of the High Court dated 08.03.2016 made in Crl.M.P. No.2267 of 2015, without
taking note of the fact that the respondent is a convict and not an undertrial prisoner.

5.1. Continuing further, the learned counsel for the appellants submitted that on the basis of the
Letter of the Jail Superintendent dated 16.05.2023 addressed to the District Commissioner as well
as the Superintendent of Police, Hazaribagh, requesting the transfer of the notorious criminals
namely, Vikash Tiwari (Respondent herein) and Aman Singh confined in Lok Nayak Jaiprakash
Narayan Central Jail, Hazaribagh, to any other prison, due to apprehension of gang war / untoward
incident inside the jail, and insufficient Kachpals in keeping strict vigilance over such criminals, and
also in the light of the recommendation of the District Commissioner, Hazaribagh, the Inspector
General of Prisons transferred the respondent to any jail in Santhal Pargana, by memo dated
17.05.2023, which, according to the learned counsel, is a reasoned one, based on true and tangible
inputs provided by the authorities below and it is only to protect the life and liberty of the
respondent herein and to ensure security of the prison. (2012) 13 SCC 192 5.2. That apart, it is
submitted that the order of intra-State jail transfer passed by the Inspector General of Prisons
against the respondent, who is a convict and serving life imprisonment, was in consonance with

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101570529/

2

The State Of Jharkhand vs Vikash Tiwary @ Bikash Tiwary @ Bikash ... on 17 January, 2025

section 29 of the Prisoners Act, 1900 r/w Rule 770(b) of the State Jail Manual, which empowers the
said authority to pass the same, based on sufficient grounds.

5.3. The learned counsel for the appellants further submitted that the contention of the respondent
that the said intra-State jail transfer poses a threat to his life, is self-defeating, as the jail authorities’
primary intention behind the transfer was to ensure his safety and security in light of the anticipated
gang war between rival groups within the jail premises.

5.4. With regard to the certificate dated 19.05.2023 issued by the Jail Superintendent about the
character of the respondent, it is submitted that the same is not in accordance with law, but is a
farce and misleading one. 5.5. To justify the order of transfer passed by the Inspector General
(Prison), the learned counsel referred to the judgment of this Court in Kalyan Chandra Sarkar v.
Rajesh Ranjan3.

5.6. Thus, according to the learned counsel, the order passed by the High Court is arbitrary and
illegal and hence, the same has to be set aside. (2005) Vol. III SCC 284

6. Repudiating the submissions made on the side of the appellants, the learned counsel for the
respondent vehemently contended that there was no material on record to demonstrate that the
respondent was involved in any untoward incident inside the prison, nor the appellants produced
any substantive evidence to fortify their claim for transfer. As such, the apprehension of gang war
expressed by the appellants is unfounded.

6.1. Inviting our attention to the certificate dated 19.05.2023 issued by the Jail Superintendent,
Hazaribagh, to the effect that the character of the respondent was satisfactory, the learned counsel
for the respondent submitted that the character certificate of an inmate is routinely sought for
before arriving at any administrative or judicial decision. However, in the present case, without
inquiring into the character of the respondent, the Inspector General of Prisons, Jharkhand, passed
the transfer order on 17.05.2023, which only creates suspicion that the same was passed without
application of mind, in a pre-determined manner and with mala fide intention.

6.2. It is also submitted that as a matter of routine, around 10 cases were registered against the
respondent, while he has been in jail. Further, the respondent was lodged in the Central Jail,
Palamau from 09.11.2017 till 09.09.2022. Therefore, it cannot be said that the cases registered
against him during such period, are due to any influence he wields by being lodged in Central Jail,
Hazaribagh.

6.3. The learned counsel for the respondent further submitted that the respondent is an undertrial
prisoner in the other cases registered against him, which are pending in the Districts of Hazaribagh
and Ramgarh and hence, as per the judgment of this Court in Saeed Sohail Sheikh (supra), his
transfer to Dumka Jail which is situated distantly, is bound to prejudice him. Reference was also
made to the judgment of this Court in Sunil Batra v. Delhi Administration and Others4, in which, it
was observed that ‘where quality of life or the liberty of a citizen is affected, no matter he/she is
under a sentence of imprisonment or is facing a criminal charge in an ongoing trial. That transfer of

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101570529/

3

The State Of Jharkhand vs Vikash Tiwary @ Bikash Tiwary @ Bikash ... on 17 January, 2025

an undertrial to a distant prison may adversely affect his right to defend himself but also isolate him
from the society of his friends, and relations’. It is thus submitted that the respondent, though
convicted and under confinement, does not lose his right to defend himself as undertrial prisoner in
the other cases. 6.4. It is also submitted that the respondent and Aman Singh were brought to
Central Jail, Hazaribagh on 09.09.2022 and 06.12.2022 respectively; and they had been confined at
Hazaribagh together for more than 6 months and no untoward incident has taken place during that
period. Furthermore, based on the communications of the Jail Superintendent as well as the District
Commissioner dated 16.05.2023, the prisoner Aman Singh was transferred from Central Jail,
Hazaribagh, and came to be lodged at Central Jail, Dhanbad, where he was shot (1978) 4 SCC 494
dead on 03.12.2023 in suspicious circumstances. Hence, the life of the respondent is at stake and he
will be executed, in case, he is transferred to any other prison as was done with Aman Singh.

6.5. Ultimately, the learned counsel for the respondent submitted that considering all these aspects,
the High Court rightly exercised its power of judicial review and set aside the order of intra-State jail
transfer of the respondent, by the order impugned herein and therefore, the same does not call for
any interference at the hands of this Court.

7. We have heard the learned counsel on either side and perused the materials available on record
carefully and meticulously.

8. The challenge made before the High Court was to the order dated 17.05.2023 passed by the
Inspector General of Prisons, in the form of memo, transferring the respondent from Lok Nayak Jai
Prakash Narayan Central Jail, Hazaribagh to Central Jail, Dumka, within the State of Jharkhand, on
administrative grounds. For better understanding, the contents of the said memo are extracted
below:

“Vikash Tiwari, a gangster of Pandey gang, undergoing life imprisonment for the
murder of the Sushil Srivastava (a leader of Srivastava Gang) is to be transferred
from Hazaribagh Central Jail to any jail in Santhal Pargana. In the light of receipt of
continuous complaints against Vikash Tiwari, and the hard stance of the Addl. D G
(Operation), the DC, Hazaribagh and the SP Hazaribagh, on yesterday, made a
recommendation to the IG Prison, Jharkhand, Ranchi for the transfer of. Vikash
Tiwary from Hazaribagh Central Jail.” It is thus apparent from the above that such
t r a n s f e r   w a s   m a d e   b y   t h e   I n s p e c t o r   G e n e r a l   o f   P r i s o n s ,   e n t i r e l y   o n   t h e
recommendation of the District Commissioner and the Superintendent of Police,
Hazaribagh, based on the letter dated 16.05.2023 addressed by the Superintendent,
Lok Nayak Jaiprakash Narayan Central Jail, Hazaribagh.

9. Notably, the communication dated 16.05.2023 sent by the Jail Superintendent
explicitly stated that notorious criminals viz., respondent herein and Aman Singh
have been confined in the same prison, as a result of which, there is threat of gang
war / untoward incident in the prison; due to shortage of kachpals, it is difficult to
exercise strict vigilance over the criminals; in the event of gang war, the Jail
administration may face extreme difficulties in controlling them; and hence, the said

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101570529/

4

The State Of Jharkhand vs Vikash Tiwary @ Bikash Tiwary @ Bikash ... on 17 January, 2025

notorious criminals may be transferred to any other prison, on administrative
grounds, so that the security of the prison remained unaffected. The District
Commissioner also, in his letter dated 16.05.2023, referred to the said
communication of the Jail Superintendent and requested the Inspector General of
Prisons, to take necessary action for transfer of the said accused persons to any other
prison, on administrative grounds. On consideration of these two communications,
the Inspector General of Prisons passed the said transfer order on 17.5.2023, which
was assailed by the respondent before the High Court. Thus, the reason for such
transfer was that the confinement of two notorious criminals in the same prison
raised a gang war threat, and the shortage of kachpals would hinder control over the
criminals and pose a challenge for the jail administration and hence, transfer was
sought for effective maintenance of the prison.

10. However, by the order impugned herein, the High Court set aside the transfer
order so made by the Inspector General of Prisons, stating that the prayer of the
respondent not to shift him to any other jail was earlier allowed by the High Court
vide order dated 08.03.2016 in Cr.M.P.No.2267 of 2015; and the certificate issued by
the Superintendent of Hazaribagh jail dated 19.05.2023 disclosed no adverse
remarks against the respondent and his character as satisfactory; and further placing
reliance on the decision of this Court in Saeed Sohail Sheikh (supra).

11. Specifically, it is pleaded by the learned counsel for the appellants that the order
of transfer passed by the Inspector General (Prison) was in terms of Section 29 of the
Prisoners Act, 1900 r/w Rule 770(B) of the State Jail Manual. For easy
understanding, the said provisions are extracted below:

"29. Removal of prisoners - (1) The State Government may, by general or special
order, provide for the removal of any prisoner confined in a prison –

(a) under sentence of death, or

(b) under, or in lieu of, a sentence of imprisonment or transportation, or

(c) in default of payment of a fine, or

(d) in default of giving security for keeping the peace or for maintaining good
behaviour, to any other prison in the State.

(2) Subject to the orders, and under the control of the State Government, the
Inspector General of prisons may, in like manner provide for the removal of any
prisoner confined as aforesaid in a prison in the State to any other prison in the State.
"

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101570529/

5

The State Of Jharkhand vs Vikash Tiwary @ Bikash Tiwary @ Bikash ... on 17 January, 2025

By Act 30 of 2000, the State of Jharkhand was brought into existence on 15.11.2000 by carving out
certain southern districts of Bihar. The State of Jharkhand has adopted many Acts and Rules
applicable to the State of Bihar. The Jail Manual, 1925 as applicable to the State of Bihar has been
adopted by the State of Jharkhand. Rule 770 (b) of the said rules as applicable to the present case,
reads as under:

“Rule 770(B) - Long-term prisoners on admission to District Jails, who are certified
fit to travel by the Medical Officers may be transferred to the affiliated Central Jails,
irrespective of their age.

Nothing in this rule contained, shall be deemed in any way to interfere with the
power of the Inspector General for sufficient reason, in his discretion, by general or
special order to direct that any class or class of prisoners shall be confined in or
transferred to any jail or class of jails”.

Thus, Section 29 makes it clear that removal of any prisoner in a prison to any other
prison within the State is at the instance of the State Government, in cases where the
prisoner is confined in circumstances mentioned by clauses (a) to (d) of sub-section
(1); and subject to the order and under the control of the State Government, the
Inspector General of Prisons is empowered to remove any prisoner confined as
aforesaid in a prison to any other prison in the State. The said provision does not
speak about an undertrial prisoner. That apart, Rule 770(B) empowers the Inspector
General to shift/transfer a prisoner from one jail to another jail on sufficient grounds.
The first limb of Section 29 empowers the State government to issue general or
specific order to remove the prisoner under any of the circumstances in clause (1) of
Sub-section (1). Sub-section (2) of Section 29 confers similar powers to the Inspector
General of Prisons to order for such transfer, however subject to orders and under
the control of the State government. In the instant case, no adverse order or
proceeding of the State government is brought to our knowledge. The substantive
right flows from the Section and Rules as applicable, enables the Inspector General of
Prisons, on discretion to transfer a prisoner from one prison to another or from one
class to another. The only caution, we may add, is that such discretion cannot be
exercised arbitrarily. Admittedly, the respondent herein is a life convict and
undergoing sentence in the Central Jail, Hazaribagh, pursuant to the judgment dated
22.09.2020 passed in S.T.No.141/2016 arising out of Hazaribagh Sadar P.S. Case
No.610/2015, corresponding to G.R.No.2325/2015. In view of the said provisions of
law, the order of transfer passed by the Inspector General of Prisons citing
administrative grounds, was in accordance with law.

12. It is interesting to note that the High Court, while setting aside the transfer order,
referred to the decision of this Court in Saeed Sohail Sheikh (supra), wherein, the
petitioners therein were undertrial prisoners; and the order of the High Court passed
earlier on 08.03.2016 in Cr.M.P.No.2267 of 2015 filed by the respondent, who was at
that time, in prison as an undertrial prisoner. As indicated above, the respondent is

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101570529/

6

The State Of Jharkhand vs Vikash Tiwary @ Bikash Tiwary @ Bikash ... on 17 January, 2025

now a life convict and undergoing sentence in the Central Jail, Hazaribagh.
Therefore, the aforesaid orders are not applicable to the present circumstances of the
case. In fact, in Saeed Sohail Sheikh (supra), it was clearly stated by this Court that
Sub-section (2) no doubt empowers the Inspector General of Prisons to direct a
transfer, but what is important is that any such transfer is of a prisoner who is
confined in circumstances mentioned in sub-

section (1) of Section 29. That is evident from the use of words any prisoner confined as aforesaid in
a prison. The expression leaves no manner of doubt that a transfer under sub-section (2) is also
permissible only if it relates to prisoners who were confined in circumstances indicated in
sub-section (1) of section 29’. As such, reference made to the said decision seems to be misplaced.

13. To justify the order passed by the High Court, the learned counsel for the respondent heavily
placed reliance on the character certificate issued by the Jail Superintendent on 19.05.2023.
Indisputably, the power of giving character certificate is entrusted to the Jail Superintendent as he is
the authority, who closely watches the activities of the inmates for a considerable amount of time.
However, as noticed earlier, the Jail superintendent by letter dated 16.05.2023 expressed
apprehension of gang war / untoward incident in the prison, due to the presence of two notorious
criminals; and insufficient kachpals to maintain them, which pose a challenge to the prison
administration and hence, made intra-State transfer request, so as to ensure the safety of the prison.
The notorious prisoner Aman Singh came to be lodged in the said Jail on 22.10.2022. Based on the
apprehension so raised, the Inspector General of Prisons by exercising his powers conferred under
section 29 of the Prisoners Act, 1900 and the applicable rules, transferred the respondent to another
jail within the State, for security of the prison and to ensure the life and safety of the respondent in
the prison. It is also to be noted that before the issuance of the character certificate, the Inspector
General of Prisons passed the order of transfer of the respondent to some other jail, in the light of
the recommendation of the District Commissioner, based on the earlier letter dated 16.05.2023 sent
by the Jail Superintendent. We have already held that the transfer so made was in accordance with
law. That apart, the fact remains that while he has been in prison from 04.08.2015 to 19.05.2023,
multiple FIRs got registered against the respondent. Even the said certificate has not denied the
threat of gang war within the prison. Therefore, the certificate issued by the Jail Superintendent, at
the later date, i.e., on 19.05.2023 appears to be contradictory and cannot be trustworthy, and the
reliance placed on the same cannot be accepted by us.

14. In connection with the issue involved herein, we may additionally refer to the Prison Manual
2016 and Model Prisons and Correctional Services Act, 2023. Chapter IX of the Prison Manual 2016,
under Rule 9.01 provides for list of grounds, under which a transfer can be made and it is on
case-to-case basis. It is significant to note that the ‘ground of security’ has been mentioned in Rule
9.01(vii). That apart, Rule 35 of the Model Prisons and Correctional Services Act, 2023 deals with
safe custody and security of prisoners, wherein, it was explicitly pointed out that the
officer-in-charge of the prison shall be responsible to undertake effective measures for ensuring safe
custody and security of prisoners; and the Head of Prisons & Correctional Services shall be
empowered to transfer a prisoner to any other prison in the State/UT, as may be prescribed under
the rules. Moreover, in Kalyan Chandra Sarkar v. Rajesh Ranjan Alias Pappu Yadav5, it was pointed

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101570529/

7

The State Of Jharkhand vs Vikash Tiwary @ Bikash Tiwary @ Bikash ... on 17 January, 2025

out that a convict or an undertrial who disobeys the law of the land, cannot contend that it is not
permissible to transfer him from one jail to another, because the Jail Manual does not provide for it.
The relevant portion is reproduced below:

“23. Therefore, in our opinion, a convict or an undertrial who disobeys the law of the
land, cannot contend that it is not permissible to transfer him from one jail to
another because the Jail Manual does not provide for it. If the factual situation
requires the transfer of a prisoner from one prison to another; be he a convict or an
undertrial. Courts are not to be a helpless bystander when the rule of law is being
challenged with impunity. The arms of law are long enough to remedy the situation
even by transferring a prisoner from one prison to another, that is by assuming that
the concerned Jail Manual does not provide such a transfer. In our opinion, the
argument of the learned counsel, as noted above, undermines the authority and
majesty of law. The facts narrated hereinabove clearly show that the respondent has
time and again flouted the law even while he was in custody and sometimes even
when he was on bail. We must note herein with all seriousness that the authorities
manning the Beur jail and the concerned doctors of the Patna Medical College
Hospital, for their own reasons, either willingly or otherwise, have enabled the
respondent to flout the law. In this process, we think the concerned authorities,
especially the authorities at the Beur Central Jail, Patna, are not in a position to
control the illegal activities of the respondent. Therefore, it is imperative that the
respondent be transferred outside Bihar.” (2005) 3 SCC 284 Thus, it is vivid that if
the situation necessitates transfer of the prisoner from one jail to another, it can be
done by the authority concerned.

15. Furthermore, this Court in Geerinder Kaur v. State of Punjab, has categorically held that “the
place of detention is a matter for the administrative choice of the detaining authority and a court
would be justified in interfering with that decision only if it was in violation of any specific provision
of the law or was vitiated by arbitrary considerations and mala fides”. In State of Maharashtra v.
Sayyed Noor Hasan Gulam Hussain6, it was held that classification of the prisoners and their
placement in different prisons by the prison administration is a relevant policy decision. The
discretion and power to interfere by the courts in such matters does exist yet it should be used very
sparingly. Similarly, this Court in Kalyan Chandra Sarkar (supra), has held that the Right of a
prisoner under Article 21 of the Constitution to be lodged in a jail and general prohibition against
his transfer to a distantly located jail in the State or out of the State is not absolute. It is also subject
to the amenability of the prisoner to the maintenance of jail discipline. The relevant passage of the
said decision reads as under:

“21. The fundamental right of an undertrial prisoner under Article 21 of the
Constitution is not absolute. His right of visitations as also other rights are provided
in the Jail Manual. The Respondent as an undertrial prisoner was bound to maintain
the internal discipline of the jail. Such a fundamental right is circumscribed by the
prison manual and other relevant statutes imposing reasonable restrictions on such
right. The provisions of the Bihar Jail Manual or other relevant statutes having not

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101570529/

8

The State Of Jharkhand vs Vikash Tiwary @ Bikash Tiwary @ Bikash ... on 17 January, 2025

been declared unconstitutional, the Respondent was bound to abide by such statutory
rules.” 1995 Crl.LJ 765 SC Hence, it is lucid that transfer of convict prisoner from one
prison to another is purely an administrative decision and hence, the same cannot be
interfered with by the court unless it is arbitrary and contrary to law.

16. Thus, the overall analysis would abundantly demonstrate that subject to the orders of the State
Government, the Inspector General of Prisons shall exercise control and superintendence of all
prisons situated in the State, in accordance with the above stated provisions. Further, the prison
authorities are charged with the duties of maintenance of discipline and peace within a prison. At
the same time, there can be no manner of doubt that the transfer of prisoners from one jail to
another is not a matter of routine and must be approached with circumspection. In the present case,
the reason given for transfer was the existence of imminent possibility of a gang war and due to
insufficient kachpals, the prison authorities would find it difficult to effectively manage such a
situation, if it arises. In this exceptional circumstance, the Inspector General of Prisons passed the
order transferring the respondent to another jail. There is a duty on the Inspector General of Prisons
to ensure the safety of all the inmates in the prison. This measure was essential to ensure not only
the safety of the prisoner but also to disrupt and neutralize the potential for gang-related violence
within the prison. Such decision of shifting the respondent was only in the larger interest of
maintaining security of the prison. There is a profound rational behind the decision and therefore,
such decision does not suffer from the vice of arbitrariness. Thus, we are of the opinion that transfer
of the respondent to some other jail is not only lawful, but also necessary for his safety and security.
However, the High Court erred in setting aside the same, by the order impugned herein, which is
liable to be set aside.

17. At this juncture, it may not be out of sight to point out that the Indian Prison System has been
under the close scrutiny of judiciary / District Magistrates, who have been given a responsibility to
closely monitor the administration and management of prisons under their jurisdiction and to
inspect them periodically. Since ‘Prisons’ is a State subject under Entry 4 in List-II of the Seventh
Schedule to the Constitution of India, the management and administration of the same comes
within the purview of the State Governments. They are governed by the Prisons Act, 1894 and the
Prison Manuals / Rules / Regulations framed by the respective State Governments from time to
time. The Model Prison Manual provides guidance to the State Governments to maintain uniformity
in the prison administration throughout the country. 17.1. This Court has repeatedly recommended
an overhaul of prison administration by suggesting reforms in treatment of prisoners and
management of prisons. The dehumanized existence of prisoners was reprimanded by Justice
Krishna Iyer in Sunil Batra v. Delhi Administration7, and he called for an overhaul of Prison
Manuals in compliance with constitutional ideals and human rights. He 1980 AIR 1579 further
emphasised on the need for an independent oversight mechanism for operationalizing prisoners’
rights and safeguards. Subsequently, after the direction of this Court to examine the framing of new
All India Jail Manual in Rama Murthy v. State of Karnataka8, the Model Prison Manual came into
existence in the year 2003 and the same was approved by the Ministry of Home Affairs, only in the
year 2016, pursuant to the direction of this Court in yet another decision in Inhuman Conditions in
1382 Prisons, In re9. The Model Prison Manual and the system that it envisages, has to be
understood as an outcome of the repeated clarion calls and demands to safeguard prisoners’ rights

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101570529/

9

The State Of Jharkhand vs Vikash Tiwary @ Bikash Tiwary @ Bikash ... on 17 January, 2025

and prison reforms.

17.2. The prison administration needs to be reformed for creating a better environment and prison
culture to ensure the prisoners enjoy their right to dignified life under Article 21. It is essential to
continuously monitor the physical conditions prevailing in the prison, compliance with basic and
fundamental rights of the prisoners, etc. The State recognizes that a prisoner loses his right to
liberty but still maintains his right to be treated as a human being and as person. His human dignity
shall be maintained and all basic amenities should be made available to him. Discipline and order
shall be maintained with firmness, but with no more restriction than is necessary for safe custody
and well-ordered community life, with due regard to the maintenance of the rights of prisoners.
(1997) 2 SCC 642 (2017) 10 SCC 658 Thus, the objective of reforms and rehabilitation of the
prisoners has to be pursued diligently.

17.3. As far as the State of Jharkhand is concerned, there is no clear-cut picture regarding prison
administration and the facilities available to the prisoners in the prisons. In Court on its own motion
v. State of Jharkhand, WP(PIL) Nos. 6125/2017 etc. cases, which are pending, vide order dated
13.01.2023, the Jharkhand High Court was apprised regarding the drafting of a Jharkhand Jail
Manual based on the Model Prison Manual, 2016. The current status of the same however remains
unclear. Hence, we deem it necessary to issue appropriate directions to the Government of
Jharkhand for implementing effective prison administration and to protect the interests of
prisoners.

18. In the upshot,

(i) The order of the High Court dated 21.08.2023 stands set aside and the order / memo dated
17.05.2023 of the Inspector General of Prisons stands restored.

(ii) The authorities shall ensure that the respondent’s life, basic and fundamental rights to the extent
available in accordance with law, are protected.

(iii) The State of Jharkhand shall, if not already done, formulate or expedite the formulation of a Jail
Manual incorporating the applicable provisions of the 2016 Model Prison Manual, for effective
prison administration and ensure its strict compliance by the prison authorities.

19. This appeal stands allowed and disposed of, in the above terms. Connected Miscellaneous
Application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.

..................................J [J.B. Pardiwala] .................................J [R.Mahadevan] NEW DELHI;

JANUARY 17, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101570529/

10

