The State Of Punjab vs M/S. Om Prakash Brick Kiln Owner on 21 January, 2025

The State Of Punjab vs M/S. Om Prakash Brick Kiln Owner on 21
January, 2025

Author: Abhay S. Oka

Bench: Abhay S. Oka

2025 INSC 88

                                                                             REPORTABLE

                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 10687-10694 OF 2013

                            STATE OF PUNJAB & ORS.                         … APPELLANTS

                                                        versus

                            M/S OM PRAKASH BRICK
                            KILN OWNER, ETC.                            … RESPONDENTS

                                                   JUDGMENT

ABHAY S. OKA, J.

FACTUAL ASPECT

1. The appellants are the original defendants, and the respondents are the original plaintiffs. The
respondents filed suits against the appellants for a permanent injunction restraining them from
assessing, levying or recovering any amount as royalty from the respondents on account of the use of
earth by the respondents for making bricks. According to the respondents who were operating brick
kilns, they took different lands (for short, ‘the said lands’) from private owners on lease. ANITA
MALHOTRA The respondents used to excavate earth from the said lands to Date: 2025.01.21
18:19:11 IST Reason:

manufacture bricks in their brick kilns. The respondents' case was that no part of the
land was vested in the Government and according to the Wajib-ul-arz, brick earth

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106654709/

1

The State Of Punjab vs M/S. Om Prakash Brick Kiln Owner on 21 January, 2025

does not belong to the State Government. Reliance was placed on Section 42 of the
Punjab Land Revenue Act, 1887 (for short, ‘the Land Revenue Act’) and, in particular,
sub-section (2) thereof. It was further contended that under the Mines and Mineral
(Regulations and Development) Act, 1957 (for short, ‘the 1957 Act’) or under the
Punjab Minor Mineral Concession Rules, 1964 (for short, ‘the Mineral Rules’), there
was no provision entitling the first appellant – State Government to levy royalty on
the use of brick earth. The respondents contended that the appellants' action of
assessing royalty and sending notices for recovery was illegal.

2. The appellants resisted the suit by filing their written statements. It was contended that the Civil
Court had no jurisdiction to entertain the suit in view of Rule 54F of the Mineral Rules, which
provides a remedy of appeal against orders of assessment of royalty. The appellants also raised
objections to the maintainability of suit on the ground of non- joinder of necessary parties. It was
contended that the respondents had failed to implead the owners of the said lands. The appellants
further challenged the maintainability of the suit for want of a notice under Section 80 of the Civil
Procedural Code, 1908. On merits, it was contended that according to Wajib-ul-arz of the village
Jallalabad, every mineral, including brick earth, vests in the first appellant – State Government in
accordance with Section 42 (2) of the Land Revenue Act. The appellants also contended that under
Section 15 of the 1957 Act, the State Government was empowered to make Rules for making a
provision for charging royalty. Accordingly, under the Mineral Rules framed by the State
Government, the appellants were entitled to levy royalty.

3. The Trial Court dismissed the suit vide judgement dated 22nd August 1983. The Trial Court
rejected the appellants' preliminary objections regarding the bar of suit and non- maintainability of
the suit. The Trial Court held that on the plain reading of Section 42 of the Land Revenue Act, in a
case where the record of rights was completed before November 18, 1871, and there is no express
provision made therein that any forest or quarry belongs to the landowners, the same shall be
presumed to belong to the State. The Trial Court held that the record of rights regarding the land in
question was made before 18th November 1871, and since the Wajib-ul-arz did not specify that the
quarries belonged to the land owners, it was held that the subject quarry is vested in the State
Government in terms of Section 42 (1) of the Land Revenue Act. The Trial Court further held that by
a notification issued under Section 3(e) of the 1957 Act, brick earth was declared a minor mineral.
The Trial Court held that even though the settlement in the years 1911-12 and 1962-63 did not show
the subject land as a quarry, that was not significant as, at that time, brick earth was not declared as
a minor mineral.

4. The decree passed by the Trial Court was confirmed in the appeal preferred by the respondents by
the learned Additional District Judge vide judgement dated 18th April 1984.

The First Appellate Court observed that both the appellants and respondents had produced
Wajib-ul-arz of the village of 1911-12 and 1962-63. Both these Wajib-ul-arz mentioned that the right
to recover minor minerals in the said lands vested in the State. The case of the respondents was that
as brick earth was not specifically mentioned in either of the Wajib-ul-arz, the appellants were not
entitled to charge royalty. The First Appellate Court, however, rejected this argument and held that

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106654709/

2

The State Of Punjab vs M/S. Om Prakash Brick Kiln Owner on 21 January, 2025

there was a presumption of ownership in favour of the first appellant under sub-Section (1) of
Section 42 of the Land Revenue Act and the mere fact that the Wajib-ul-arz did not specifically
mention ownership of the State over brick earth, would not disentitle the appellants from levying tax
on the mining of brick earth by virtue of it being declared a minor mineral.

5. By the impugned judgment, second appeals preferred by the respondents have been allowed, and
the suits filed by the respondents have been decreed. The High Court concluded that by way of mere
declaration of brick earth as a minor mineral, no rights can vest in the State Government to levy
royalty. It was held that since the appellants failed to prove that they are owners of brick earth, they
are not entitled to claim any royalty from the respondents.

SUBMISSIONS

6. Learned Additional Advocate General appearing for the State of Punjab submitted that Section 15
of the 1957 Act empowers the State Government to make Rules enabling it to charge a royalty on the
extraction of minor minerals. He pointed out that, admittedly, a notification was issued under
Section 3 of the 1957 Act by which brick earth was declared as a minor mineral. He submitted that
the first regular settlement of the village in question was made before the year 1871. Nothing was on
record to show that in the Wajib-ul-arz, forests and quarries, etc, were shown as belonging to the
land owners. Therefore, there was a presumption of ownership in favour of the first appellant – the
State Government. Reliance was placed on Rule 54A of the Mineral Rules, which provided that no
person shall undertake quarry or mining operations unless and until he holds a certificate of
approval in Form “B”. He submitted that the royalty is payable irrespective of the ownership.

7. The learned counsel appearing for the respondents supported the impugned judgment by
contending that the State has not discharged the burden to prove that the brick earth is vesting in it.
It was submitted that merely because brick earth was declared as a minor mineral, the first
appellant

- State Government does not get a right to levy royalty.

CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS

8. On 1st June 1958, the Government of India published a notification in the exercise of powers
conferred under clause (e) of Section 3 of the 1957 Act by which brick earth was declared a minor
mineral within the meaning of the 1957 Act. As can be seen from the judgment of the Trial Court, the
respondents did not claim to be the owners of the said lands from which they were excavating brick
earth. According to the respondents, the said lands were owned by someone else and were taken on
lease by the respondents. In short, the respondents' stand was that the said lands were vested in
private persons. If that be so, the persons claiming to be the land owners ought to have been made a
party to the suit to enable the Court to decide the issue of title. Section 41 of the Land Revenue Act
provides that all mines of metal and coal and all earth oil and gold shall be deemed to be the
property of the State. Section 42 of the Land Revenue Act is material, which reads thus:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106654709/

3

The State Of Punjab vs M/S. Om Prakash Brick Kiln Owner on 21 January, 2025

“42. Presumption as to ownership of forests, quarries and waste lands.— (1) When in
any record-of-rights completed before the eighteenth day of November, 1871, it is no
expressly provided that any forest quarry, unclaimed unoccupied, deserted or waste-
land, spontaneous produce or other accessary interest in land belongs to the
land-owners, it shall be presumed to belong to the Government.

(2) When in any record-of-rights completed after that date it is not expressly
provided that any forest or quarry or any such land or interest belongs to the
Government, it shall be presumed to belong to the land- owners.

(3) The presumption created by sub-section (1) may be rebutted by showing—

(a) from the records or report made by the assessing officer at the time of
assessment; or

(b) if the record or report, is silent, then from a comparison between the assessment
of villages in which there existed, and the assessment of villages of similar character
in which there did not exist, any forest or quarry, or any such land or interest, that
the forest, quarry, land or interest was taken into account in the assessment of the
land-revenue.

(4) Until the presumption is so rebutted, the forest, quarry, land or interest shall be
held to belong to the Government.” (emphasis added) Therefore, if the record of
rights was completed after 18th November 1871 and if it was not expressly recorded
that any forest or quarry or any such land or interest belongs to the Government, the
same shall be presumed to belong to the land owners. As regards the lands of which
record of right was completed before 18th November 1871, unless it was recorded that
any forest quarry, unclaimed, unoccupied, deserted or wasteland belongs to the land
owners, it shall be presumed to be of the ownership of the State Government. The
High Court, in the impugned judgment, held that the presumption under sub-Section
(2) of Section 42 of the Land Revenue Act would not apply. The reason is that at the
relevant time, brick earth was not declared as a minor mineral.

9. In our view, the High Court has missed the real issue. As far as the ownership of the said lands is
concerned, admittedly, respondents were not the owners. The respondents claimed that they had
taken the said lands on lease from the real owners. The persons claiming to be the real owners were
not parties to the suit. Most importantly, the Trial Court did not frame any issue on the ownership of
the land in question. The District Court did not frame the point for determination on this aspect.

10. There is no dispute that brick earth was declared as a minor mineral by a notification under
Section 3(e) of the 1957 Act. We have carefully perused the Mineral Rules. Rule 3 provides for
exemptions from payment of royalty. Rule 3 does not provide for an exemption in respect of the
excavation of brick earth for manufacturing bricks. Apart from the fact that the land ownership issue
was not decided by the Trial Court and the First Appellate Court, even if we assume that the lands

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106654709/

4

The State Of Punjab vs M/S. Om Prakash Brick Kiln Owner on 21 January, 2025

on which the respondents carried out excavation were private lands, the question is whether the
State Government was powerless to levy royalty. The answer to the question is in Rules 54A, 54B,
and 54C, which read thus:

“54A. Prohibition of under taking quarrying or mining operation - No person shall
undertake quarrying or mining operation unless and until he holds a certificate of
approval in Form "B" :

Provided that no such certificate shall be necessary for undertaking quarrying or
mining operation by a person exempted under rule 3.

54B. Returns.

- Every assessee shall for each month furnish a return in Form 'N' about the
production and disposal of minor minerals, during that month by the 10th day of the
month following that to which the return relates. 54C. Assessment of royalty.

(1) If the Assessing Authority is satisfied without requiring the presence of the
assessee or the production by him of any evidence that the returns furnished in form
'N' in respect of any period are correct and complete, he shall assess the amount of
royalty due from the assessee on the basis of such returns and record assessment
order in Form 'O'.

(2) If the Assessing Authority is not satisfied without requiring the presence of the
assessee who furnished the returns in Form 'N' or production of evidence that the
returns furnished in Form 'N' in respect of any period are correct and complete, he
shall serve on such assessee a notice in Form 'P', requiring him on a date and a place
specified therein, to attend in person or to cause to be produced any evidence (on
which such assessee may rely) in support of such returns.

(3) In case the assessee having furnished the returns in respect of a period in Form
'N' fails to comply with the terms of the notice in Form 'P' issued under sub-rule (1),
the Assessing Authority shall within three years after the expiry of such period
proceed to assess to the best of his judgment, the amount of the royalty due from the
assessee and record the assessment order in Form 'O'.

(4) If an assessee does not furnish the returns in respect of any period by the due
date, the Assessing Authority shall serve a notice upon the assessee in Form 'Q' and
after giving the assessee a reasonable opportunity of being heard shall, within a
period of three years after the expiry of the said period, proceed to assess to the best
of his judgment the amount of royalty if any due from the assessee and record the
assessment order in form 'O'.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106654709/

5

The State Of Punjab vs M/S. Om Prakash Brick Kiln Owner on 21 January, 2025

(5) If upon information which has come into his possession the Assessing Authority is
satisfied that any person has raised, without any lawful authority, any minor mineral
from any land and has not paid the royalty due thereon to the Government, the
assessing Authority shall within three years after the expiry of the period during
which the land was occupied by such person serve on such person in Form 'R' and
after giving such person a reasonable opportunity of being heard, proceed to assess to
the best of his judgment the amount of royalty due from him. The Assessing
Authority may also pass an order for recovery from such person of the minor mineral
so raised or where such minor mineral has already been disposed of the price thereof.

(6) The amount of royalty due and the price of minor mineral, if any, shall be paid by
the assessee into the government Treasury by such date as may be specified in the
notice in Form 'S' issued by the Assessing Authority for this purpose and the date so
specified shall not be less then thirty days from the date of service of such notice
:Provided that the Assessing Authority may in respect of any particular assessee and
for reasons to be recorded in writing extend the date of such payment or allow the
payment of royalty and price, if any, by instalments not exceeding four.

(7) If in consequence of definite information which has come into his possession the
Assessing Authority discovers that an assessee has been under- assessed or escaped
assessment of royalty in any year, the Assessing Authority may, at any time within
three years after the expiry of that year re-assess the royalty in Form 'O' after giving
the assessee a reasonable opportunity of being heard.

(8) The Assessing Authority may, at any time, within one year from the date of any
order passed by him of his own motion, rectify any clerical or arithmetical mistake
apparent from the record and within a like time period rectify any such mistake
which has been brought to his notice by any person, affected by such order.”
(emphasis added)

11. Therefore, even if a person owns the land, he cannot undertake quarrying or mining operations
therein unless he holds a certificate of approval in Form “B”. A person to whom the certificate is
issued is required to file returns showing the production and disposal of mines or minerals. The
royalty is determined as provided in sub-Rule (1) of Rule 54C.

12. Therefore, once it is accepted that brick earth was a minor mineral under the Mineral Rules, the
first appellant – the State Government, gets the right to levy royalty on the production and disposal
of minor minerals. An appeal is provided under Rule 54F of the Mineral Rules against an order of
the assessment of royalty. This remedy is an efficacious remedy available to challenge the levy of
royalty.

13. The three Courts have unnecessarily gone into the issue of ownership of the said lands or
minerals therein. The issue was about the right of the first appellant – the State Government to levy
royalty. Once it is shown that under the Mineral Rules, the first appellant – State Government was

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106654709/

6

The State Of Punjab vs M/S. Om Prakash Brick Kiln Owner on 21 January, 2025

entitled to levy royalty on the activity of mining of brick earth, the issue of ownership of the said
lands becomes irrelevant. The reason is that the owners of the said lands in which the excavation is
made are not in the exempted category specified in Rule 3 of the Mineral Rules. Though, for
different reasons, the Trial Court and the First Appellate Court were right in dismissing the suits. In
view of the discussions made above, the respondents did not make out a case for the grant of a
decree of permanent injunction restraining the appellants from recovering royalty from the
respondents. However, on the quantum of royalty, an appeal under Rule 54F is always available.

14. Therefore, the impugned judgment dated 19th September 2007 of the High Court is hereby
quashed and set aside, and the decrees of the dismissal of suits passed by the Trial Court are
restored. We make it clear that we have made no adjudication on the right of ownership of the said
lands, which the respondents used to excavate brick earth.

15. Appeals are, accordingly, allowed on the above terms with no orders as to cost.

……………………..J. (Abhay S. Oka) ……………………..J. (Ujjal Bhuyan) New Delhi;

January 21, 2025

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106654709/

7

