The State Of Uttar Pradesh Home ... vs Satendra Etc on 20 March, 2025

The State Of Uttar Pradesh Home ... vs Satendra Etc on 20
March, 2025

Author: Sanjay Kumar

Bench: Sanjay Kumar

                                                                                                NON-REPORTABLE
                                             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
2025 INSC 409
                                            CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                           CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 550-551/2015

        THE STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH                                               .....         APPELLANT(S)

                                                       VERSUS

        SATENDRA, ETC.                                                           .....     RESPONDENT(S)

                                                              O R D E R

1. The State of Uttar Pradesh filed the present appeals challenging the judgment dated 29.02.2012
passed by the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad in Criminal Appeal Nos. 5509/2007 and
4954/2007, accepting the appeals filed by the respondents, namely, Satendra and Neetu, and
acquitting them of the charges under Sections 148, 450/149, 323/149, 307/149 and 302/149 of the
Indian Penal Code, 1860.1

2. The trial court, by judgment dated 25.07.2007, had convicted the respondents, namely, Satendra
and Neetu, on the aforestated charges, while acquitting as many as six accused, namely, Abdul
Rehman; Shamsad, son of Khursheed; Shamshad, son of Farzanda;2 Fateh Mohammad alias
Fotu/Photu; Jabir; and Tausif.

3. The acquittal of the aforesaid accused persons was not challenged by the State and has become
final.

1 For short, ‘IPC’.

2 Shamshad, son of Farzanda, died during the pendency of the trial. 19:05:27 IST Reason:

Therefore, the case against him stood abated.

4. We have heard the learned counsel for the State of Uttar Pradesh and for the
respondents, namely, Satendra and Neetu, at some length.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114206908/

1

The State Of Uttar Pradesh Home ... vs Satendra Etc on 20 March, 2025

5. In our opinion, the High Court erred in appreciating the evidence of the three
eye-witnesses, namely, Rajveer Singh (PW-1), son of Lakshman Singh, Rajpal Singh
(PW-2), son of Lakshman Singh and Lakshman Singh (PW-3). Rajveer Singh (PW-1)
and Rajpal Singh (PW-2) are the brothers of the deceased, Dharampal, while
Lakshman Singh (PW-3) is their father.

6. The date and time of the occurrence is the night between 30th and 31st January,
2004, at about 12.00 midnight. The incident occurred at the house where Lakshman
Singh (PW-3) and his family, including Rajveer Singh (PW-1) and Rajpal Singh
(PW-2), were residing.

7. The three eye-witnesses, namely, Rajveer Singh (PW-1), Rajpal Singh (PW-2) and
Lakshman Singh (PW-3) have, in seriatim, deposed about the presence of the
respondents, namely, Satendra and Neetu, along with three or four other persons,
who had broken into the house. It is deposed that two persons came from the roof,
and the others entered through the main door, carrying firearms and arms.

They also testified about identifying the respondents, namely, Satendra and Neetu, because of the
light available from the torch and the lantern. It is important here to state that the names and the
parentage of both the respondents, namely, Satendra and Neetu, were duly recorded and mentioned
in the complaint and the First Information Report3 No. 24 of 2004 dated 31.01.2004 registered
soon thereafter at 02.30 a.m. with Police Station – Budana, Muzzafarnagar, Uttar Pradesh.

8. Shish Kanwar Rana (PW-5), Constable, deposed about the registration of the said FIR at about
02.30 a.m. on 31.01.2004 by Krishan Pal Rathi, Constable, who could not be examined as he had
expired in 2005. Shish Kanwar Rana (PW-5) was posted at the aforesaid police station and was
present during the registration of the FIR. He identified the signatures and handwriting of Krishan
Pal Rathi, Constable.

9. We will now deal with the so-called discrepancies which weighed with the High Court to upset the
findings recorded by the trial court and disbelieve the eye-witness version of Rajveer Singh (PW-1),
Rajpal Singh (PW-2) and Lakshman Singh (PW-3).

10. The first ground and reason given by the High Court is that there was a discrepancy as to
whether the accused had muffled up their faces when they entered the house. Reference was made
to the purportedly divergent testimonies of Rajveer Singh (PW-1) and Rajpal Singh (PW-2), who had
stated that the intruders did not have their faces covered, whereas Lakshman Singh (PW-3) had
deposed that the intruders, including the respondents, Satendra and Neetu, had muffled up their
faces. Lakshman Singh (PW-3), however, deposed that, during the scuffle, he saw their faces and
was able to 3 For short, “FIR”.

identify and recognize the respondents, Satendra and Neetu.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114206908/

2

The State Of Uttar Pradesh Home ... vs Satendra Etc on 20 March, 2025

11. We find that the aforesaid alleged discrepancy is not there at all. We considered the testimonies
of Rajveer Singh (PW-1) and Rajpal Singh (PW-2), who stated that, at about midnight, two
miscreants came down from the roof by climbing down the staircase and opened the gate.
Thereupon, three or four miscreants had come inside. Lakshman Singh (PW-3), the father of the
deceased, Dharampal, had raised an alarm, upon which the miscreants had started assaulting him.
On hearing the noise, and after getting a torch and a gas lantern from their rooms, the brothers,
namely, Rajveer Singh (PW-1), Rajpal Singh (PW-2), Dharampal (deceased), Udaiveer (not
examined), Jaipal (not examined) and Vijaypal (not examined), ran towards their father, Lakshman
Singh (PW-3), with lathis and sticks. The miscreants fired gunshots from country-made pistol(s)
with an intent to murder them but missed. However, the deceased, Dharampal, chased the
miscreants while they were running away, and the respondent, Satendra, who was a fellow villager,
fired a gunshot, which hit and killed Dharampal. They also named respondent, Neetu, who belonged
to the same village, as one of the miscreants who had been identified by them. The death of
Dharampal, as a result of a gunshot injury, was duly proved by the postmortem report (Exhibit – Ka.
3), which was conducted by Dr. Sudhir Kumar (PW-4). It was proved that the bullet pierced and
exited through the upper side of the chest of the deceased, Dharampal, causing his death.

12. We have also examined the testimony of Lakshman Singh (PW-3) and compared the version
given by him with the versions of Rajveer Singh (PW-1) and Rajpal Singh (PW-2). While
appreciating their testimonies before the Court, one must keep in mind that they are rustic villagers
who were suddenly shaken up by the miscreants entering their house at midnight. They confronted
the miscreants, and there was a scuffle between them and the miscreants. The identification of the
two accused, namely, Satendra and Neetu, is specifically deposed to in their testimonies, and this
factum is corroborated by the FIR (Exhibit – Ka. 4), wherein their names were duly recorded,
shortly after the occurrence.

13. Another alleged discrepancy relied upon by the High Court to acquit the respondents, Satendra
and Neetu, in our opinion, is more in the nature of a contradiction in the reasoning of the High
Court. The High Court observed that the eye-witnesses, Rajveer Singh (PW-1), Rajpal Singh (PW-2)
and Lakshman Singh (PW-

3), have deposed one and the same thing without deviating much from the stand taken in the FIR
and, therefore, their version should not be accepted.

14. We not only find the above reasoning contradictory, but on reading the testimonies of Rajveer
Singh (PW-1), Rajpal Singh (PW-2) and Lakshman Singh (PW-3), we are of the opinion that they
have been forthright about the facts in the versions stated by them. Although there are some minor
discrepancies in their versions, the overall consistency between their statements in the Court and
their earlier statements implicating both the respondents, namely, Satendra and Neetu, and the acts
on their part, has been clearly and lucidly brought out.

15. Thus, we would not treat the versions given by Rajveer Singh (PW-1), Rajpal Singh (PW-2) and
Lakshman Singh (PW-3) as improbable or unnatural. On the other hand, their versions and the facts
stated by them are utmost believable and should be accepted, as held by the trial court.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114206908/

3

The State Of Uttar Pradesh Home ... vs Satendra Etc on 20 March, 2025

16. The third reason given by the High Court, in our opinion, refers to a minor discrepancy as to how
the grapple had taken place. The High Court also accepted that there was grappling, as was stated by
the three eye-witnesses. As per the versions given by Rajveer Singh (PW-1) and Rajpal Singh
(PW-2), at the time of the incident, on account of the light of the torch and the lantern, they were
able to identify both the respondents, Satendra and Neetu, who belonged to the same village. We,
therefore, reject the reasoning of the High Court that because the respondents, Satendra and Neetu,
belonged to the same village, they would not have gone to commit dacoity or would have hidden
their faces so as to not be identified.

17. The High Court also referred to the recovery of the pistol (Exhibit-Ka. 13/1) from Satendra and
the ballistic report (Exhibit- Ka. 26). As per the ballistic report (Exhibit-Ka. 26), the two empty
cartridges recovered from the spot (Exhibit-Ka. 12) could not be matched with the fired cartridge
from the country-made pistol (Exhibit-Ka. 13/1). This, in our opinion, would not, in any way, dilute
the eye-witness accounts of Rajveer Singh (PW-1), Rajpal Singh (PW-2) and Lakshman Singh
(PW-3). It would only show that the police were not able to recover the cartridge/weapon of the
offence. It may be noted that, as per the version given by Rajveer Singh (PW-1) and Rajpal Singh
(PW-2), three bullets were fired, but only two empty cartridges were recovered from the spot. The
postmortem report (Exhibit-Ka. 3), as noticed above, stated that the bullet had pierced and gone
through the body of the deceased, Dharampal.

18. During the course of the hearing, our attention was drawn to some additional facts. First, the
respondent, Neetu, was not even charge-sheeted; secondly, the clothes worn by Rajveer Singh
(PW-1) and Rajpal Singh (PW-2) were not seized by the police. On the first aspect, the
eye-witnesses, Rajveer Singh (PW-1), Rajpal Singh (PW-2) and Lakshman Singh (PW-3) had
expressed their anguish and anger at the manner in which the police had conducted the
investigation. They openly claimed that the ‘Darogaji’, who had conducted the investigation, sided
with and helped Neetu, who was specifically disclosed/named with his parentage in the FIR
(Exhibit-Ka. 4). They had, in seriatim, denied having made any statements on 16.02.2004 to the
effect that they had misidentified and wrongly mentioned the name of Neetu along with his
parentage, whereas the person who was present at the spot belonged to a different village. On the
other hand, they further deposed that they had not implicated anyone else and had stated that the
six other accused, who were acquitted by the trial Court, were falsely implicated and were never
present at the spot.

19. It is also a fact that Neetu was not charge-sheeted, but subsequently, when the statement of
Rajveer Singh (PW-1) was recorded, an application under Section 319 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973,4 was moved, and Neetu was summoned and asked to stand trial.

20. On the question of bloodstains on the clothes, we find that the witnesses deposed that they, that
is, the brothers, had lifted the deceased, Dharampal, and had taken his body inside. They also stated
that their clothes did not have blood stains, as they lifted the deceased together in a shoulder-leg
position. The bullet injury, as per the postmortem report (Exhibit-Ka. 3), was in the chest area. The
clothes worn by the deceased, Dharampal, as well as the controlled earth sample (Exhibit-Ka.11),
taken during the course of the investigation, tested positive for human blood. However, the blood

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114206908/

4

group could not be ascertained due to the putrefaction of the blood.

The State Of Uttar Pradesh Home ... vs Satendra Etc on 20 March, 2025

21. The contention, which was also accepted by the High Court, that the miscreants had weapons
and, therefore, the two eye- witnesses, namely, Rajveer Singh (PW-1) and Rajpal Singh (PW-2), and
the other brothers would not have dared to confront and grapple with the miscreants, must be
rejected. We are dealing with villagers who were perturbed when they found intruders entering 4
For short, “the Code”.

their house to commit dacoity and attacking their father, Lakshman Singh (PW-3). They had not
come out empty-handed but with lathis/dandas/sticks to challenge the intruders/miscreants. We,
therefore, do not think that the conduct of Rajveer Singh (PW-1), Rajpal Singh (PW-2) and their
brothers in challenging the intruders was unnatural, so as to be discarded as unbelievable.

22. Another contention was that Rajveer Singh (PW-1), Rajpal Singh (PW-2) and Lakshman Singh
(PW-3) had not given the names of the known intruders to the fellow villagers who had come to the
spot after the occurrence. We do not think that this aspect dents the prosecution case, given the fact
that the names of the respondents, Satendra and Neetu, were categorically mentioned in the FIR,
which was recorded immediately after the occurrence. Interestingly, the Investigating Officer,
Jagdish Singh (PW-7), stated that he had visited the spot at 05.00 a.m. during the same night. This
corroborates the fact that the FIR was recorded immediately after the occurrence without delay.

23. In view of the above discussion, we are of the opinion that charges under Sections 323, 450, 307
and 302 read with Section 34 of the IPC are made out against the respondents, Satendra and Neetu.
We would give the benefit of doubt insofar as the charge under Sections 148 and 149 of the IPC is
concerned. Accordingly, the respondents, Satendra and Neetu, shall stand convicted under Sections
323, 450, 307 and 302 read with Section 34 of the IPC. The respondents, Satendra and Neetu, are
sentenced as under:

i. For the charge under Section 302 of the IPC, they shall undergo life imprisonment
and pay a fine of (cid:133)10,000/- each. ii. For the charge under Section 307 of the IPC, they
shall undergo 5 years of rigorous imprisonment and pay a fine of (cid:133)5,000/- each.

iii. For the charge under Section 450 of the IPC, they shall undergo 5 years of
rigorous imprisonment and pay a fine of (cid:133)5,000/- each.

iv. For the charge under Section 323 of the IPC, they shall undergo rigorous
imprisonment for 1 year. v. In case of non-payment of the aforestated fine amounts,
the respondents, Satendra and Neetu, shall undergo 6 months of simple
imprisonment.

All sentences will run concurrently. The benefit of Section 428 of the Code will be
given to them.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114206908/

5

The State Of Uttar Pradesh Home ... vs Satendra Etc on 20 March, 2025

24. The respondents, Satendra and Neetu, shall surrender within a period of four weeks from today
to undergo their sentences, as noted above. In case the respondents, Satendra and Neetu, fail to
surrender within a period of four weeks from today, the police/trial Court will take steps to
detain/arrest them for undergoing their sentences.

25. The impugned judgment(s) is modified to the aforesaid extent and the appeals are partly
allowed.

26. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.

................CJI.

(SANJIV KHANNA) ..................J. (SANJAY KUMAR) NEW DELHI;

MARCH 20, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114206908/

6

