Union Of India vs Man Singh Verma on 28 February, 2025

Union Of India vs Man Singh Verma on 28 February, 2025

Author: Sanjay Karol

Bench: Sanjay Karol

2025 INSC 292

                                                                         REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                        CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 77 OF 2025

                            UNION OF INDIA THR. I.O.
                            NARCOTICS CONTROL
                            BUREAU                                …APPELLANT(S)

                                                     VERSUS

                            MAN SINGH VERMA                        …RESPONDENT(S)

                                                 JUDGMENT

SANJAY KAROL J.

1. The present appeal arises from the impugned order dated 22nd May, 2024 passed by the High
Court of Judicature at Allahabad, Lucknow Bench in Crl. Misc. Bail Application No.2812 of 2023,
wherein the High Court directed the Director Date: 2025.02.28 18:26:32 IST Reason:

of Narcotics Control Bureau1, New Delhi, to pay a sum of Rs.5,00,000/- (Rupees Five
Lakhs) as compensation to the respondent for the alleged wrongful confinement.
Aggrieved by the said direction, the Union of India through NCB has preferred the
present appeal.

2. The brief facts leading to the present appeal are as under :-

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14770680/

1

Union Of India vs Man Singh Verma on 28 February, 2025

2.1. In a joint operation, the NCB seized 1280 grams of brown powder (allegedly
heroin) from the possession of Man Singh Verma (respondent herein) and one Aman
Singh. Accordingly, Criminal Case No.02/2023 was registered against the respondent
under Sections 8(C), 21 and 29 of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
Act, 19852 on 6th January, 2023, consequently, he was remanded to judicial custody.

2.2. NCB prepared an arrest memo on the same date and drew four samples – SO1,
SD1, SO2 and SD2 from the recovered substance. Two of these samples (SO1 and
SD1) were sent to the Central Revenues Control 1 For short ‘NCB’ 2 Abbreviated as
‘NDPS’ Laboratory (CRPL), New Delhi, for chemical examination.

2.3. While awaiting results from the laboratory, the respondent filed B.A.No.251/2023 before
Special Judge, NDPS, Barabanki District, seeking bail. This application was rejected vide order
dated 24th January, 2023. Consequently, the respondent approached the High Court by filing Crl.
Misc. Bail Application No.2812 of 2023. 2.4. On 30th January, 2023, CRPL issued its report stating
that the sample tested negative for heroin and other narcotic substances. Following this, the
Investigating Officer (I.O.) moved an application before the Special Court seeking permission to
send a second set of samples (SO2 and SD2) to the Central Forensic Science Laboratory (CFSL),
Chandigarh, for further examination. The same was allowed by the concerned Court.

2.5. On 5th April, 2023, the report received from CFSL, Chandigarh, found that the second set of
samples also tested negative for any narcotic substance. As a result, on 6th April, 2023, NCB filed a
closure report before the Special Judge, NDPS, pursuant to which, the respondent was released
from District Jail, Barabanki on 10th April, 2023 under an order of the Additional District and
Sessions Judge.

2.6. Despite filing of the closure report and the respondent’s release, the High Court proceeded to
adjudicate the pending bail application and vide the impugned order observed that the respondent
was a young person who had been wrongfully confined for four months despite the initial laboratory
finding and, therefore, directed the Director, NCB to pay Rs.5,00,000/- as compensation to the
respondent within a period of two months and to file a compliance affidavit. 2.7. Aggrieved by this
order, the appellant filed a Modification Application before the High Court seeking waiver of the
compensation, which was rejected vide order dated 16th July, 2024 on the ground that the
application is barred under Section 362 of Code of Criminal Procedure, 19733.

2.8. An Application for Grant of Exemption (for paying compensation) was also preferred by one
Mr. Surendra Kumar, Junior Intelligence Officer, NCB, which was rejected by the High Court vide
order dated 9th September, 2024, observing that the order granting compensation has not been
challenged before a higher Court.

3. We have heard Mr. Satya Darshi Sanjay, learned Additional Solicitor General for the appellant,
and Mr. Pijush K. Roy, learned Senior Counsel appointed as Amicus Curiae in the matter. The
respondent, despite service, has not entered an appearance. We have also perused the material
placed on record and the written submission filed by the Amicus Curiae. The main contentions

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14770680/

2

raised, as can be understood from the record, have been recorded as under:

Union Of India vs Man Singh Verma on 28 February, 2025

APPELLANTS:

(i) The High Court, while exercising its power under Section 439 CrPC, went beyond
its jurisdiction by doing a detailed 3 For short ‘CrPC’ examination of evidence and
awarding compensation for alleged wrongful detention. Reliance was placed on
Kalyan Chandra Sarkar v. Rajesh Ranjan4, wherein it was observed that at the stage
of granting bail, a detailed examination of evidence and elaborate documentation of
the merits of a case need not be undertaken.

(ii) The officers of NCB acted in bonafide manner on credible intelligence and initial test results.
Section 69 of the NDPS Act offers protection to officers for acts done in good faith, thus prohibiting
prosecution as well as imposition of fine without proof of malafides.

(iii) It was further submitted that the respondent had been released from custody on 10th April,
2023, almost a year before the High Court passed the impugned order, rendering the bail
application infructuous. Consequently, the award of compensation was unwarranted.

AMICUS CURIAE:

(i) It was submitted that re-testing the second sample of the same alleged
contraband, which had already been tested

4 (2004) 7 SCC 528 negative in its previous sample sent for analysis, was impermissible under the
NDPS Act and the guidelines laid down in Thana Singh v. Central Bureau of Narcotics5. In the
present case, the concerned authority should have filed an application for closure before the Special
Judge upon receiving the first negative report from CRPL on 30th January, 2023. However, instead
of filing such an application, the authority proceeded with re-testing of second sample, which was
illegal and led to an unjustified extension of the respondent’s custody.

(ii) It was urged that the principle of awarding compensatory relief for the violation of fundamental
rights by public officials as recognized in Rudal Sah v. State of Bihar6; Nilabati Behera v. State of
Orissa7; and D.K. Basu v. State of West Bengal 8 – all adjudicated under Article 32 of the
Constitution of India, should be extended to bail proceedings under Section 439 CrPC.

(iii) Protection under Section 69 NDPS Act to the authorities is not absolute. The re-testing of
second sample was done due to malice, as no exceptional circumstances as per Thana Singh 5 (2013)
2 SCC 590 6 (1983) 4 SCC 141 7 (1993) 2 SCC 746 8 (1997) 1 SCC 416 (supra) were present to justify
the second examination by a laboratory.

4. The sole issue, which arises for consideration of this Court, is whether the contours of Section 439
CrPC permit the grant of compensation by the High Court to the appellant.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14770680/

3

Union Of India vs Man Singh Verma on 28 February, 2025

5. To answer this issue at hand, it is imperative for this Court to discuss the scope of jurisdiction of
the Court while exercising its power under Section 439 CrPC. Section 439 of CrPC reads as:

“439. Special powers of High Court or Court of Session regarding bail.—(1) A High
Court or Court of Session may direct,—

(a) that any person accused of an offence and in custody be released on bail, and if
the offence is of the nature specified in sub-section (3) of section 437, may impose
any condition which it considers necessary for the purposes mentioned in that
sub-section;

(b) that any condition imposed by a Magistrate when releasing any person on bail be
set aside or modified:

Provided that the High Court or the Court of Session shall, before granting bail to a
person who is accused of an offence which is triable exclusively by the Court of
Session or which, though not so triable, is punishable with 184 imprisonment for life,
give notice of the application for bail to the Public Prosecutor unless it is, for reasons
to be recorded in writing, of opinion that it is not practicable to give such notice.

Provided further that the High Court or the Court of Session shall, before granting bail to a person
who is accused of an offence triable under sub-section (3) of section 376 or section 376AB or section
376DA or section 376DB of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), give notice of the application for bail
to the Public Prosecutor within a period of fifteen days from the date of receipt of the notice of such
application.

(1A) The presence of the informant or any person authorised by him shall be obligatory at the time
of hearing of the application for bail to the person under sub- section (3) of section 376 or section
376AB or section 376DA or section DB of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).] (2) A High Court or
Court of Session may direct that any person who has been released on bail under this Chapter be
arrested and commit him to custody.”

6. It is a settled principle of law that the jurisdiction conferred upon a Court under Section 439 CrPC
is limited to grant or refusal of bail pending trial. In the following decisions, this Court has time and
again held that the sphere of consideration, when exercising power under this Section pertains only
to securing or restricting liberty of the person in question.

6.1. In RBI v. Cooperative Bank Deposit A/C HR. Sha9, this Court held that the High Court order,
directing the Cooperative Bank to distribute the money recovered 9 (2010) 15 SCC 85 from the
accused, to persons who had made deposits less than Rs.10,000/- as and when such recoveries are
made, passed in a Bail Application had far-reaching consequences and was beyond the scope of
Section 439 CrPC. The Court held as under :

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14770680/

4

Union Of India vs Man Singh Verma on 28 February, 2025

“6. We are of the opinion that the far-reaching consequences of the directions of the
High Court are in a way beyond the scope of an application for bail filed by an
accused under Section 439 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and the High Court, as
much as anyone else, must stay confined to the issues relevant to the matter before it.
It was thus not open to the High Court to pass orders which could affect the working
of banks all over the country. It has been pointed out by Mr Basava Prabhu S. Patil,
the learned Senior Counsel for the appellant that it is for this reason that Reserve
Bank of India had filed this appeal.” 6.2. This Court in Sangitaben Shaileshbhai
Datanta v.

State of Gujarat10, while examining a case wherein the High Court had ordered the accused as well
as the relatives of the victim to undergo scientific tests, viz., lie detector, brain mapping and
narco-analysis, held that, by ordering such tests the High Court has converted the adjudication of a
bail matter to that of a mini-trial and was in contravention of the first principles of criminal law 10
(2019) 14 SCC 522 jurisprudence and the statutory requirements. The Court held as under:

“6. Having heard the counsel for the parties, it is surprising to note the present
approach adopted by the High Court while considering the bail application. The High
Court ordering the abovementioned tests is not only in contravention to the first
principles of criminal law jurisprudence but also violates statutory requirements.
While adjudicating a bail application, Section 439 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 is the guiding principle wherein the court takes into consideration, inter alia, the
gravity of the crime, the character of the evidence, position and status of the accused
with reference to the victim and witnesses, the likelihood of the accused fleeing from
justice and repeating the offence, the possibility of his tampering with the witnesses
and obstructing the course of justice and such other grounds. Each criminal case
presents its own peculiar factual matrix, and therefore, certain grounds peculiar to a
particular case may have to be taken into account by the court. However, the court
has to only opine as to whether there is prima facie case against the accused. The
court must not undertake meticulous examination of the evidence collected by the
police, or rather order specific tests as done in the present case.

7. In the instant case, by ordering the abovementioned tests and venturing into the
reports of the same with meticulous details, the High Court has converted the
adjudication of a bail matter to that of a mini trial indeed. This assumption of
function of a trial court by the High Court is deprecated.” 6.3. In State v. M.
Murugesan11, this Court again reiterated that the Court’s jurisdiction is limited to
grant or

11 (2020) 15 SCC 251 refusal to grant bail, pending trial. In this case, the High Court, while taking a
decision on bail application, had retained the file and directed the State to form a committee and
seek its recommendations on the reformation and rehabilitation of convict/accused persons. The
Court held that while ordering such directions the High Court has committed grave illegality and
held that the jurisdiction under Section 439 CrPC ends when the bail application is finally decided.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14770680/

5

The Court held as under :-

Union Of India vs Man Singh Verma on 28 February, 2025

“11. We find that the learned Single Judge [M. Murugesan v. State, 2019 SCC OnLine
Mad 12414] has collated data from the State and made it part of the order after the
decision [M. Murugesan v. State, Criminal Original Petition No. 1618 of 2019, order
dated 18-2-2019 (Mad)] of the bail application, as if the Court had the inherent
jurisdiction to pass any order under the guise of improving the criminal justice
system in the State. The jurisdiction of the court under Section 439 of the Code is
limited to grant or not to grant bail pending trial. Even though the object of the
Hon'ble Judge was laudable but the jurisdiction exercised was clearly erroneous. The
effort made by the Hon'ble Judge may be academically proper to be presented at an
appropriate forum but such directions could not be issued under the colour of office
of the court.”

7. Time and again, the act of Courts overstepping the bounds of jurisdiction, has
clearly been frowned upon. The instant case is another such example. It is undisputed
that the application for bail filed before the High Court had become infructuous since
the District Court had already released the respondent herein.

The straightforward course of action that ought to have been adopted, therefore, was that the bail
application would have been dismissed as such. No occasion arose for the Court to pass an order
delving into the aspects of impermissibility of re- testing and/or wrongful confinement. Not only
was the same outside the bounds, as discussed above, but it is erroneous on a further count that
since the application was infructuous, the exercise of jurisdiction was entirely unjustified and
contrary to law.

8. Regarding the submission pertaining to Section 69 of the NDPS Act, it is submitted that the
actions of the authorities are protected from prosecution, in the absence of malafide intention. We
refrain from making any comment on this issue for reasons that shall come to light later in this
judgment.

9. The learned Amicus Curiae in his submissions has referred to judgments of this Court in Rudal
Sah (supra), D.K. Basu (supra) and Nilabati Behera (supra). As has already been noticed, these
judgments were rendered by this Court under Article 32 jurisdiction, which is a remedy available to
any person whose fundamental rights have been violated. So, whereas the Court has indeed held
permissibility of grant of compensation, it has so done in the context of violation of fundamental
rights. The undue restriction of liberty, i.e., without the backing of procedures established by law is
unquestionably an affront to a person’s rights but the avenues to seek recourse of law in connection
therewith are limited to remedies as per law. However, none was availed in the present facts.

10. As such, we accept the submission of the Union of India that grant of compensation to the tune
of Rs.5,00,000/- was without the authority of law. The order of the High Court, therefore, to this
extent has to be set aside. Ordered accordingly. Appeal is allowed partly. The observations made
hereinabove should not be taken to preclude any remedy that may be available to the respondent as

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14770680/

6

Union Of India vs Man Singh Verma on 28 February, 2025

per law. Hence, our observations are limited only to the correctness of the grant of compensation in
the adjudication of a bail application.

11. We place on record our appreciation for the able assistance rendered by Mr. Pijush K. Roy,
learned Senior Counsel, Amicus Curiae.

Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed of.

…………………………J. (SANJAY KAROL) …………………………J. (MANMOHAN) New Delhi;

February 28, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14770680/

7

