V. Ravikumar vs S. Kumar on 3 March, 2025

V. Ravikumar vs S. Kumar on 3 March, 2025

Author: Sudhanshu Dhulia

Bench: Sudhanshu Dhulia

2025 INSC 343

                                                              NON-REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. ________ OF 2025

                            (@SPECIAL LEAVE PETETION (CIVIL) NO. 9472 OF 2023)

                            V. RAVIKUMAR                            …Appellant
                                                   -Versus-
                            S. KUMAR                              …Respondent

                                                  ORDER

Leave granted.

2. The rejection of a plaint on the ground of limitation was reversed by the High Court. The
defendant in the suit is the appellant herein who assails the decision of the learned Single Judge
reckoning limitation from the cancellation of a power of attorney; which power of attorney itself was
babita pandey Date: 2025.03.07 18:45:37 IST Reason:

executed long back, pursuant to which sale deeds were also executed.

3. The suit was instituted by the plaintiff for declaration and injunction; declaration, that the various
sale deeds entered into and executed on the strength of the power of attorney are null and void and
injunction, to restrain the defendant permanently from interfering with the peaceful possession and
enjoyment of the suit properties. The first defendant, the power holder filed an application under
Order VII Rule 11 read with Sections 10, 11 and 150 of the C.P.C. (Civil Procedure Code) clearly
alleging that the suit was barred by limitation. The Trial Court mindful of the caution in considering
an application under Order VII Rule 11, that normally such an application would not require an
elaborate examination of the documents produced; which has to be done at the time of trial, all the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4479670/

1

same found that the clear facts coming out even from the averments would indicate that the suit is
barred by limitation.

V. Ravikumar vs S. Kumar on 3 March, 2025

4. The general power of attorney executed by the plaintiff in the name of the first respondent was
dated 15.10.2004 and the sale deeds sought to be declared null and void are of the years 2004-06
and 2009. The plaintiff’s contention itself was that he was made aware of the sale deeds only on
21.09.2015; within three years of which the suit was filed on 20.09.2018. The Trial Court found that
attached to the general power of attorney; filed as the 26th document, along with the plaint, was a
patta obtained on 10.01.2015 which clearly indicated conveyance to the various defendants and
hence as on 10.01.2015 itself, the plaintiff was in the know of the transactions made on the strength
of the power of attorney. It was found that the suit was clearly barred by limitation, even from the
date of knowledge and the plaint was rejected.

5. In appeal, the High Court found that the power of attorney stood cancelled only on 22.09.2015
and the limitation has to commence from the date of such cancellation. The High Court directed the
suit to be restored to the files of the Trial Court for proceeding on merits in accordance with law.

6. Learned Counsel, Ms. Haripriya Padmanabhan, appearing for the appellant herein contended
that limitation cannot commence from the date of cancellation of the power of attorney. Admittedly
there was a power of attorney executed on the strength of which the appellant had effected
conveyances which cannot be unsettled after more than a decade.

7. Learned Senior Counsel appearing for the respondent-plaintiff would on the other hand submit
that the transactions were collusive, insofar as the power holder had transferred the properties to
his own wife and having got back the conveyance in his name, clearly a fraud was played on the
plaintiff and the judgment of the High Court has to be upheld.

8. As is clear from the records, the respondent-plaintiff does not at all dispute the execution of the
general power of attorney, which was also executed as far back as in the year 2004. There were
conveyances made by the power holder clearly on the strength of the power conferred on him. The
attempt of the plaintiff is to unsettle settled matters especially on the plea that the power of attorney
granted in the year 2004 was cancelled in the year 2015. We are clear in our minds that the
cancellation does not affect the prior conveyances made which are clearly on the strength of the
power conferred on the appellant. There is no contention raised as to the power of attorney having
not conferred the power to enter into conveyances or that such power of attorney was executed by
reason of a fraud or coercion employed on the executant. The power holder having exercised the
authority conferred; to convey the properties in the name of the purchasers, the cancellation of the
power of attorney will have no effect on the conveyances carried out under the valid power
conferred. Nor would it confer the person who executed the power of attorney any cause of action,
by virtue of a cancellation of the power conferred by a subsequent document, to challenge the valid
exercise of the power when it existed.

9. We are definitely of the opinion that the High Court had erroneously treated the cancellation as
the point of commencement of limitation. We do not place any reliance on the knowledge attributed

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4479670/

2

V. Ravikumar vs S. Kumar on 3 March, 2025

to the plaintiff as on 10.01.2015 by the Trial Court in its order; which is argued by the respondent to
be without any basis. The power of attorney has been executed in 2004 and the conveyances having
been made in the years between 2004-09, there cannot be any cause of action ferreted out on the
basis of the cancellation of the power of attorney, after more than 11 years. We set aside the
impugned order of the High Court and affirm the rejection of the plaint as ordered by the Trial
Court.

10. The appeal stands allowed.

11. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.

……………………..……………, J.

[SUDHANSHU DHULIA] ……………………..……………, J.

[K. VINOD CHANDRAN] NEW DELHI;

MARCH 03, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4479670/

3

