Vijay Prabhu vs S.T. Lajapathie on 8 January, 2025

Vijay Prabhu vs S.T. Lajapathie on 8 January, 2025

                                                             1

2025 INSC 52
                                                                                        REPORTABLE

                                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                      EXTRAORDINARY APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                             Petition for Special Leave to Appeal (C)           No.25246/2023

        VIJAY PRABHU                                                                Petitioner(s)

                                                         VERSUS

        S.T. LAJAPATHIE & ORS.                                                      Respondent(s)

                                                       O R D E R

1. We have heard Mr. S. Nagamuthu, the learned Senior counsel appearing for the petitioner
(original plaintiff) and Mr. Balaji Srinivasan, the learned counsel appearing for the respondents
(original defendants).

2. This petition arises from the judgment and order passed by the High Court of Judicature at
Madras dated 24.03.2023 in Appeal Suit No. 211 of 2013 by which the High Court dismissed the
appeal and thereby affirmed the judgment and decree passed by the District Judge of Nilgiris at
Udhagamandalam dated 18.02.2010 in Original Suit No. 45 of 2008. It appears from the materials
on record that the petitioner herein (original plaintiff) instituted Original Suit No. 45 of 2008
seeking specific performance of the agreement dated 07.11.2005 and for delivery of possession of
the suit property. In the alternative, he prayed for Rs. 60,00,000/- with interest at 12 per cent per
annum towards the damages from the date of filing of the suit.

3. The Trial Court rejected the prayer for specific performance and directed that the amount of Rs.
20,00,000/- paid by the plaintiff to the defendants towards the earnest money be refunded with
interest at 12 per cent per annum.

4. The Trial Court framed the following issues:

“1. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the relief of specific performance of sale
agreement dated 07.11.2005 with modifications as prayed by him?

2. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to possession of the suit property described in the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63156376/

1

plaint schedule excluding the portion in the possession of the tenants?

Vijay Prabhu vs S.T. Lajapathie on 8 January, 2025

3. In the alternative, whether the plaintiff is entitled to refund of the advance amount
of Rs.20,00,000/- and for damages to a tune of Rs.40,00,000/- from the
defendants?

4. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to claim interest at the rate of 12% p.a. on the
above amounts? (end of the 6th page in original)

5. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to charge over the suit property for the above
amounts as claimed by him?

6. To what other reliefs the plaintiff is entitled?”

5. The Trial Court recorded a finding that the plaintiff was not ready and willing to perform his part
of the contract. Besides, the plaintiff had failed to plead and prove that he has suffered damages.

6. The High Court while deciding the appeals framed the following points for its determination:

“(1) Whether the plaintiff was ready and willing to perform his part of the agreement
of sale dated

07.11.2005?

(2) Whether the plaintiff can seek to invoke Sec.12 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963?

(3) Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the discretionary and equitable relief of specific performance?

(4) Whether the plaintiff, in the event of not being entitled to the relief of specific performance,
would be alternatively entitled to the relief of damages and refund of advance to the tune
Rs.40,00,000/- and Rs.20,00,000/- respectively?”

7. The High Court in Para 35 while discussing Section 12 of the Specific Relief Act (for short, “the
Act”) has observed as under:-

“35. Thus, when the plaintiff has chosen to waive only one of the obligations that
remained unfulfilled at the end of the defendants, it is not open to the plaintiff to seek
shelter U/s.12 and claim specific performance of the part of the agreement of sale in
his favour. Interestingly, it is also seen that apart from seeking relief of specific
performance, the plaintiff has also made a claim for damages besides refund of
advance. Thus, the plaintiff does not qualify to invoke clause

(ii) of Sub-Section (3) to Sec.12, when admittedly, he has not relinquished “all claims”
and when he approaches the Court seeking damages. This Court also holds that

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63156376/

2

Vijay Prabhu vs S.T. Lajapathie on 8 January, 2025

Sec.12(3) is only a discretionary relief, which can be granted to the plaintiff,
depending on peculiar facts and circumstances of the case. In the opinion of this
Court, Sec.12(3) cannot be invoked where the terms of the contract are not capable of
being segregated. In the instant case, we do not find that the agreement of sale can be
compartmentalised in order to grant specific performance of only a part of the
agreement of sale. It is also seen that A.S.Nos.211 and 355 of 2013 mandate of Sec.12
is very clear in so far as payment of the whole of the consideration.

Admittedly, in the instant case, the plaintiff has paid only a sum of Rs.20,00,000/- and a sum of
Rs.64,00,000/- was still outstanding. Unless the plaintiff's pay or has paid the sum of
Rs.64,00,000/- he was not even justified in invoking the part performance of the agreement of sale
by resorting to Sec.12 of the Act.”

8. The learned Senior counsel appearing for the petitioner (plaintiff) reiterated that his client is
entitled to the benefit of the provisions of Section 12(3) of the Specific Relief Act (for short, “the
Act”) and the High Court has not appreciated this aspect of the matter in its true perspective.

9. Section 12 of the Act:

“12. Specific performance of part of contract.—(1) Except as otherwise hereinafter
provided in this section, the court shall not direct the specific performance of a part
of a contract.

(2) Where a party to a contract is unable to perform the whole of his part of it, but the
part which must be left unperformed by only a small proportion to the whole in value
and admits of compensation in money, the court may, at the suit of either party,
direct the specific performance of so much of the contract as can be performed, and
award compensation in money for the deficiency.

(3) Where a party to a contract is unable to perform the whole of his part of it, and
the part which must be left unperformed either—

(a) forms a considerable part of the whole, though admitting of compensation in
money; or

(b) does not admit of compensation in money;

he is not entitled to obtain a decree for specific performance; but the court may, at the suit of other
party, direct the party in default to perform specifically so much of his part of the contract as he can
perform, if the other party—

(i) in a case falling under clause (a), pays or has paid the agreed consideration for the whole of the
contract reduced by the consideration for the part which must be left unperformed and in a case
falling under clause (b), pays or has paid the consideration for the whole of the contract without any

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63156376/

3

abatement; and

Vijay Prabhu vs S.T. Lajapathie on 8 January, 2025

(ii) in either case, relinquishes all claims to the performance of the remaining part of the contract
and all right to compensation, either for the deficiency or for the loss or damage sustained by him
through the default of the defendant.

(4) When a part of a contract which, taken by itself, can and ought to be specifically performed,
stands on a separate and independent footing from another part of the same contract which cannot
or ought not to be specifically performed, the court may direct specific performance of the former
part.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, a party to a contract shall be deemed to be unable to
perform the whole of his part of it if a portion of its subject-matter existing at the date of the
contract has ceased to exist at the time of its performance.”

10. A bare perusal of the aforesaid provision contained in Section 12 of the Act makes it clear that it
is not open to the High Court to direct specific performance of a part of contract except otherwise
provided in the section in absence of any of the exigencies available under the provisions of
sub-sections (2), (3) and (4) of Section 12 so as to decree the suit.

11. The words ‘unable to perform’ suggest that the sub-section is applicable only when the party
cannot for any reason perform the whole of what he has promised. The inability may arise by any
cause whatsoever including any statutory limitations. The inability to perform may arise by—

(i) deficiency in quantity of the subject-matter, or

(ii) variance in quality, or

(iii) defect in title; or

(iv) some legal prohibition; or

(v) other causes.

12. The expression ‘considerable part’ implies that the part which will be left unperformed is either
large as regards quantity or as regards quality. In other words, it is material and not insignificant, so
that a reasonable objection can be taken by the promisee to accept performance. The phrase ‘does
not admit of compensation’ implies that there is no data for ascertaining a fair and reasonable
amount as the money value of the difference between what can be performed and the express
subject-matter of the contract. The amount need not be mathematically accurate. If a reasonable
estimate of the amount as the money value can be made, it will not be a case where the
compensation is unascertainable.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63156376/

4

Vijay Prabhu vs S.T. Lajapathie on 8 January, 2025

13. The power to grant partial relief, from the very language of Section 12(3) of the Act is
discretionary with the court to be exercised keeping in view the facts and circumstances of each case
and the rights and interests of the parties involved. Section 12(3) of the Act can be invoked only
where the terms of contract permit segregation of rights and interests of parties in the property.

14. In view of the specific finding recorded by the courts below that the plaintiff was not ready and
willing to perform his part of the contract and the plaintiff being in default he could not be said to be
entitled to invoke Section 12(3) of the Act also.

15. In the aforesaid context, we may refer to a decision of this Court in Jaswinder Kaur (Now
Deceased) through her Legal Representatives and Others v. Gurmeet Singh and Others reported in
(2017) 12 SCC 810, wherein this Court observed in paras 19, 20 and 21 respectively as under:

“19. In Abdul Haq v. Mohd. Yehia Khan reported in AIR 1924 Pat 81, the Court
observed that the Court will not as a general rule compel specific performance of a
contract unless it can execute the whole contract. It is not a case where the entire
contract is not capable of performance. Section 12 encompasses provisions in respect
of a claim for specific performance of part of a contract. Sections 14 and 17 of the old
Act have been amalgamated with modifications and the explanation based on Section
13 of the repealed Act together, the law is stated with clarity under Section 12 of the
Act.

20. Section 12(1) of the Act provides that specific performance can be granted on part
of a contract only in the circumstances mentioned in the section.

Section 12(2) of the Act deals with breach the contract if a party is unable to perform the whole of its
part and such part bears a small proportion to the whole in value and admits compensation in
money. The expression “unable to perform” in Section 12(2) of the Act for instance would mean that
a part of the property destroyed after contract or act of God or an act by which it would cease to
exist. In such a case party to a contract shall be deemed to be unable to perform the whole or its part
of the contract. Such a person would come within the words “party in default”. The inability to
perform may arise by deficiency in quantity of subject-matter or deficiencies or some legal
prohibition or such other causes. None of such causes is present in the instant case.

21. Section 12 of the Act does not apply where the inability to perform specific performance on part
of contract arises because of the plaintiff's own conduct as held in Abdul Rahim v. Maidhar Gazi
reported in AIR 1928 Cal 584.

In Graham v. Krishna Chunder Dey reported in AIR 1925 PC 45, it has been laid down that the
Explanation in the section exhaust all the circumstances in which part-performance can be granted.
Section 12(2) of the Act deals with the situation where a party is unable to perform and such part is
only a small proportion in value and capable of compensation in form of money. It was not a case
covered in Section 12(2) of the Act at all. Under Section 12(3) of the Act party in default is entitled to
specific performance on payment of whole consideration or for the part left unperformed but here in

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63156376/

5

Vijay Prabhu vs S.T. Lajapathie on 8 January, 2025

the instant case the plaintiff being in default could not be said to be entitled to invoke Section 12(3)
of the Act also.”

16. There is one another issue, we must look into and clarify. In para 29, the High Court has
observed as under:

“29. Learned Senior counsel for the plaintiff relied on Sec.12 of the Act and
vehemently contended that the plaintiff would be entitled to a decree when the
plaintiff was willing to relinquish his claims to the performance by the defendants, of
the remaining part of the agreement of sale. This Court at the very outset notices that
such a plea was never raised before the Trial Court and no grounds have also been
raised in the memorandum of First Appeal in this regard. However, this Court is
inclined to deal with the elaborate submissions made by the learned Senior counsel
for the plaintiff touching Sec.12 of the Act.” (Emphasis supplied)

17. Thus, the High Court expressed doubt whether the plea as regards Section 12 of the Act if not
raised before the Trial Court could have been raised for the first time before the High Court in first
appeal.

18. In the aforesaid context, we may only say that the relinquishment of claim to further
performance of the remaining part of the contract and all rights to compensation can be made at any
stage of litigation. This was held in Kalyanpur Lime Works v. State of Bihar reported in AIR 1954 SC
165. This Court referred with approval to a Division Bench decision of the Lahore High Court in
Waryam Singh v. Gopi Chand, (AIR 1930 Lah 34).

19. In the case of Kalyanpur Lime Works (supra) the plaintiff had sued the State of Bihar for specific
performance of a contract for lease. It was found that an earlier lease in favour of another company
was in force and could not be forfeited and, therefore, the Government was not in a position to grant
lease of the property to the Lime company. The Lime Company made an application at the appellate
stage claiming benefit of the provisions of old Section 15 and prayed for grant of lease for a period of
five years which remained after the expiry of the period of lease of the other company. This Court
observed:

“Relinquishment of the claim to further performance can be made at any stage of the
litigation.” Thus, Waryam Singh's case was referred to with approval. However, the
benefit of old Section 15 was not allowed on other considerations.

20. In Waryam Singh's case the defendant Nos. 1 and 2 respectively had agreed to sell 200 Kanals of
specified land, but later on it was found that they were owners of only two-third of that land. In the
Trial Court the plaintiff insisted on specific performance of the whole contract and prayed that the
defendants be asked to make good the deficiency from the other land belonging to them. At the time
of the arguments the plaintiff had moved an application claiming benefit of the old Section 15 in case
it was held that the defendants were incompetent to sell the whole of the land. The Division Bench
held:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63156376/

6

Vijay Prabhu vs S.T. Lajapathie on 8 January, 2025

“It is open to the plaintiff to relinquish his claim to any part of the property in suit on
the conditions specified in Section 15 at any time before the suit is finally decided by
the Court of appeal.”

21. Thus, the position of law is that relinquishment could be made at any stage of the litigation
including the appellate stage. The claim of the plaintiff appellant for grant of benefit under Section
12(3) of the Act was, therefore, rightly not rejected by the High Court on the simple ground that it
was not made at the trial stage and had been made for the first time at the appellate stage. In our
view the claim can also not be rejected on the short ground that it was not incorporated in the plaint
or was not set forth in writing before the Trial Court. [See: Ram Niwas v. Smt. Omkari and another :
AIR 1983 All 310]

22. We are of the view that no error not to speak of any error of law could be said to have been
committed by the High Court in passing the impugned order.

23. In such circumstances, referred to above, the Special Leave Petition fails and is hereby
dismissed.

24. The amount of Rs.20,00,000/- which came to be deposited by the defendants in the Trial Court
in the form of refund of the earnest money to the original plaintiff must have been invested by the
Court concerned with any bank by way of fixed deposit receipt, the said amount shall be refunded to
the petitioner – herein (original plaintiff) within a period of four weeks from today with the
accumulated interest as awarded by the Court below.

25. Pending applications, if any, also stand disposed of.

… … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … J .   ( J . B .   P A R D I W A L A )
………………………………………………………J. (R. MAHADEVAN) New Delhi.

8th January, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63156376/

7

