Vinod Kumar vs State(Govt. Of Nct Of Delhi) on 13 February, 2025

Vinod Kumar vs State(Govt. Of Nct Of Delhi) on 13 February,
2025

Author: Abhay S. Oka

Bench: Abhay S Oka

2025 INSC 209

                                                                      Non-Reportable
                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2482 OF 2014

                            Vinod Kumar                                 … Appellant

                                                      versus

                            State (Govt. of NCT of Delhi)             ... Respondent

                                              J U D G M E N T

ABHAY S. OKA, J.

FACTUAL ASPECTS

1. The appellant has been convicted for the offence punishable under Section 302 of the Indian
Penal Code, 1860 (for short, ‘the IPC’) and has been sentenced to undergo imprisonment for life and
pay a fine of Rs.2000/-. In default of payment of the fine of Rs.2000/-, he has been sentenced to
undergo rigorous imprisonment for one year. The appellant's conviction was rendered by the
Sessions Court (Court of Additional Sessions Judge, Shahdara, High Court of Delhi.

KAVITA PAHUJA Date: 2025.02.13 17:26:05 IST Reason:

2. The name of the deceased is Dharminder. The appellant was a neighbour of the deceased. On 12th
July 1995, at about noon, the appellant came to the residence of the deceased and called upon him
to accompany him. PW-3 (mother of the deceased) enquired with the appellant where they were
going. The appellant replied that they would return soon, and they went together by holding each
other’s hands. At that time, PW-1 (father of the deceased) was in the house, but he was sleeping as

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187061112/

1

Vinod Kumar vs State(Govt. Of Nct Of Delhi) on 13 February, 2025

he had done night duty as a security guard. As the deceased did not return till 1 pm, PW-3 went to
the appellant's house to enquire about the whereabouts of the deceased. At that time, the appellant
told PW-3 that the accused had gone to watch a movie. PW-3 had to wait for the whole night. As the
deceased did not turn up, on 13th July 1995 at 7 am, PW- 3 again visited the appellant's house to
enquire. The appellant’s mother told PW-3 that the appellant had gone out for work and he would
be back by 9 pm. The parents of the deceased searched for the deceased the whole day. They went to
the appellant’s house again at 8 pm. When they met the appellant, they found that the appellant
gave inconsistent answers. Initially, the appellant stated that the deceased had gone to purchase
manjha (a thread used for flying kites). Thereafter, he stated that he had left the deceased on the
road. Lastly, the appellant stated that he had left the deceased at his residence. As the answers given
by the appellant were not satisfactory, the parents of the deceased threatened the appellant to file a
police complaint. Ultimately, at 10 pm, PW-1 went to the Police Station and lodged a missing report.
After lodging the missing report, when the Police, accompanied by the parents of the deceased, went
to the house of the appellant, they found that the appellant and his father had absconded. On 14th
July 1995 at about 8 am, PW-5, who was the cousin of the deceased, told PW-1 that the dead body of
the deceased was lying in a bathroom on the terrace of a particular building. PW-1 visited the spot
and identified the body of the deceased. He found that a rope was tied to the neck of the deceased,
and the hands were tied on the back side. A First Information Report was registered for the
commission of an offence punishable under Section 302 of the IPC. The case rests on circumstantial
evidence.

SUBMISSIONS

3. The learned counsel appearing for the appellant has taken us through the evidence of the material
prosecution witnesses. He submitted that the evidence of PW-3 (mother of the deceased) is full of
inconsistencies, improvements, omissions and contradictions. He pointed out the omissions from
the cross-examination of PW-3. He submitted that the omissions are so vital that it is very difficult
to believe the testimony of PW-3. He pointed out that PW-3 was declared hostile, and the Public
Prosecutor was permitted to cross-examine her on certain aspects. He submitted that the evidence
of PW-3 ought not to have been believed. He pointed out that though in the examination-in-chief,
PW-1 and PW-3 stated that they repeatedly went to the house of the appellant to enquire about the
whereabouts of the deceased, these statements in the examination-in-chief are omissions. He
submitted that the vital circumstance of the last seen together had not been established beyond a
reasonable doubt. He submitted that even the allegation that the appellant gave evasive replies
about the whereabouts of the deceased to PW-1 and PW-3 is not established. He would, therefore,
submit that another circumstance of the appellant giving evasive replies is also not established. He
would, therefore, submit that the appellant's conviction cannot be sustained.

4. The learned counsel appearing for the respondent- NCT of Delhi submitted that the state of mind
of PW-1 and PW-3 must be considered while they deposed before the Court as they had lost their
son. She submitted that the testimony of PW-3, as regards the appellant and the deceased being last
seen together, is not shaken in the cross-examination. Even the circumstance of the appellant giving
evasive replies about the whereabouts of the deceased has been duly proved. He submitted that the
fact that the appellant absconded from his residence after registration of the FIR and recovery of

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187061112/

2

Vinod Kumar vs State(Govt. Of Nct Of Delhi) on 13 February, 2025

bloodstained clothes was made at his instance established the appellant's guilt. He would, therefore,
submit that no interference is called for with the impugned judgments.

CONSIDERATION

5. The prosecution’s case is based on circumstantial evidence. We find from paragraph 35 of the
impugned judgment of the High Court that the following circumstances, forming a part of the chain
of circumstances, were held to be proved. The said circumstances are as follows:

“35. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..

a. That PW-3, mother of the deceased was a last seen evidence of the appellant taking
the deceased along with him from his residence on 12th July 1995 at 12 noon.

b. The testimonies of PW-1 and PW- 3 that they repeatedly went to the residence of
the appellant so as to know the whereabouts of their son but the appellant gave
evasive replies to misguide them.

c. The proximity of time of the death of the deceased with the time of the deceased leaving his
residence.

d. The conduct of the appellant in absconding from his residence after he was told that the Police
Report would be lodged against him for not disclosing the whereabouts of the deceased.

e. The recovery of blood stained clothes of the appellant at the instance of the appellant.

f. The appellant had suffered injuries on his own person as the MLC proved on record as Ex.PW-

22/A, which remained unexplained by the appellant forming an additional link in the chain of
circumstantial evidence to prove his guilt.”

6. The evidence of PW-1 on the last seen together theory cannot be believed as he stated that he was
sleeping when allegedly the appellant took the deceased with him. His statement that PW-3 had
visited the appellant’s house at 1 pm is hearsay evidence as he did not accompany his wife.
Thereafter, he deposed that:

a) At about 8 pm, he, along with PW-3, visited the house of the appellant to enquire
about the whereabouts of the deceased. At that time, the appellant was not present;

b) On 13th July 1995, at about 7 am or 7:30 am, he and PW-3 went to the appellant's
house to enquire about the deceased's whereabouts. At that time, the parents of the
appellant told them that the appellant had gone to attend his duty and would be back
by 9 pm;

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187061112/

3

Vinod Kumar vs State(Govt. Of Nct Of Delhi) on 13 February, 2025

c) On the evening of 13th July 1995, he and PW-3 again visited the appellant's house
at about 6 pm. At that time, the appellant told them that he had left the deceased
near their house, and

d) On the same day, at about 8 pm or 9 pm, he, along with the Police, went to the
appellant's house when it was found that the appellant and his father had run away
from their house.

7. What is stated by PW-1 in terms of clause (a) above is an omission. He did not depose that the
appellant gave evasive answers when he visited his house.

8. Now, we come to the deposition of PW-3 (mother of the deceased). The following are the salient
features of her evidence:

a. In the cross-examination, she stated that she had told the Police in her statement
that the appellant pulled the deceased by catching his hand while taking the deceased
with him. However, she accepted that no such statement was recorded by the Police;

b. In the examination-in-chief, she came out with a different version which indicates
that the deceased voluntarily accompanied the appellant;

c. At 1 pm on 12th July 1995, she went to the appellant's house to enquire why the
deceased had not come. This statement is an omission;

d. She alone went to enquire about the deceased at 6 pm to the house of the appellant
when the appellant’s mother told her that the appellant would be back by 9 pm. Even
this statement is an omission;

e. On the next day, at about 9 am, she and her husband (PW-1) went to the house of
the appellant to enquire about the deceased. She was informed by the appellant’s
mother that the appellant was on duty and would return at 9 pm. Even this statement
is an omission;

f. She stated that at 9 am when she and her husband enquired with the appellant, he
stated that the deceased had gone to fetch manjha. He also stated that he had left the
deceased on the road. Even these statements are omissions. As the statement of
PW-3 that she visited the appellant's residence at 9 am on 13th July 1995 is an
omission, her version that the appellant gave evasive replies must be treated as an
omission.

9. When PW-3 was asked a question for what reasons the appellant may have killed her son, she
answered that there was no enmity between the deceased and the appellant, but she suspected that
the appellant had killed her son as the appellant had taken her son with him. Therefore, even
according to the case of the PW-3, the motive for the commission of the offence was absent. This is

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187061112/

4

very relevant as the case is based on circumstantial evidence.

Vinod Kumar vs State(Govt. Of Nct Of Delhi) on 13 February, 2025

10. There are significant improvements and omissions in the evidence of PW-3. The omissions are
so relevant that they become contradictions in view of the Explanation to Section 162 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973. Thus, it is very difficult to accept the testimony of PW-3 as reliable. PW-1
is not a witness to the theory of last seen together. Therefore, it is not possible to hold that the
theory of last seen together was proved by the prosecution beyond a reasonable doubt. Even the
finding of the High Court that the appellant gave evasive replies to misguide the parents of the
deceased cannot be sustained. Therefore, two out of five circumstances held as established were not
established beyond a reasonable doubt. When the prosecution case is based on circumstantial
evidence, the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should be fully
established. There must be a chain of circumstances so complete as not to leave any ground for any
conclusion inconsistent with the innocence of the accused. In this case, two significant
circumstances forming the chain have not been established.

11. Before we part with the judgment, we must refer to a peculiar practice followed by the Trial
Court. PW-1 and PW-3 were confronted in the cross-examination with their statements recorded
under Section 161 of the CrPC. In the depositions, it is mentioned that the attention of the witness
was invited to a particular portion of the prior statement. After recording the answer of the witness,
the portion of the prior statement used to contradict the witness has been reproduced in brackets.
The law is well settled. The portion of the prior statement shown to the witness for contradicting the
witness must be proved through the investigating officer. Unless the said portion of the prior
statement used for contradiction is duly proved, it cannot be reproduced in the deposition of the
witnesses. The correct procedure is that the Trial Judge should mark the portions of the prior
statements used for contradicting the witness. The said portions can be put in bracket and marked
as AA, BB, etc. The marked portions cannot form a part of the deposition unless the same are
proved.

12. For the reasons recorded above, the conviction and sentence of the appellant cannot be
sustained. Accordingly, the impugned judgments are quashed and set aside, and the appellant is
acquitted of the offences alleged against him. The Appeal is accordingly allowed. Bail bonds
furnished by the appellant stand cancelled.

……………………….J. (Abhay S Oka) ……………………….J. (Ujjal Bhuyan) New Delhi;

February 13, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187061112/

5

