Vinod @ Nasmulla vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 14 February, 2025

Vinod @ Nasmulla vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 14 February,
2025

Author: Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha

Bench: Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha

2025 INSC 220

                                                                                    REPORTABLE

                                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                             CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                              CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1931 OF 2019

                                    VINOD @ NASMULLA                                  …APPELLANT

                                                                   VERSUS

                                    THE STATE OF CHHATTISGARH                        …RESPONDENT

                                                             JUDGMENT

MANOJ MISRA, J.

1. This appeal impugns the judgment and order of the High Court of Chhattisgarh, Bilaspur1 dated
03.01.2018 passed in Criminal Appeal No.3014 of 1999 whereby the appeal of the appellant against
the judgment and order of the Sessions Judge, (Surgujha) Ambikapur (then in Madhya Pradesh)
dated 26.10.1999, passed in Sessions Trial No.292 of KAPIL TANDON Date: 2025.02.14 18:37:17
IST Reason:

“The High Court” 1994, has been dismissed and conviction of the appellant under
Section 395 read with Section 397 of the Indian Penal Code, 18602 and Section 25 of
the Arms Act, 19593 has been upheld.

2. The appellant Vinod @ Nasmulla and Mohd.

Kalam Ansari were jointly tried by the Court of Session, (Surguja), Ambikapur (now in the State of
Chhattisgarh). Mohd. Kalam Ansari was acquitted whereas the appellant was convicted under

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/117886838/

1

Vinod @ Nasmulla vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 14 February, 2025

Section 395 read with Section 397 of the IPC and Section 25 (1)(b) of the Arms Act. Under Section
395 read with Section 397 of the IPC he was sentenced to seven years rigorous imprisonment along
with fine of Rs.2,000/-, coupled with a default sentence of eight months; and for the offence
punishable under Section 25(1) (b) (a) of the Arms Act, he was sentenced to one and a half years of
rigorous imprisonment along with fine of Rs.500/-, coupled with a default sentence of three
months. All sentences were to run concurrently.

Prosecution Case

3. The prosecution case in brief is that while Bus bearing registration No. U.P. 42-A 5406 of Adarsh
“IPC” Arms Act Transport Bus Service was going to Raipur in the night of 28.09.1993, at about 11:30
p.m., one person, who was sitting behind the driver, put a country-made pistol on the temple of the
driver and ordered him to stop the bus. When the bus stopped four persons already travelling in the
bus and four other persons, who boarded the bus from where it had stopped, inter alia, started
beating the passengers and robbed them of their belongings. A shot was also fired at one of the
passengers who sustained injuries. The culprits thereafter escaped with looted articles. The driver
took the bus to the Police Station, Ambikapur where First Information Report (FIR) was lodged at
about 12:20 a.m. on 29.09.1993. Whereafter the police swung into action, barricades were put to
ensure that culprits do not escape and, ultimately, it is claimed, in the night of 29.09.1993 itself,
Khemraj Singh (PW-5) arrested the appellant, at about 3:00 a.m., carrying a country- made pistol,
which had five cartridges, two live and three empty. On 30.09.1993, the appellant was put to test
identification parade (for short TIP) wherein he was identified by the bus driver Ram Sajeevan
Sharma (not examined) and Khalasi Ainul Khan (not examined). The other person, who was also
there in the bus, namely, Kamal Singh (the Conductor of the bus), though was asked to identify the
accused, failed to identify him. Based on the alleged confessional statement made during
investigation, Mohd. Kalam Ansari was arrested and put to trial along with the appellant.

Prosecution Evidence

4. Though a number of witnesses were examined by the prosecution but eye witnesses (i.e.,
passengers in the Bus) examined were only three, namely, PW-6, PW-9 and PW-12. However, none
of them had participated in the TIP of the appellant. PW-6, PW-9 and PW-12 proved commission of
dacoity whereas PW-9 identified the appellant in Court, during the course of the trial, as the one,
amongst those dacoits, who had put the gun on the temple of the driver. PW- 5 was witness of
appellant’s arrest and recovery of country-made pistol. PW-7 (i.e., the Naib Tehsildar), who
executed the TIP of the appellant, proved the TIP and PW-8 (i.e., the Additional Tehsildar) proved
the TIP of Mohd. Kalam Ansari.

Trial Court Finding

5. The trial court, inter alia, held that the factum of dacoity is duly proved; PW-9 identified the
appellant as one of the dacoits who committed the crime; PW-5 proved recovery of country-made
pistol from the appellant and, therefore, the appellant is liable to be convicted. The trial court,
however, acquitted co-accused Mohd. Kalam Ansari.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/117886838/

2

High Court Finding

Vinod @ Nasmulla vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 14 February, 2025

6. Aggrieved by the judgment and order of conviction, the appellant preferred appeal before the
High Court, though without success. Aggrieved by dismissal of the appeal, the appellant is before us.

7. We have heard the learned counsel for the appellant; the learned counsel representing the State of
Chhattisgarh; and have perused the records.

Submissions on behalf of Appellant

8. The submission of the learned counsel for the appellant is as follows:

(i) The prosecution has withheld the best evidence, namely, the driver of the bus at
whom the gun was pointed and who allegedly identified the appellant in the TIP.
Besides that, neither the conductor nor the Khalasi (i.e., the Cleaner), who
participated in the TIP, was examined by the prosecution.

(ii) PW-9 is a police personnel whose presence in the Bus at the time of dacoity is
doubtful because, firstly, his papers relating to his movement were not brought on
record and, secondly, if he was present, there was no reason not to use him for
identification during the TIP.

Even if it is assumed that he was travelling in the Bus, his non-participation in the TIP renders him
unreliable, more so, because in his testimony he admits that he had seen the appellant earlier.

(iii) No stolen/ looted article was recovered either from the possession of the appellant or at his
pointing out.

(iv) The country-made pistol alleged to have been recovered is not linked to the gun shots that were
allegedly fired with the aid of any forensic evidence.

(v) The manner in which the appellant is stated to have been arrested by PW-5 at 3.00 a.m. in the
night does not inspire confidence. Moreover, if the appellant was carrying a loaded pistol, why he
would not use it to effect his escape, particularly, when PW-5 was alone and attending nature’s call.

9. Based on the above submissions, the learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the trial
court as well as the High Court has accepted the testimony of the prosecution witnesses without
testing it on the anvil of probability, therefore, the judgment and order of conviction deserves to be
set- aside.

Submissions on behalf of State

10. Per contra, the learned counsel for the State submitted that the factum of dacoity is proved
beyond doubt; PW-9 has identified the appellant as the culprit who pointed the gun at the driver to

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/117886838/

3

Vinod @ Nasmulla vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 14 February, 2025

ensure that the bus stopped; there is nothing to indicate as to why PW-9 would falsely implicate the
appellant; the TIP was promptly conducted; PW-7, the Naib Tehsildar, in whose presence the TIP
was conducted, has proved that in the said parade the appellant was identified; PW-5 proved that in
the night of the incident, the appellant was arrested while he was carrying a country-made pistol;
and the forensic examination of the pistol reveals that it was in a working condition with live
cartridges. These evidences, inter alia, duly proved the involvement of the appellant in the
commission of crime and therefore, the order of conviction and sentence is based on proper
appreciation of the evidence on record and does not call for interference in exercise of power under
Article 136 of the Constitution of India.

Analysis

11. Before analysing the rival submissions, it would be useful to cull out facts as regards which there
is no dispute. These are:

(i) The incident for which the prosecution was launched is of dacoity where a running
bus, carrying 35 passengers, was looted by about eight armed men in the night of
28.09.1993.

However, only two including the appellant were put to trial.

(ii) No looted article of any kind is stated to have been recovered either from, or at the instance of,
the appellant or the other accused. The country-made pistol stated to have been recovered from the
appellant at the time of arrest is not connected to any empty cartridge, or bullet, that might have
been found at the spot or extracted from the person injured.

(iii) Neither the FIR nor the statements of eyewitnesses recorded under Section 161 CrPC name the
appellant or for that matter any other accused.

(iv) Though the TIP was carried out with the aid of Driver, Khalasi (i.e., the Cleaner) and Conductor
of the Bus, none of them was examined as a witness during trial.

(v) PW-9 is the only witness who identified the appellant on the dock as one of the dacoits who
participated in the dacoity.

(vi) PW-5 is the only witness of arrest of the appellant in the night of 29.09.1993.

12. From the facts culled out above, there are just two pieces of evidence against the appellant,
namely,

(a) dock identification by PW-9; and (b) arrest of the appellant that night with a country-made pistol
by PW-5. We shall deal with each of them separately.

Dock Identification by PW-9 not reliable

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/117886838/

4

Vinod @ Nasmulla vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 14 February, 2025

13. Before we proceed to test the reliability of the dock identification by PW-9, it would be apposite
to examine the evidentiary value of the TIP conducted during investigation to identify the appellant.

14. A test identification parade under Section 9 of the Evidence Act, 18724 is not substantive
evidence in a criminal prosecution but is only corroborative evidence. The purpose of holding a test
identification parade during the stage of investigation is, firstly, to ensure that the investigating
agency is proceeding in the right direction where the accused is unknown and, secondly, to serve as
a corroborative piece of evidence when the witness identifies the accused during trial.5 The evidence
of identification merely corroborates and strengthens the oral testimony in court which alone is the
primary and substantive evidence as to identity.6 In Rameshwar Singh v. State of Jammu and
Kashmir7, a three-Judge Bench of this Court succinctly summarized the evidentiary value of the TIP
as under:

“6……. The identification during police investigation ……. is not substantive evidence
in law and it can only be used for corroborating or contradicting evidence of the
witness concerned as given in Court. The identification proceedings …… must Section
9.- Facts necessary to explain or introduce relevant facts. - Facts necessary to explain
or introduce a fact in issue or relevant fact, or which support or rebut an inference
suggested by a fact in issue or relevant fact, or which establish the identity of
anything or person whose identity is relevant, or fix the time or place at which any
fact in issue or relevant fact happened, or which show the relation of parties by whom
any such fact was transacted, are relevant in so far as they are necessary for that
purpose.

Umesh Chandra v. State of Uttarakhand, (2021) 17 SCC 616, (paragraph 9); Iqbal and
Another v. State of Uttar Pradesh, (2015) 6 SCC 623 (paragraph 15) Hari Nath and
Another v. State of U.P., (1988) 1 SCC 14 (paragraph 19), (1971) 2 SCC 715 be so
conducted that evidence with regard to them when given at the trial, enables the
court safely to form appropriate judicial opinion about its evidentiary value for the
purpose of corroborating or contradicting the statement in Court of the identifying
witness.” Thus, if the witness who identified a person or an article in the TIP is not
examined during trial, the TIP report which may be useful to corroborate or
contradict him would lose its evidentiary value for the purposes of identification. The
rationale behind the aforesaid legal principle is that unless the witness enters the
witness box and submits himself for cross-

examination how can it be ascertained as to on what basis he identified the person or the article.
Because it is quite possible that before the TIP is conducted the accused may be shown to the
witness or the witness may be tutored to identify the accused. Be that as it may, once the person who
identifies the accused during the TIP is not produced as a witness during trial, the TIP is of no use to
sustain an identification by some other witness.

15. In the instant case, though it was proved by PW-7 (i.e., the Naib Tehsildar who executed the TIP)
that the TIP for identifying the appellant was conducted and the appellant was identified by two out

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/117886838/

5

Vinod @ Nasmulla vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 14 February, 2025

of three witnesses, those three witnesses who participated in the TIP of the appellant were not
examined during trial. Thus, the TIP report, which could have been used to either contradict or
corroborate those witnesses, is of no evidentiary value. Hence, the only substantive evidence on
record of the case in respect of identification of the appellant is the dock identification by PW-9.

16. The dock identification by PW-9 does not inspire our confidence for the following reasons:

(a) PW-9 is a police personnel posted at police station Prem Nagar. During
cross-examination, on being questioned about his movement papers, he could not
provide a satisfactory explanation for his movement in that bus.

(b) As per the investigating officer, PW-9’s statement was recorded on the same day
the FIR was registered. The appellant was also arrested that very night within few
hours of the incident.

Yet, PW-9 was not used for identifying the accused during the TIP. His non-participation in the TIP,
seriously dents his credibility.

(c) PW-9 in his deposition stated that he had seen the appellant earlier on more than one occasion.
If that was so, there was all the more reason for the investigating officer to use him in the TIP. More
so, when, as a police personnel, he was under the control of the prosecution.

17. Besides that, when you withhold the best evidence such as that of the driver, conductor and
cleaner of the Bus, who all participated in the TIP, without giving good reason as to why they were
not produced or summoned, the dock identification by a solitary witness, that too a police
personnel, fails to inspire our confidence to sustain conviction of the appellant for the offence
punishable under Section 395 read with Section 397 of the IPC, particularly, in absence of
corroborative evidence of recovery of any looted article either from, or at the instance of, the
appellant.

Manner in which arrest has been effected is doubtful

18. As regards the manner in which the appellant is stated to have been arrested, prosecution case
rests on the testimony of PW-5. PW-5 is a police constable. According to him, while he was going to
attend nature’s call on 29.09.1993, at around 3:00 a.m., he saw the appellant hiding in the bushes
near a public pond, probably to evade arrest, as the police had been on the look-out for the dacoits.
PW-5 says that the appellant tried to escape by threatening to use his country made pistol, but he
managed to overpower and arrest the appellant; and later he along with the pistol was handed over
to the police station in-charge.

19. The prosecution evidence indicates that country-made pistol had two live cartridges and three
empty cartridges.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/117886838/

6

Vinod @ Nasmulla vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 14 February, 2025

20. The appellant had denied the factum of arrest in the manner alleged and had also produced
defence witnesses, but neither the trial court nor the High Court discussed the defence evidence.

21. Ordinarily, if a person is carrying a loaded weapon, he would use the same to evade arrest unless
the person is completely outnumbered. Here, the appellant is stated to have been arrested by PW- 5,
who was single and about to attend nature’s call. Moreover, there is no injury on either side to
suggest that resistance was offered at the time of arrest. Such a prosecution story is too convenient
to be acceptable as true. More so, when it had support from police witnesses only. Therefore, the
court should have been circumspect so as to look for corroborative pieces of evidence. This we say
so, because it is not uncommon for the police to be under pressure to quickly resolve a case having
implications on public order and therefore, look for soft targets.

22. Here, there is neither recovery of any looted article from the appellant or at his instance, nor the
country-made pistol was linked to any empty cartridge recovered from the Bus or the scene of crime.
There is also no injury report to substantiate that the appellant offered resistance before he was
apprehended. In absence of any such corroborative evidence, it would be too naive on our part to
accept the prosecution story regarding the manner in which the appellant is stated to have been
arrested.

23. Besides above, from paragraph 34 of the trial court judgment, we could notice that the seizure
memo (Exb. P/11) of country made pistol, etc. was prepared at 11:45 hours on 29.09.1993, which is
about nine hours after the appellant was allegedly arrested. Such a long delay in producing the
seized articles at the police station for preparing seizure memo, in absence of cogent explanation,
dents the credibility of prosecution story regarding the arrest of the appellant at about 3 a.m. on
29.09.1993.

24. Once we doubt the manner in which the appellant is stated to have been arrested, the recovery of
country-made pistol alleged to have been made at the time of arrest falls to the ground. Besides that,
from paragraphs 33 and 34 of the trial court judgment, it appears that the country made pistol
produced during trial did not match with the description of the seized weapon in the seizure memo.
This discrepancy was casually brushed aside by observing that it may be due to rusting. That apart,
the seized article(s) were sent for forensic examination on 22.06.1994, as would appear from
paragraph 34 of the trial court judgment. All these circumstances, taken cumulatively, seriously dent
the credibility of the prosecution case qua recovery of country made pistol from the appellant at 3
a.m. in the night of 29.09.1993.

25. In the light of the analysis above, we are of the view that the prosecution has failed to prove the
guilt beyond reasonable doubt. The appellant is therefore, entitled to the benefit of doubt. The
appeal is allowed. The judgment and order of the trial court and the High Court are hereby set-aside.
The appellant is acquitted of the charge for which he was tried. The appellant is reported to be on
bail. He need not surrender. His bail bond is discharged.

26. Let a copy of this order be sent to the concerned court.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/117886838/

7

Vinod @ Nasmulla vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 14 February, 2025

… … . … … … … . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . J .   ( P A M I D I G H A N T A M   S R I   N A R A S I M H A )
………………......................................J. (MANOJ MISRA) New Delhi;

February 14, 2025

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/117886838/

8

