Wahid vs State Govt. Of Nct Of Delhi on 4 February, 2025

Wahid vs State Govt. Of Nct Of Delhi on 4 February, 2025

Author: Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha

Bench: Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha

2025 INSC 145

                                                                             REPORTABLE

                                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                             CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.201 OF 2020
                                    WAHID                                    …APPELLANT
                                                                  VERSUS
                                    STATE GOVT. OF NCT OF DELHI              …RESPONDENT
                                                                    WITH
                                               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.202 OF 2020
                                    ANSHU                                    …APPELLANT
                                                                    VERSUS
                                    STATE GOVT. OF NCT OF DELHI              …RESPONDENT

                                                              JUDGMENT

MANOJ MISRA, J.

1. These two appeals impugn a common judgment and order of the High Court of Delhi at New
Delhi1 dated 15.11.2018, inter alia, passed in Criminal Appeal Nos. 1015 of 2017 and 1132 of 2017,
whereby the appeals of the appellants preferred against the judgment and order of the Additional
Sessions Date: 2025.02.04 16:43:03 IST Reason:

The High Court Judge-04 (Shahdara), KKD Courts, Delhi (i.e., the Trial Court) dated
16.08.2017 passed in Sessions Case No. 78 of 2014 were dismissed.

2. The appellants along with two others were tried for offences punishable under Sections
392/397/411 of the Indian Penal Code, 18602 and Section 25 of the Arms Act, 19593 in connection
with F.I.R. No. 512 of 2011 at PS Nand Nagri, Delhi.

3. Appellant Wahid was convicted by the Trial Court for offence punishable under Section 392 read
with Section 397 IPC, but acquitted under Section 411 IPC. For his conviction under Section 392
read with Section 397 IPC, Wahid was sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment of seven years
with fine of Rs. 5000/-, coupled with a default sentence of two years. Insofar as appellant Anshu is

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30342000/

1

Wahid vs State Govt. Of Nct Of Delhi on 4 February, 2025

concerned, he was convicted and sentenced under Section 392 read with Section 397 IPC to seven
years of rigorous imprisonment along with fine of Rs. 5,000/-, coupled with a default sentence of
two years; besides that he was also convicted for offence punishable under Section 25(1) of the Arms
Act and sentenced IPC Arms Act thereunder to three years rigorous imprisonment along with fine of
Rs. 2,000/-, coupled with a default sentence of six months.

4. There were two other accused, namely, Narender and Arif, who were also tried and convicted but
since they are not before us, and it is reported that they have already served the sentence awarded to
them, we do not propose to deal with the merits of their conviction, though they had also separately
preferred appeal before the High Court.

5. The appellants, Wahid and Anshu, had separately preferred appeal against their conviction before
the High Court. Their appeals were dismissed by the impugned order.

6. Aggrieved by the dismissal of their appeals, the appellants have preferred these appeals.

PROSECUTION CASE

7. Before we proceed to notice the submissions made before us, it would be apposite to notice in
brief the prosecution case.

8. The prosecution case bereft of unnecessary details is that while complainant (PW-1) was
travelling along with four other passengers, driver and conductor in Gramin Sewa (a mini bus), at
about 11:25 p.m., in the night of 03.12.2011, four persons boarded the vehicle near Gagan Cinema.
Those four thereafter threatened the passengers with knives, screw driver and country-made pistol,
robbed them of their mobile(s) and cash and deboarded the vehicle. The driver thereafter took the
passengers/victims to nearby police (PCR). The police officer present there was apprised of the
incident and later a formal first information report (FIR) was registered at Police Station, Nand
Nagri, Delhi as FIR No. 512/2011.

9. The investigation of the case was carried out by PW-13 who, allegedly, on the basis of information
provided by the complainant (PW-1), effected the arrest of all four accused on 05.12.2011 from near
DTC Bus Depot at Nand Nagri. According to the prosecution, at the time of arrest, Narender alias
Bhola (non-appellant) had a knife, Anshu (appellant in criminal appeal no. 202/2020) had a
country- made pistol, Arif (non-appellant) had a button operated knife and Wahid (appellant in
criminal appeal no. 201/2020) had a screw driver. Besides that, they had some cash. On 6.12.2011,
according to the prosecution, looted mobile(s) were recovered separately at the instance of accused
Narender and Arif i.e., non-appellants.

10. We have heard learned counsel for the parties and have perused the materials on record.

SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANTS

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30342000/

2

Wahid vs State Govt. Of Nct Of Delhi on 4 February, 2025

11. The learned counsel for the appellants submitted that the FIR named none of the accused
persons; the incident occurred in the darkness of night; the accused and the witnesses were not
known to each other; the arrest of four accused, who were not related to each other, from one place
and at one time, based on identification by PW-1 is highly doubtful; no test identification parade was
conducted by the investigating agency to test whether the other passengers could recognise them; no
looted articles were recovered from any of the accused; even recovery of knives, screw driver and
country-made pistol is rendered doubtful by the statement of PW-1 to the effect that he was made to
sign on blank papers; PW-2, PW-3 and PW-12, who were also travelling in the same Gramin Sewa,
specifically stated that the accused were not those who committed the robbery; PW-14, who was also
travelling in that Gramin Sewa stated that it was dark and, therefore, he is unable to recognise the
robbers; and, besides above, there are material contradictions in the statement of witnesses who
were allegedly travelling in that Gramin Sewa. In these circumstances, benefit of doubt ought to
have been extended to the accused persons.

SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE STATE

12. Per contra, the learned counsel for the State submitted that even if few witnesses have not
supported the prosecution case, conviction can be sustained on the basis of testimony of other
witnesses who had no motive to falsely implicate the accused. The testimony of PW-1, PW-5 and
PW-6 is reliable and sufficient to hold the accused guilty. In these circumstances, once the courts
below, after appreciating the evidence, have held the accused appellants guilty, no case is made out
to interfere with the findings returned by the courts below in exercise of power under Article 136 of
the Constitution of India.

ANALYSIS

13. Having perused the materials on record, we find that prosecution has succeeded in establishing
that on the night of 3.12.2011 the travellers of Gramin Sewa were robbed by four persons, who
entered and exited the vehicle together after looting the travellers of their belongings such as cash
and mobile phones, under threat of knife, country made pistol and screw driver. In respect of the
above allegations, there is no discrepancy in the FIR and the eye witnesses (i.e., travellers, conductor
and driver of Gramin Sewa) account. Moreover, the FIR of the incident has been lodged at the first
opportunity. However, mere proof of robbery is not sufficient to hold that the accused persons who
were put to trial were the ones who committed the offence.

14. In cases where the FIR is lodged against unknown persons, and the persons made accused are
not known to the witnesses, material collected during investigation plays an important role to
determine whether there is a credible case against the accused. In such type of cases, the courts have
to meticulously examine the evidence regarding (a) how the investigating agency derived clue about
the involvement of the accused in the crime; (b) the manner in which the accused was arrested; and
(c) the manner in which the accused was identified. Apart from above, discovery/ recovery of any
looted article on the disclosure made by, or at the instance of, the accused, or from his possession,
assumes importance to lend credence to the prosecution case.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30342000/

3

Manner in which accused persons were arrested and recovery effected appears doubtful

Wahid vs State Govt. Of Nct Of Delhi on 4 February, 2025

15. In the instant case, neither the accused persons were named nor they were known either to the
complainant or the witnesses from before. Prosecution case is rather too simple, that is, two days
later, on 5.12.2011, PW-1 himself noticed the accused persons standing near DTC Bus Depot at Nand
Nagri; immediately thereafter he informed the police about their presence; the police went to the
spot, arrested them, and, upon search of those persons, recovered from them weapons including
screw driver, as described in the FIR, used by the robbers to threaten the passengers.

16. The aforesaid prosecution story of four accused persons, not belonging to one family, being
spotted together at a public place (i.e., bus depot), that too near a police station, just two days after
the incident, that too with weapons corresponding to the weapons held by the robbers mentioned in
the FIR, appears too well-crafted to be real. More so, when we consider it in conjunction with the
arrest memorandums of the four accused which indicate that they were arrested post 10 pm on
5.12.2011. This is quite an odd hour for any person to venture out on a winter night. PW-1, who is a
witness to the arrest memorandums, in his statement- in- chief said that while he was going to the
police station to handover mobile purchase receipt, he spotted the accused persons. Such a story
appears improbable because PW-1, who is not a resident of Nand Nagri, and had suffered an act of
robbery just two days before, in ordinary circumstances would not venture out so late in the night,
just to hand over receipt regarding purchase of his robbed mobile. These circumstances make the
prosecution story relating to the manner of arrest highly improbable. Therefore, it should have put
the court on guard as to look for corroborative pieces of evidence before accepting the prosecution
story as credible. One such corroborative piece of evidence could be recovery of looted articles from
the accused which, in the present case, is absent inasmuch as the trial court has already acquitted
the appellant(s) of the charge of offence punishable under Section 411 IPC.

17. Taking a guarded approach we have therefore carefully examined the prosecution evidence to be
satisfied about the truthfulness of the prosecution story. Having done so, we found that there
appears some discrepancy in the statement of PW-10 (i.e., head constable Mursaleen, posted at P.S.
Nand Nagri) and PW-13 (i.e., Narendra Singh Rana, the investigating officer of the case) regarding
the place where they received information about the presence of the accused persons at the bus
depot. In this regard, PW-10 (HC Mursaleen) stated:

“On 5/12/2011, I was posted at PS Nand Nagri, on that day, I joined the investigation
in the present case. I along with IO Insp. Narendra Singh Rana, SI Rajiv, Ct. Kushal
Pal, Ct. Jasvir went to red light Nand Nagri, where complainant Imtiaz met us, who
informed to the IO that four persons involved in the present case are standing near
bus depot, Nand Nagri. After receiving information, we rushed to the Nand Nagri,
bus depot where we found that four persons were standing near bus depot. Upon
seeing them, complainant pointed out towards them by stating that they are the same
persons who had committed offense with him.” On the other hand, PW-13, Inspector
Narendra Singh Rana (i.e., the investigation officer of the case) stated:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30342000/

4

Wahid vs State Govt. Of Nct Of Delhi on 4 February, 2025

“On 5.12.2011, I was posted as Inspector in PS Nand Nagri, Delhi. On that day, I
along with SI Rajiv, HC Mursaleen, Ct. Jasvir and Kushal Pal along with complainant
left the police station for investigation of the case. When we reached at main road in
front of Nand Nagri DTC Depot, the complainant Imtiaz pointed out towards four
young men i.e., Arif, Wahid, Narendra alias Bhola and Anshu, who are present in the
court today. He further stated that the accused persons had robbed him and others in
Gramin Seva bus while they were travelling from Nand Nagri to Gol Chakkar, Loni. I
with the help of staff had apprehended the accused persons and interrogated and
after interrogation all the accused persons were arrested…” The statement-in-chief of
PW-1 (i.e., Imtiaz), however, corroborates the statement of PW-13 noticed above.
PW-1 in his statement-in-chief stated:

“The police had asked me to produce the copy of the receipt of my mobile phone vide
which I had purchased the same. I went to my house and brought the same on the
next day and produced the same before the police. Same is Ex PW1/C which bears my
signature at point A. At that time when I was going to the PS, I saw all the four
accused persons present in the court were standing at the bus stop of Nand Nagri. I
told the police that the accused persons are standing at the bus stop of Nand Nagri.
The police along with me immediately went there and on my pointing out they had
apprehended all the four accused persons present in the court.”

18. From the statements extracted above, what is clear is that, according to the prosecution, the
police got information about the presence of accused persons at the bus depot from PW-1. However,
where that information was given by PW-1 to the police, there is discrepancy in the testimony of
witnesses who were part of the team that effected arrest of the accused persons. According to
PW-10, information was given when the police party, which had already left the police station, met
PW-1 at the red light of Nand Nagri whereas according to PW-13 the police team left the police
station with the complainant (i.e., PW-1) and at bus depot, PW-1 pointed towards the accused
persons. PW-1’s statement- in -chief is also on similar terms as that of PW-13 inasmuch as he states
that when he spotted the accused persons near the bus depot, enroute to the police station, he went
to the police station and informed the police about their presence there, whereafter the police team
accompanied him to apprehend the accused persons. But if the version of PW-1 is correct, there
ought to have been a record of receipt of such information at the police station. Because, in ordinary
course, before leaving the police station, based on any information, the police officer enters the
information in the relevant diary and then proceeds. Here there is no disclosure in the testimony of
any of the police witnesses that before leaving the police station, the information provided by PW-1
regarding spotting the accused was entered in any of the diaries maintained at the police station.
Besides that, PW-1, during cross-examination, made a self-contradictory statement which renders
the prosecution case regarding arrest and recovery from the accused persons doubtful. The relevant
portion of PW-1’s statement during cross-examination is extracted below:

“I.O. of the case met him at the police station when the PCR took him and the
accused persons to the police station. On the next day, he again met me at the bus
stop of Nand Nagri where he remained with the I.O. for 10 to 15 minutes, thereafter,

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30342000/

5

Wahid vs State Govt. Of Nct Of Delhi on 4 February, 2025

the I.O. did not meet me. I saw the accused person present in the Court on the date of
the occurrence and thereafter, I have seen them in the court on the date of this
matter.

(emphasis supplied) The underscored portion of PW-1’s statement would suggest that
PW-1 had not seen the accused persons on 5.12.2011 (i.e. the date of arrest) because
the date of the occurrence was 3.12.2011.

19. In respect of recovery from the accused persons, PW-1, who was signatory to seizure
memorandums, during cross-examination, stated:

“It is correct that IO obtained my signature on blank papers and had not recorded my
statement. It is further correct that statement Ex. PW1/A bears my signature at point
A, but at that time it was blank.”

20. From the statements of key witnesses extracted above, and on cumulative analysis of the
c i r c u m s t a n c e s   d i s c u s s e d   a b o v e ,   w h i l e   t a k i n g   i n t o   c o n s i d e r a t i o n   t h e   s t a t e m e n t s   o f
accused-appellants recorded under Section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 that they
were picked up from home and falsely implicated by the police, a serious doubt is cast on the
manner in which the prosecution claims to have arrested the accused. Unfortunately, the High Court
and the trial court were not circumspect while evaluating the prosecution evidence and thereby
failed to test the prosecution evidence on the anvil of probability as was required in the facts of the
case. For the reasons above, we hold that the arrest of the accused persons in the manner alleged by
the prosecution is highly doubtful and unworthy of acceptance.

21. Once we doubt the manner in which the accused were stated to have been arrested, the alleged
recovery of screw driver, knives and country- made pistol made at the time of arrest is rendered
unacceptable. Moreover, weapons /articles allegedly recovered are not so unique that they cannot be
arranged.

Dock Identification by few eye witnesses not reliable

22. Normally, where accused persons are unknown and are not named in the FIR, if the prosecution
case as regards the manner in which they were arrested is disbelieved, the Court should proceed
cautiously with other evidence and objectively determine whether all other circumstances were
proved beyond reasonable doubt3. In this light we shall now consider the evidence relating to
identification of the accused persons. Admittedly, this is a case of night incident. Though seven eye
witnesses of the incident were examined by the prosecution, only three (i.e., PW-1, PW-5 and PW-6)
identified the accused in court. Out of the remaining four, three including the driver categorically
stated that the accused persons are not those who robbed the passengers that night. The fourth one
stated that it was too dark, therefore, he is unable to recognise. PW-1, at whose instance the arrest of
the accused persons was allegedly effected, during cross-examination, stated that he saw the accused
persons first on the date of the incident and second on the date fixed in the case. Admittedly, no test
identification parade was conducted and the statement of PW-1 was recorded in court on

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30342000/

6

Wahid vs State Govt. Of Nct Of Delhi on 4 February, 2025

28.05.2013, that is, after 16 months of the incident. In such circumstances, not much reliance can be
placed on his statement.

See Manoj and others v. State of Madhya Pradesh, (2023) 2 SCC 353, paragraph 88

23. As far as dock identification by the remaining two eye witnesses is concerned, they identified the
accused persons during their deposition in court in the year 2015, that is, after nearly 4 years of the
incident. PW-6, though stated that he identified the accused persons on 06.12.2011 while they were
in the police lock-up, admitted that he went to the police station without being summoned.
Interestingly, as per his description in the record, he is a resident of Aligarh. During
cross-examination, he stated that he visited the police station on 06.12.2011 at 07:30 a.m.
Considering that he is a resident of Aligarh, his statement that he visited the police station without
summons on 06.12.2011 at 07:30 a.m. does not inspire our confidence. Admittedly, memory of those
witnesses was not tested through a test identification parade. In such circumstances, when three eye
witnesses stated that accused persons were not the ones who committed the crime and another one
stated that it was too dark, therefore, he could not recognise, bearing in mind that the accused
persons were not known to the eye witnesses from before, not much reliance can be placed on the
dock identification.

24. In such circumstances, and in absence of corroborative evidence of recovery of looted articles at
the instance of or from the accused persons, in our view, this was a fit case where the appellants
should have been given the benefit of doubt.

25. In view of the analysis and conclusions above, these appeals are allowed. The impugned
judgment and order of the High Court is set aside. The appellants are acquitted of the charge(s) for
which they were tried and convicted. They are reported to be on bail. They need not surrender. Their
bail bonds stand discharged.

… . … … … … . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . J .   ( P A M I D I G H A N T A M   S R I   N A R A S I M H A )
……………......................................J. (MANOJ MISRA) New Delhi;

February 4, 2025

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30342000/

7

