Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors.
... on 24 March, 2025

2025 INSC 383

                                                                    REPORTABLE

                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4311 OF 2025
                            (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO. 3324 OF 2015)

             YERIKALA SUNKALAMMA & ANR.                         …APPELLANT(S)

                                              VERSUS

             STATE OF ANDHRA PRADESH,                          …RESPONDENT(S)
             DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE & ORS.

                                           JUDGMENT

J.B. PARDIWALA, J.:

For the convenience of exposition, this judgment is divided into the following parts: -

I N D E X   A .
  F A C T U A L   A V E R M E N T S
.............................................................................................. 2 B. IMPUGNED
JUDGMENT ............................................................................................ 18 C.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANTS ........................................... 23
D. SUBMISSION ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENTS ..........................................
S
2
...................................................................................................................... 34 i. The
Andhra Pradesh (Record of Rights in Land and Pattadar Pass Books) Act, 1971 36 ii.
The Andhra Pradesh Assigned Lands (Prohibition of Transfers) Act, 1977 ................

N

A

A

E

Y

L

S

7

I

.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

1

 
 
Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

.

i

i

i

  O r a l

3 9  
  E v i d e n c e   o n   r e c o r d
............................................................................................... 45 iv. Section 113 of the
Bhartiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023 ............................................... 57 v. How is the
Court expected to consider title suits against the Government .................. 62 vi.
Section 80 of CPC......................................................................................................... 67
v i i .   O b j e c t   o f   N o t i c e   i n   G o v e r n m e n t   S u i t s
.......................................................................... 71 viii. Essentials of Section 80
CPC........................................................................................ 72 ix. Payment of
compensation in cases of resumption of land. ........................................... 77 F.
CONCLUSION ...............................................................................................................
93

1. Leave granted

2. This appeal arises from the judgment and order passed by the High Court of
Judicature at Hyderabad for the State of Telangana and the State of Andhra Pradesh
dated 10.07.2014 in AS No. 1931 0f 2002 by which the High Court allowed the first
appeal filed by the Respondents (original defendants) and thereby set aside the
judgment and decree dated 05.08.1999 passed by the Principal Senior Civil Judge,
Kurnool in Original Suit No. 115 of 1996 instituted by the appellants herein (original
plaintiffs).

A. FACTUAL AVERMENTS

3. The subject matter of the present litigation is a parcel of land, admeasuring approximately 3.34
acres, bearing Survey No. 451/1 situated in Dinnedevarapadu Mandal, Kurnool District, Andhra
Pradesh (hereinafter, the “Subject Land”). It is the case of the appellants that in 1995, the
Respondents, without any intimation or prior notice, unlawfully dispossessed the appellants from
the Subject Land - a purported act that compelled them to institute O.S. No. 115 of 1996 in the Court
of the Principal Senior Civil Judge, Kurnool, wherein the appellants sought a declaration of their
title to the Subject Land.

4. According to the appellants, the ownership of the land can be traced back to 1943. The subject
land was then originally owned by one Harijana Govindu. It is the case of the appellants that the
subject land was not a government assigned land but rather a private property over which the
respondents had no right, title or interest at any point of time.

5. The Subject Land was mortgaged by Harijana Govindu with Perugu Swamy Reddy by virtue of a
mortgage deed dated 06.06.1943 as security for a sum of Rs. 100/-. The said mortgage deed was not
redeemed during the lifetime of Harijana Govindu and Perugu Swamy Reddy As Harijana Govindu
defaulted on the payment of the loan, the Legal Representatives of Perugu Swamy Reddy instituted
a suit for the recovery of the said sum, bearing suit number O.S. No. 178 of 1967, before the Court of
the Principal District Munsif, Kurnool. The Trial Court decreed the suit in favour of the legal
representatives for sale of the mortgaged property.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

2

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

6. In furtherance of the aforesaid decree, execution proceedings were instituted by the legal
representatives of Perugu Swamy Reddy in E.P. No. 69 of 1961 before the Court of the Principal
District Munsif, Kurnool. In the said proceedings, the Subject Land was duly auctioned in a Court
Auction dated 22.04.1970, whereupon one Kuruva Ramanna purchased it for Rs. 600/- and took
possession of the land by way of a process issued by the Court on 09.10.1970. The delivery of
possession of the subject land was recorded by the District Munsif Court, Kurnool on 06.11.1970.
Later on, 10.12.1970, a sale certificate was issued by the Trial Court under Order 21 Rule 94 of the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (for short, the “CPC”). The relevant portion of the Certificate issued
under Order 21 Rule 94 of C.P.C is reproduced herein below:

“In the execution of the above decree on 22.4.1970 auction was conducted in respect
of the Schedule immovable property belonging to the respondents, knocked down in
favour of the Auction Purchaser P. Ramannna for Rs. 600/ only and the said sale was
confirmed. on 1.7.1970 certificate is issued accordingly.”

7. The auction purchaser viz. Kuruva Ramanna further transferred the property to
one Yerikala Rosanna, the deceased father of the appellant no. 1 by virtue of a
registered sale deed dated 10.12.1970 bearing Document No. 3154 of 1970, for a total
sale consideration of Rs. 600/-. Accordingly, the father of the appellant no.1 was in
possession and enjoyment of the Subject Land till his death in 1986. The Ryotwari
patta was also issued in favor of the father of appellant no. 1 in respect of the subject
land and other survey numbers, considering his uninterrupted possession and
enjoyment thereof. The relevant portion of the sale deed is reproduced herein below:

Sale Deed for Rs. 600/-, dated 10.12.1970 1970 December 10 equivalent Shalivahana
Shaka 192 Margasira 19 Kuruva P. Ramanna, S/o Kuruva P. Ramanna, Agriculturist,
R/o Dinnadevarapadu Village, Deinnedevarapadu P.O. Kurnool Taluq, Kurnool
District, executed the sale deed in favour of Yerukala Roshanna, S/o Yerukala N
aganna, agriculturist, R/o Dinnadevarapadu Village, Dinnadevarapadu Post, Kunool
Taluq, Kurnool District, which recites that and my personal and family agricultural
expenses today received a sum of Rs. 600/-only in consideration of whereof I sold the
schedule property in your favour and delivered the possession of it to you today itself.
From today onwards you, your legal heirs are entitled to enjoy with absolute and
Saleable rights over the schedule land and that from today neither myself nor my
legal heirs have any right or title over the schedule land. I have executed the sale deed
with my free will and consent.”

8. On the death of his father, the appellant no. 1 is said to have been in possession
and enjoyment of the Subject Land. According to the appellants, the principal cause
of action to institute the suit first arose in the year 1995, as they came to be ‘illegally’
dispossessed from the Subject Land without any intimation or prior notice by the
respondents. It is the case of the appellants that as the respondents wanted to
construct a District Institute of Education and Training Centre (DIET) building on
the aforesaid land, they were forcibly dispossessed without payment of any

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

3

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

compensation of any description.

9. According to the appellants, upon seeking explanation from the respondents as
regards their subject land, they were informed that the subject land was an assigned
government land, endowed with non-alienable rights to it and that the Government
retained the rights to resume the assigned land at any time for a ‘public purpose’.

10. The appellants refuted the claim of the respondents before the Trial Court,
contending that the Subject Land was a ‘Patta Land’ and, by its very nature, it could
not have been assigned to anybody. In support of this position, it was averred that a
Pattadar Passbook was issued to the appellants under the Andhra Pradesh (Record of
Rights in Land and Pattadar Pass Books) Act, 1971 (for short, the “Act of 1971”).

11. Aggrieved by the foregoing, the appellants submitted a representation dated
23.01.1996 addressed to the District Collector, Kurnool, stating that the subject land
was purchased from one Kuruva Ramanna under a registered sale deed in the year
1970 for a valid consideration and they had been in exclusive possession of the same.
The appellants requested the District Collector to cancel the aforementioned
resumption. As the District Collector failed to respond to the said representation, the
plaintiffs issued a notice dated 04.01.1996 under Section 80 CPC to the District
Collector, intimating that a suit would be instituted against the State if the Subject
Land was not reconveyed back to the appellants.

12. The appellants ultimately instituted an original Suit being O.S. No. 115 of 1996
before the Trial Court, praying for a declaration of their title to the Subject Land and
for an order directing the respondents to deliver the possession to them.

13. The respondents in their written statement took the stance that the Subject Land
was an arable waste land owned by the Government. The respondents had no
knowledge of the events occurring from the time when Harijana Govindu mortgaged
the land till when the land was conveyed by Kuruva Ramanna to the deceased father
of the appellant no.1 and the respondents denied that the appellants were in
possession of the subject land after the death of father of appellant no.1.

14. According to the respondents, the subject land by virtue of being an assigned
government land was subject to certain conditions; one of those being that the
Government at any time may resume the land wholly or in part, if it was of the
opinion that the land is required for any public purpose. In light of the same, it was
contended that Harijana Govindu did not possess any alienable rights at any point in
time and therefore, could not have further alienated the Subject Land.

15. According to the respondents, the Subject Land was resumed by the Mandal
Revenue, Kurnool in the resumption proceedings No. R.C.C 184/89 dated 03.02.1989
and in addition to the same, the Mandal Officer also resumed various other parcels of

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

4

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

land, as the said lands were situated at a hill slope with red gravel. Thus, they were
unfit for any sort of cultivation.

16. According to the respondents upon requisition from the District Educational
Officer, Kurnool for the construction of a DIET Building, the Mandal Revenue
Officer, together with the Mandal Surveyor and Revenue Inspector, inspected the
lands and found them suitable for such construction. Thereafter, the Sub-

Divisional Records were prepared and scrutinized by the Deputy Inspector of Survey, Kurnool
whereby the said lands were classified as arable waste lands.

17. Pursuant to the resumption proceedings, a notice was published in the village as part of the
procedure to invite objections, if any, against the transfer of the subject land in favor of the
Education Department. As no objections were received within the time period stipulated, the
Gramapanchayat of Dinnedevarapadu gave its consent for transfer of the said lands in favour of the
Education Department. Thereafter, on 01.05.1989, the possession of the land was handed over to
the District Educational Officer, Kurnool for the purpose of constructing the DIET Building.

18. According to the respondents, in the year 1995, the Education Department commenced the
construction of the DIET Buildings on a portion of the resumed land. According to the respondents,
the resumption of the land was effected bona fide for a public purpose and in strict compliance with
the Rules framed under the Board Standing Order No. 15 of the Andhra Pradesh Board of Revenue
Standing Orders and other provisions. The action of the government in resuming the lands cannot
be termed as a high-handed action and the appellants have no right, title, or interest in the land.

19. According to the respondents, the suit was otherwise also barred by limitation. The possession of
the Subject Land was transferred to the District Collector in 1989, whereas the suit came to be
instituted in 1996, i.e., beyond the prescribed period of limitation as per the Limitation Act, 1963.

20. We must try to understand the exact case of the appellants as pleaded in the plaint. The relevant
pleadings in the plaint read thus:

“3. The plaintiffs are the owners of plaint schedule land. Then plaint schedule land
originally belonged to one Harijana Govindu, resident of Dinne Devarapadu. The said
Govindu mortgaged the plaint schedule land for Rs. 100 in favour of one Perugu
Swamy Reddy of Dinne Devarapadu under a mortgage deed dated 6.6.1943 the
mortgage was not redeemed during the life time of Govindu and Perugu Swamy
Reddy. Therefore Perugu Swamy Reddy's sons filed a suit O.S. 178/67 in District
Munsif's court, Kurnool. For recovery of mortgage money against the sons of
Govindu and accordingly a decree was passed for sale of the mortgaged property i.e.
the plaint schedule land. In pursuance of the said decree E.P. was filed for sale of the
plaintiff schedule land and recover the decretal amount. In the court auction held on
22.4.70, one Kuruva Ramanna of Dinne Devarapadu purchased the plaint schedule
land for Rs. 600 and took delivery of the land through process of court on 9.10.70

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

5

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

and the delivery was recorded by court on 6.11.70.

4. The court auction purchaser, Kuruva Ramanna, in turn sold the plaint; schedule
land for Rs. 600 to 1st plaintiffs father, Yerikala Rosanna, under a registered sale
deed dated 10.12.70. The 1st plaintiffs father was in possession and enjoyment of
plaint schedule land till his death in the year 1986. A ryotwari patta pass book was
issued to 1st plaintiffs father for the plaint schedule land and others S. nos. in his
possession and enjoyment. On the death of his father, the 1st plaintiff is in possession
and enjoyment of plaint schedule land without obstruction from any quarter.

5. The defendant has no manner of right, title or possession to the plaint schedule
land. From the beginning the plaint schedule land is in the hands of private
individuals and at no time it was in possession of Government. Last year the
defendant took possession of a portion plaint schedule land for the purpose of
constructing a building for District Institute of Educational Training Centre (DIET)
without issuing any notice to the plaintiff and without paying any compensation to
the plaintiff. The area so occupied by Government will be about 34 cents and the
plaintiff is cultivating the balance extent in the plaint schedule land.

6. The Government has taken possession of plaint schedule land from the plaintiffs
on the false and mischievous plea that the plaint schedule land is an assigned land
and that the Government is at liberty to resume their assigned land at any time for
public purpose.

This stand of Government is utterly false. The plaint schedule land is a patta land from the days of
yore and it is not an assigned land to anybody. The 1st plaintiff gave a representation to the Dist.
Collector, Kunrool on 23.1.96 stating all the true facts about plaint schedule land and requested the
District Collector, Kurnool, to reconvey the plaint schedule land to the petitioner. But the District
Collector Kurnool did not redress the grievance of plaintiff. Therefore the 1st plaintiff ultimately
gave a notice to the Dist. Collector, Kurnool, under Section 80 C.P.C. on 4.1.96 informing the
District Collector that a suit will be filed against the State for its high handed action if the District
Collector does not cancel the so called resumption of plaint schedule land or pay the compensation
to the plaintiff at the rate of one lakh rupees per acre. The District Collector, Kurnool received the
said notice on 8.1. 96 but did not comply with the demand of the plaintiff. Hence the plaintiff files
this suit for declaration of plaintiff's title to the plaint schedule and for recovery of possession of
plaint schedule land from the defendant.

7. The cause of action arose in September, 95 when the defendant took over the plaint schedule land
high handed by for construction of District Institute of Educational Training Centre. (DIET) and
subsequent dates when the plaintiff demanded reconveyance of plaint schedule land to the plaintiff
and the defendant refused to comply with the demand of plaintiff.” (Emphasis supplied)

21. In para 11, the appellants prayed as under:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

6

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

“11. The plaintiffs therefore pray that the Hon'ble Court may be pleased to declare
plaintiffs title to the plaint schedule land, direct the defendants to deliver back the
possession of the plaint schedule land to the plaintiff, award costs and grant any
other relief which the Hon'ble Court deems fit and proper under the circumstance of
the case.”

22.To the aforesaid, the respondents herein filed their written statement stating as under:

“3. The allegations in para 3 of the plaint that the plaintiffs are the owner of the suit
schedule land, and it originally belonged to Harijana Govindu, and the said Govindu
mortgage and land to Perugu Swamy Reddy of Dinnedevarapadu Village, under a
mortgage deed dated 6.6.1943, and that Perugu Swamy Reddy filed O.S. No. 178/67
in D.M.C. Kurnool for recovery of the mortgage debt and that one Kuruva Ramana
purchased the. said land in Court Auction for realization of the decree in O.S. No.
178/1967 on 22.4.1970 and delivery was effected in favour of Kuruva Ramana on
6.11.1970 are all not known to this defendant and the plaintiff is put to strict proof of
all the said allegations. Likewise the further allegations that Kuruva Ramana sold the
plaint schedule land to Yerikala Rosanna under a registered sale deed dtd. 10.12.1970
and that plaintiffs father was in possession and enjoyment of the said land till his
death in the year 1986 are also not within the knowledge of this defendant. The
further allegations that on the death of his father, the plaintiff is in possession and
enjoyment of the suit land without obstructions from any quarter are all false and
incorrect statements made for the purpose of the suit.

4. The contention of the plaintiff in para 5 of the plaint that the defendant has no
manner of right title or possession to the plaint schedule land and that from the
beginning the suit land is in the hands of private persons and at no time it was in
possession of Government are all not true and correct. The further allegations that
the suit schedule land is a patta land and it is not an assigned land to anybody is also
an utterly false statement created for the purpose of the suit.

5. This defendant humbly submits that the land in S.No. 451/1 extent Ac. 3.34 cents
situated in Dinnedevarapadu Village was originally arable waste land belonging to
the Government. The said land was assigned to Harijana Govindanna subject to
certain conditions and one among them is that the Government may resume the land
wholly or in part if in the opinion of the Government the land is required for any
public purpose. The said Govindanna has no alienable rights in the land assigned to
him. The suit schedule land was resumed to Government by the Mandal Revenue
Officer, Kurnool in his proceedings No. R.C.B. 184/89 dated 3.2.1989.

6. The following lands are situated within the Dinnedevarapadu village limits near B.
Tandrapadu village and are classified as Arable Waste lands.

            S. No. 449/1                                 Extent Ac. 1.48
            449/2                                        0.95

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

7

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

            449/3                                        3.03
            449/4                                        3.00
            451/ 1                                       3.34
            451/3                                        1.41
            451/4                                        0.70
            Total                                        13.91 cents

The entire lands were on hill slope with red gravel. These lands are unfit for
cultivation.

7. It is further submitted that on the requisition of District Educational Officer,
Kurnool for transfer of the above lands including the plaint schedule land for the
purpose of construction of District Institution of Education and Training Centre
Buildings, the Mandal Revenue Officer, Kurnool along with Mandal Surveyor and
Revenue Inspector, inspected the above lands and found that the said lands are
suitable for the construction of DIET Centre.

Thereupon the Sub-Divisional Records for the above lands have been got prepared and it has been
got scrutinized by the Deputy Inspector of Survey, Kurnool. According to the Village accounts the
said lands are classified as Arable Waste lands. A notice has been got published in the village
inviting objections if any against the transfer of the land in favour of Education Department. The
time allowed for objections was expired by 31.10.1990, and no objections have been received from
the public. The said lands are in Dinnedevarapadu Gran1a Panchayat limits. The Grama Panchayat
also has given its consent for transfer of the above land in favour of the Education Department. It is
further submitted that these lands are vacant lands and are free from any encroachments, and the
said land is quiet suitable for construction of DIET buildings. Thereupon the land was given
possession to the District Educational Officer, Kurnool on 1.5.1989 by the Mandal Revenue Officer,
Kurnool in strict conformity with the rules and regulations prescribed under Law. Subsequently the
said land was transferred in favour of District Educational Officer, Kurnool for construction of DIET
buildings. During the year 1995 the Education Department started construction of DIET Centre
buildings in a portion of the plaint schedule land. The action of the Government in resuming the
assigned and required bona fide for a public purpose cannot be termed as a high handed action. The
entire process was made in accordance with the Rules framed under the Board standing orders and
other relevant provisions of law. The allegations contra are denied as false.

8. This defendant submits that the plaintiff has no right, title, interest and possession of the plaint
schedule land. Therefore the question of declaration of his title or delivery of possession to the
plaintiff does not arise. The plaintiff has misconceived his remedy if any.

9. In any event the suit is barred by limitation. Issue of notice will not save limitation. The land was
required to the Government in the year 1989. Therefore, the suit filed in the year 1996 is clearly
barred by time.” (Emphasis supplied) i. Trial Court’s Judgment

23. The Trial Court framed the following issues for its consideration:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

8

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

“1. Whether the plaintiff is in possession and enjoyment of the suit land without
obstruction from any quarter from the date of his father?

2. Whether the defendants have no manner of right or title for the possession of the
plaint schedule property?

3. Whether the suit land is assigned land and Govindanna has no alienable rights for
said assigned lands?

4. Whether the suit was resumed to Govt. by M.R.O., Kurnool with the proceedings
No. R.C.B. 184/89, dt. 3-2-1989?

5. Whether the suit land was given in possession of District Educational Officer on
1-5-89 by M.R.O., Kurnool?

6. Whether the plaintiff has no right or interest or possession of the plaint schedule
right?

7. Whether this court has no jurisdiction to entertain the suit?

8. Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of necessary parties?

9. To what relief?

10. The issues 1, 2, 3 and 6 are recasted as follows: “Whether the plaintiffs are the
owners of suit schedule property and if so, 'they are entitled for declaration and
recovery of possession as prayed for in respect of the suit schedule property"?

24. The findings recorded by the Trial Court in its Judgment and Decree dated 05.08.1999 can be
understood in two parts: -

a. First, the Trial Court held that the resumption proceedings conducted by the
Mandal Officer was tainted with serious procedural irregularities. The respondents
had failed to adduce any credible evidence to establish that the Mandal Revenue
Officer had conducted any enquiry before resuming the Subject Land & handing it
over to the District Educational Officer, Kurnool. It was held that mere bald
assertions in the oral evidence of DW1, Mandal Revenue Officer, would not be
sufficient to establish that the resumption of the Subject Land was in accordance with
law. Moreover, when the appellants challenged the resumption proceedings, the
authorities had failed to produce any relevant records to establish that they had
followed proper procedure for the purpose of resumption of the land. Therefore, the
Trial Court had drawn an adverse inference against the evidence of the DW1, Mandal
Revenue Officer.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

9

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

b. Secondly, the issuance of the pattadar passbook duly signed by the then Tahsildar
in favour of the appellants combined with the land revenue receipts was held to serve
as clear indicators of the actual possession and enjoyment of the Subject Land by the
appellants. Furthermore, the Trial Court observed that the oral testimony of PW1 was
duly corroborated by documentary evidence. This was considered to have sufficiently
established the appellants’ title and possession to the Subject Land, thereby entitling
them to recover possession of the same.

25.The Trial Court accordingly decreed the suit in favour of the appellants declaring
them to be the lawful owners of the subject land and directed the respondents to
deliver the possession of the subject land back to the appellants and observed as
under:

“21. As seen from ex. All proceedings from District Revenue Officer, Kurnool dt.
31-5-1996 indicating that the first plaintiff issued Ex.A8 Section 80 C.P.C. notice dt.
4-1-1996 and the District Revenue officer requested the Mandal Revenue Officer to
send resumption records without any delay. Further as seen Ex.A12 dt. 6-5-1996
proceedings from District Revenue Officer, Kurnool indicating that D.R.O. Kurnool
address Ex. A12 to M.R.O., Kurnool to send resumption records pertaining to the suit
schedule property. As regard Ex. A7, Ex.A8 and Exs.A10 to A12 indicates that the first
plaintiff sent petitions to the higher revenue authorities and also issued notices to
them to enquire into the matter. Absolutely, there is no material on record that what
action was taken by the District Revenue Authorities on the petitions and notices
issued by the first plaintiff. Even today, this Court did not see the light of the day with
regard to the alleged resumption proceedings of suit schedule property in R.C.B.
184/89 dt. 28-2-1989. Absolutely, there is no evidence when Mandal Revenue Officer
conducted enquiry and resumed the suit land and handed over possession of suit
land to District Educational officer, Kurnool. The mere statement of DW1, Mandal
Revenue Officer is not sufficient to prove that he has followed proper procedure and
resumed the suit land. When the plaintiffs challenging the resumption proceedings
itself as no enquiry was conducted and no notice was served on them, it is for the
Government to produce such resumption proceedings in R.C.B. 184/89, dt. 3-2-89 to
prove that they have followed proper procedure in resumption of the suit land.
Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case, absolutely there is no
material before this court to know whether the Mandal Revenue Officer adopted
proper procedure or conducted any enquiry at the time of resumption of suit land.
The evidence of DW1 is not sufficient to establish that the resumption of suit land is
legal and proper without produce any relevant records. Nothing prevented the
revenue authorities to produce the resumption proceedings of the suit land before
this court. Therefore, inference can be drawn that the Mandal Revenue Officer,
Kurnool has not adopted procedure in resumption of suit land. In the absence of
resumption proceedings of the suit land, the court cannot accept the evidence of DW1
Mandal Revenue Officer, Kurnool with regard to resuming of the suit land. Therefore,
I have no hesitation to come to conclusion that Mandal Revenue Officer, Kurnool has

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

10

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

not adopted proper procedure while resuming the suit land and possession given to
Education Officer cannot be said legal.

22. The learned Asst. Government Pleader pointed that the Mandal Revenue Officer
resumed the suit schedule land for public purpose as the suit land is an assigned
land. It is true that there are some conditions in D. Form patta that the Government
may take the assigned lands if it is required for the public purpose. But, in this case,
the facts are different. The plaintiffs belong to Yerikala Community (Schedule Tribe).
It is also the case of plaintiff that except the suit land, they have no other land of their
own. They purchased the suit schedule land under a registered sale deed in the year
1970 DW1 admitted in his cross-examination that they have issued Ex.A3 patta pass
book in respect of suit schedule land and also Ex.A4 to Ex.A6 land revenue receipts
for having paid the land revenue by the plaintiffs to the suit schedule property. If
really, the plaintiffs family is not in possession and enjoyment of the suit land, there
is no need to issue Ex.A3 patta pass book to the plaintiffs and also receive land
revenue from the plaintiffs. Learned Asst. Govt.

pleader argued that buildings were raised in the suit property. Even structures raised in the suit
property, it has no significance to the circumstances of present case.

23. DW1 Mandal Revenue officer on one hand he admits having issued Ex.A3 patta pass book and
Ex.A4 to A6 land revenue receipts and on the other hand, denies the plaintiff peaceful possession in
respect of the suit schedule property. It is not the case of defendant that they have not issued Ex.A3
to A6 patta pass book and land revenue receipts. Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the
case there is no proof when Government resuming the suit land and is handed over possession to
Educational Officer, Kurnool. Therefore I have to answer issues 4 and 5 against defendant and in
favour of plaintiffs.

Further, there is no material on record to show that the Mandal Revenue officer has adopted proper
procedure while resuming the suit land. Therefore, the resumption of suit land can be said as
improper and illegal.

24. RECASTED ISSUE FRAMED ON 30-7-1999:

On this issue, the burden lies on the plaintiffs to prove that they are the owners of
suit schedule property and they are entitled for declaration and also relief of recovery
of possession.

25. Coming to the evidence of Second Plaintiff as PW1 that the suit schedule land originally belongs
to one Madiga Govindu of her village. The said Govindu mortgaged the suit schedule land to Perugu
Swamy Reddy. As the Govindu did not pay the mortgage amount, the Swamy Reddy filed a suit
against the Govindu, the said suit was decreed. One Kuruva Ramanna purchased the suit schedule
property in court auction and took possession of the same through court. Ex.A1 is registration
extract of sale certificate in E.P. 51/59 in O.S. 178/67 for having purchased the suit schedule

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

11

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

property by Kuruva Ramanna in court auction.

26. Further, according to PW1, Rosanna the father of first plaintiff purchased the suit schedule
property under the original of Ex.A2 dt. 10-12-1970. Considering the possession and enjoyment, the
Government also issued patta pass book in favour of her father-in- law. Ex. A3 is such pass book.
They have been paying the land revenue to the suit schedule land. Ex.A4 to Ex.A6 are such receipts.
Further, according to PW1, the suit schedule property is an agricultural land and they are raising
crops in the suit schedule property. The Government took the possession of suit schedule property
for constructing the school without their consent. First plaintiff her husband also sent Ex.A7 petition
to District Collector, Kurnool. The District Collector, Kurnool did not act on Ex.A7. Thereafter notice
under Section 80 C.P.C. issued. Ex.A8 is such notice at 4-1-1996. Ex.A9 is served acknowledgments
relating to Ex.A8 Sec. 80 C.P.C. notice. The District Collector, Kurnool issued reply notices which
are Ex.A10 to Ex.A12.

27. Further, according to plaintiffs that they belong to Yerikala community which is a schedule tribe
caste. The Mandal Revenue Officer has issued Ex.A13 caste certificate to that effect. They were in
possession and enjoyment of the suit schedule property. The suit land is not assigned land. Hence,
to declare their rights in respect of the suit schedule land and also deliver the same.

28. In the cross-examination, PW1 denied the suggestion that they have no way connected or related
to the suit schedule property. PW1 further denied the suggestion that they never raised any crop in
the suit schedule property. PW1 further denied the suggestion that they are neither the owners nor
possessors of the suit schedule property. As seen from Ex.A1 registration extract of sale certificate
would go to show that the legal representatives of Perugu Swamy Reddy filed suit in O.S. 178/67
against the legal representatives of Govindu and others to pass a preliminary decree, in respect of
suit schedule property. In the auction, one Kuruva Ramanna purchased the schedule property for
Rs. 600/- being the highest auction purchaser. So, as seen from Ex.A1, sale certificate issued by the
competent Civil Court, that Kuruva Ramanna purchased the suit schedule property in court auction
being the highest bidder.

29. Further as seen Ex.A2 registration extract sale deed dt. 10-12- 1970, it discloses that Rosanna,
the father of first plaintiff purchased the suit schedule property for Rs. 600/- from Ramanna. It is
also evident that considering the possession and enjoyment of Yerikala Rosanna, the father of first
plaintiff, the Government issued Ex.A3 patta pass book in respect of the suit schedule property. As
seen from Ex. A4 to Ex.A6, the plaintiffs family have paid necessary land revenue to the suit
schedule property. It is also evident that the first plaintiff sent petitions to the District Revenue
authorities for taking possession of his property by Mandal Revenue officer, Kurnool which is
evident under Ex.A7, Ex.A8, Ex.A10 to Ex.A12. It is clear that the District Revenue authorities did
not act on the notices given by the plaintiff to enquire the dispute with regard to suit schedule
property. The District Revenue authorities did not take any action, there after the first plaintiff has
issued Ex.A8 Section 80 C.P.C.

statutory notice and filed present suit for the reliefs as stated above.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

12

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

30. It is the case of plaintiffs that they belong to Yerikala community (schedule tribe) they do not
possess any other land except the suit schedule property. The Mandal Revenue Officer, Kurnool did
not issue any notices nor enquired at the time of resumption of land.

31. It is the case of defendant that the plaintiffs are strangers to the suit schedule property. The
Govindu original assignee has no right to alienate the suit schedule property to anybody. The
plaintiffs were never in possession and enjoyment of the suit schedule property. If really, the
plaintiffs are not in possession and enjoyment of the suit schedule property, the question of issuing
Ex.A3 patta pass book duly signed by then Tahsildar and village Karnam to Rosanna, the father of
first plaintiff does not arise. If the plaintiffs family were not in possession of the suit property, the
question of taking any land revenue with them under Ex.A4 to Ex.A6 does not arise. If we correlate,
the evidence of PW1, coupled with Ex.A1 to Ex.A6, it would clinchingly and conclusively establish
that the plaintiffs are the owners and possessors of the suit schedule property.

32. Having considered the possession and enjoyment of the suit schedule property of the plaintiffs
family, the Government has issued Ex.A3 patta pass book and also received land revenue under
Ex.A4 to Ex.A6. One thing is certain that the Mandal Revenue Officer has not adopted proper
procedure while resuming the suit schedule land. The Mandal Revenue officer should have allotted
some other land to the plaintiffs in view of suit property or to pay some compensation to them for
resuming the land as the plaintiffs belong to Yerikala caste which is a schedule tribe community.

33. In the instant case, the plaintiff have not only marked Ex.A1 to Ex. A6, but also examined second
plaintiff as PW1 to prove their title and possession in respect of the suit schedule property.
Therefore, I have no hesitation to hold that the plaintiffs are the owners of the plaint schedule
property, certainly they are entitled for recovery of possession of suit schedule property. The issue
is, answered in favour of plaintiffs and against the defendants.” (Emphasis supplied) B. IMPUGNED
JUDGMENT

26. Aggrieved by the judgment & decree passed by the Trial Court, the respondents preferred an
Appeal before the High Court of Judicature at Andhra Pradesh being in AS No. 1931 of 2002.

27. Before the High Court, the respondents submitted that the suit land, having been assigned to
Harijana Govindanna, by its very nature was a government assigned land, and thereby any attempt
to alienate it was consequently invalid. It was argued that due process of law was followed to resume
the land. The record clearly indicated that the Mandal Revenue Officer at Kurnool, acting under
proceedings No. Rc.B.No.184/89 dated 03.02.1989, resumed possession and subsequently on
01.05.1989, transferred the land to the District Educational Officer in strict compliance with the
statutory requirements.

28. It was further submitted that the fact as stated above established that the appellant and their
predecessors had no right, title or authority to convey any interest in the Subject Land. While
contending so, the respondents placed strong reliance on the following decisions:

(i) Dharma Reddy v. Sub-Collector, Bodhan & Ors. reported in (1987) 1 APLJ 171.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

13

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

(ii) Chittoor District Co-op. Milk Producers Union Ltd., Milk Products Factory v. C.
Rajamma. reported in (1996) 2 ALT 526.

29. The appellants herein, while opposing the appeal, before the High Court placed strong reliance
on the decision in K.M. Kamallula Basha v. District Collector, Chittoor District, Chittoor reported in
(2009) 3 ALD 385.

30. The High Court framed the following point for its determination:

“1. Whether the Plaintiff got no right and title over the property and the
Defendant/Appellant got right of resumption of land in claiming as assigned land for
the public purpose and if so, the Trial Court’s decree and judgment in favour of the
Plaintiffs impugned in the appeal by the Defendant/Appellant is unsustainable, so
also on the ground of maintainability?”

31.The High Court allowed the appeal and thereby set aside the judgment & decree of the Trial Court
on the ground that the appellants had failed to establish their title over the Subject Land and further
that they had failed to produce any valid documents to counter the respondent’s case that the
subject land was a government-assigned land.

32. The High Court relying on the decision in K.M. Kamallula Basha(supra) took the view that if a
D-Form patta contains a condition permitting the Government to resume an assigned land for a
public purpose, such as the establishment of a milk-processing plant by a cooperative society, such
condition remains binding irrespective of the duration of possession by the assignee or those
claiming through them. The Court noted that in cases of assigned lands, the proprietary rights
remain with the Government, and as such, no assignee can claim a title beyond what is expressly
stipulated in the conditions of assignment. It was further observed that an assignee cannot lawfully
transfer an assigned land, and consequently, no transferee can claim a better title than the assignee.

33.Accordingly, the High Court held that the assignee, being in permissive possession by virtue of
the assignment, and any alienee deriving title from such possession, whether through voluntary or
involuntary alienation, cannot obtain a title superior to that which the original assignee and his legal
representatives had. Even when the land is alienated through a court auction or by mortgage to a
private individual who subsequently resells the property, the title acquired remains limited to the
rights originally conferred by the assignment.

34.Few relevant observations made by the High Court in its impugned judgment are reproduced
hereinbelow:

“25. It is also deposed by D.W. 1 that the said Govindu, original assignee had no right
to transfer or alienate to anybody. It was revealed in the cross examination of D.W.1
that according to Board Standing Orders No. 15, pattas were issued with conditions in
favour of the assignees. It is deposed that conditions are administrative in nature. In
fact, Board Standing Orders got statutory force as a subordinate legislation and when

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

14

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

the original assignment by patta issued is subject to conditions and the B.S.O. No. 15
is not in dispute by plaintiffs including from D.W. 1 cross examination in favour of
the original assignee, Govindu they have no right to dispute the enforceability of
B.S.O. No.15, more particularly, even in the suit.

26. It is also brought in the cross examination that it is the Government land and
after assigning the Government land, it is being called as patta land of the assignee.
He deposed that he does not know whether individual notices were issued to the
occupants before resumption and any personal enquiry was conducted. He deposed
that no enquiry conducted under Section 3 of the A.P. Assigned Lands (Prohibition of
Transfers) Act, 1977 (in brief 'the Act'). In fact, for resumption of land for public
purpose, Section 3 of the Act has no direct application, as Section 3 reads, prohibition
of any transfer is null and void and unless the transfer is to a landless poor, the land
is to be resumed. Here, D.W. l deposed that there is a violation of the assignment
conditions brought by D-Form patta by transfer also under Section 3 of the Act. He
denied the suggestion that suit land assigned Govindu was on market value and thus
the suit land is a patta land of Govindu. It is important to note here that it is a clear
admission from the plaintiffs by said suggestion not even inadvertent one being
unambiguous to bind the plaintiffs that the suit land is the Government assigned
land, assigned to the original person Govindu i.e., assignee. It is for the plaintiffs to
establish therefrom that it was assigned for consideration or without right of
resumption or Govindu got any absolute rights, which they did not prove. He also
denied the suggestion that they did not follow the correct procedure and manipulated
the records and occupying the land from the possession of the plaintiffs. From the
said suggestion also, they are indirectly saying that there is some procedure followed
and as such it is for the plaintiffs to show how the procedure followed is not correct.
There is no worth evidence in this regard, more particularly, from the evidence of
P.W. 1/2nd plaintiff who is the only witness examined on behalf of the plaintiffs. In
the reexamination, even D.W.1 deposed that other assignees never raised any
objection for resumption of the lands to construct the buildings of the Education
Department. He did not disclose that fact, but for asked in the cross examination
including the names of the other assignees. It is also crystal clear that suit land is part
of the Government assigned land by D-Form patta in favour of the Harijana Govindu,
way back in 1943, with right of resumption by the Government at any time and the
assignee is like a licencee and not absolute owner and thus any length of possession
does not confer any right, much less to set up any adverse possession.

27. From this background, coming to the legal position, in K.M. Kamallula Basha
(supra) it was held that, under Section 3, there is a prohibition for transfer of the
assigned land that was assigned prior to 1954, would not operate for assignments
made two decades earlier thereto and the purchaser of assigned land acquires
ownership rights by prescription, if he enjoys possession of said land for 30 years.
For the said conclusion in the writ petition referred but for relied upon Mandal
Revenue Officer report suggesting for no objection certificate for registration in

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

15

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

favour of the transferee of the assigned land that was since objected by the District
Collector impugned in the writ petition in the Sub-

Registrar insisted for no objection of the Government land for transfer from the Government. This
decision no way dealt with the earlier precedents on the scope of the law including the provisions of
the A. P. Assigned Lands (Prohibition of Transfers) Act, 1977.

28. The Full Bench Judgment of this Court in Dharma Reddy (supra), held that the A.P. Assigned
Lands (Prohibition of Transfers) Act (9 of 1977), Section 3(1) is retrospective in nature, which
applies even to transfer of assigned land taking place prior to the Act came into force for resumption
of the land to the original assignee by disbursing the transfer alienee unless the alienee is a landless
poor. Therefore, the expression in K.M. Kamalluia Basha (supra) that runs contrary to the Full
Bench expression in Dharma Reddy (supra), cannot be outweighed. Apart from it, in the Full Bench
expression it was observed that while answering a reference upholding the Division Bench
expression of Dharma Reddy (supra) of retrospective operation by over ruling of earlier Division
Bench expression of (1979) 1 ALT 79 of only prospective in operation while answering the said
reference also by referring to the Apex Court's expression in Manchegowda v. State of Karnataka,
under the Karnataka S.C. & S.T. Prohibition of transfer of certain lands Act 2 of 1979, the provisions
of which are identical to the Act 7 of 1977 are similar analogy to rely on the probabilities that where
the transferee acquires only a defeasible title liable to be defeated in accordance with law, avoidance
of such defeasible title which still remains to be defeated in accordance with law at the date of
commencement of the Act and recovery of possession of such granted land on the basis of provisions
contained in Sections 4 and 5 of the Act cannot be said to be constitutionally invalid and such a
provision cannot be termed as unconscionable, unjust and arbitrary. It was also observed that an
assignee or transferee shall not get any indefeasible title over the assigned Land for prohibiting the
resumption.

29. In Chittoor District Co-op. Milk Producers Union Ltd., (supra) also it was held that in the
D-Form patta when there was condition No.17 for resumption of assigned land by the Government
for public purpose without compensation where it is for establishing milk processing plan by a
society, the same is permissible and assignee shall not have any right to property more than what is
stipulated in the assignment conditions and that too in the case of assignment land the proprietary
land remains with the Government and thereby Government can resume the land for public purpose
at any time irrespective of duration of possession of land by assignee or those who inherited from
the assignee or claiming through it was so held by setting aside the Single Judges order reported in
Smt. C. Rajamma vs The District Collector, wherein the Division Bench observed at paras 8 and 9 to
the conclusion that it is the well settled law that when on the one side there is 'public interest' and
on the other side interest of an individual, the Court will protect the 'public interest and not the
interest of an individual'. Resumption of land, we have already noticed, is intended for a public
purpose and thus the public interest is in favour of resumption of land. No assignee can get a right to
transfer and in that no transferee can get a right. The document of assignment has incorporated a
condition and that condition always remained alive irrespective of the duration of possession of land
by the assignee or those who inherited from the assignee. The principle of derivative title is not at all
attracted in the case of an assignment because the proprietary right remains with the person who

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

16

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

assigns and does not vest in the assignee.

30. Having regard to the above, the assignee is for all purposes in permissive possession by virtue of
the assignment, so also any alienee from the assignee, either from voluntary alienation or
involuntary alienation, for its makes no difference and thereby this assigned land prohibited from
alienation, alienated through court - auction pursuant to the alienation by mortgage to a private
individual and who in turn brought the property to sale, the auction purchaser can get no better title
than what the original assignee and his legal representatives got, so also the in turn alienee from the
auction purchaser as well as the in turn alienee legal representatives or those claiming through. As
such, the Plaintiffs cannot claim any right or title over the property and they cannot even set up
adverse possession against the Government from any length of possession even more than 30 years
and they have no iota of right to oppose the resumption much less to seek for restoration of the land
by the Government to them and the land having been taken possession and constructed buildings
thereby the trial court went wrong. Accordingly, the Point No.1 is answered.” (Emphasis supplied) C.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANTS

35.We heard Mr. S. Niranjan Reddy, the learned senior counsel appearing for the appellants
(original plaintiffs). Mr. Reddy urged that over and above the oral submissions made by him, the
written submissions filed on behalf of the appellants may also be taken into consideration. The
written submissions read thus:

“1. Petitioner has already filed its written synopsis of submission on 26.12.2021 along
with a compilation of relevant statutes and judgments. This Special Leave Petition
was heard and reserved on 21.01.2025. In compliance of the order dated 21.01.2025,
these written submissions are being filed in addition to the written synopsis of
submission already filed.

2. In these submissions Reference to the judgments and statutes is from the
‘Compilation for Final Hearing on behalf of Petitioners’ already filed on behalf of
Petitioners.

3. PETITIONER’S CASE: Petitioner is the Plaintiff in the subject suit from which the
instant SLP arises. The suit was filed for declaration and recovery of possession of
subject land. In the suit, the Petitioner traced back their title to 1943, when the land
was owned by one Mr. Govindu. Title pleaded and proved by the Petitioner is as
follows:

a) Mr. Govindu had mortgaged the subject property (in 1943)

b) After failure to pay the mortgage money, the subject property was foreclosed and
sold in a Court auction after default (in July 1970)

c) Petitioner’s predecessor purchased the subject property from the Court auction
purchaser vide a registered sale deed (in December 1970)

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

17

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

d) Thereafter, the Petitioner’s family had been in continuous enjoyment and
possession of the subject property.

e) Petitioner’s predecessor was also issued a pattadar passbook under the Andhra
Pradesh Rights in Land and Pattadar Passbooks Act, 1971 (“ROR Act”) and paid land
revenue on the subject land.

4. In 1995 for the first time, State (Respondent No.1) illegally disposed the Petitioner, after which
after following due process under Section 80 of CPC, the subject suit was filed for Declaration of title
and recovery of possession.

5. RESPONDENT’S CASE: It was Respondent’s case that the subject land is a government land
assigned to Mr. Govindu. Respondent claimed that the assignment was made subject to the
condition of non-alienation and the government can also resume the land. It was claimed that the
subject land was resumed after following due process. Respondent did not file any documents in the
Trial. As such no documents, whatsoever, were marked on behalf of the Respondent.

6. THE JUDGMENTS: The Trial Court decreed the suit in Petitioner’s favour. The same was
erroneously reversed by the Hon’ble High Court in a first appeal vide the Impugned Judgment.

7. The following are Petitioner’s submissions:

I. RESPONDENT’S DEFENCE BASED ON THE PLEA OF ASSIGNMENT IS
MISCONCEIVED AND LEGALLY ERRONEOUS.

8. Firstly, except for a bald plea, Respondent had not filed a single document to demonstrate that
the subject land was an assigned land.

9. Even if the Respondent’s stand on assignment is considered on demurrer, it is settled position of
law in the State of Andhra Pradesh that the non-alienation clause was only introduced vide G.O.Ms.
No. 1142 in 1954 and the assignments made prior thereto were freely alienable.

10. In the State of Andhra Pradesh, there are 3 distinct periods on the issue of assignments and
non-alienation.

PRIOR TO 1954: There was no condition of non-alienation. FROM 1954-177: Executive instructions
in G.O.Ms. No. 1142 governed the assignments, which introduced the condition of non- alienation.

POST 1977: The Andhra Pradesh Assigned Lands (Prohibition of Transfers) Act, 1977 (“Assignment
Act”) was enacted. Section 2(1) of the Act defines “assigned lands” and “assigned” as lands assigned
to the “subject to the condition of non alienation”.

11. State authorities routinely try to illegally interfere in land ownerships of private parties, with long
standing titles and possession – as in the present case – contending that the subject land was

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

18

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

assigned.

12. In a catena of judgments, the Hon’ble High Court dealt with this issue categorially holding that
the State cannot interfere in assignments made prior to 1954.

• KM Kamallula Basha v. District Collector reported in 2009 SCCOnline AP 88.

• G Satyanarana v. The Government of Andhra Pradesh reported in 2014 SCCOnline AP 334.

• PV Rajendra Kumar v. Government of Andhra Pradesh reported in 2010 SCCOnline AP 919.

13. It was also held in Satyanarana’s case that the burden of proof lies on the State to demonstrate
that the assignments contained a condition of non-alienation.

14. The Hon’ble High Court failed to consider the ratio in Kamallula Basha’s case on the premise
that the Assignments Act was held to be retrospectively applicable by a Full Bench judgment in
Dharma Reddy v. Sub Collector reported in 1986 SCC Online AP 141.

15. The Hon’ble High Court failed to appreciate that the ratio on retrospectivity in Dharma Reddy’s
case is based on the express wording of the Section 3.

16. If Section 3 is read with Section 2(1) of the Act, it is clear that the ratio in Dharma Reddy’s case
was meant to deal with situations between 1954 and 1977. In fact, if the eventual decision of the
Single Judge of Dharma Reddy after reference is observed, this legal aspect becomes very clear.

17. But for this misreading of the Dharma Reddy’s case, the Kamallula Basha’s case and other
judgments governing the filed are squarely applicable to the instant case, thus supporting the
Petitioner’s case ex facie.

18. For the first time in the Reply to the SLP, the Respondent took a new factual plea that the subject
assignment was made in 1955. This is misconceived for the following reasons:

• Such stand was never taken before the Trial Court or the High Court. Therefore,
new factual pleas cannot be introduced in the Supreme Court.

• The High Court itself held that the assignment in the present case was “way back in
1943”.

• The mortgage by the original owner Mr. Govindu was a registered mortgage in the
year 1943 • The factum of mortgage in the year 1943 was also specifically pleaded in
the Petitioner’s plaint. In response thereto, in its Written Statement, the Respondent
did not take any plea that the assignment was after 1954, much less a specific plea
that the assignment was in the year 1955.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

19

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

PETITIONER’S TITLE IS LEGALLY SUPPORTED BY SECTION 6 OF THE ROR ACT

20. It has been the petitioner’s plea that the subject land is a patta land and not an
assigned land. The petitioner also filed the pattadar passbook issued under the ROR
Act.

21. Section 6 of the ROR Act categorially stipulates that the entries in record of rights
maintained under the Act “shall be presumed to be true” until the contrary is proved.
The presumption provided under Section 6 is not a factual presumption (‘may
presume’) but a legal presumption (‘shall presume’) to be read with Section 4 of the
Evidence Act, 1872.

22. Respondent had not filed a single document to disprove the legal presumption to
t h e   r e l i e f s   c l a i m e d   i n   t h e   s u i t . ”   D .   S U B M I S S I O N   O N   B E H A L F   O F   T H E
RESPONDENTS

36. We heard Mr. Anand Padmanabhan, the learned senior counsel appearing for the
respondents. His written submissions read thus:

“(i) The land measuring Sy. No. 451/1 measuring Ac 3.34 in Dinnedevarapadu Village
(hereinafter referred to as the “Subject Land”) was derived from Sy. No. 396
classified as Government Land (dotted land) in the land record/Resettlement
Register. The said land was assigned to one Harijan Govindu in NRC 519/1364 dt
12.1.1955 of the Affidavit dt 30.12.2021 filed by the State of Andhra Pradesh). Such an
assignment of land is subject to certain conditions, pertinently that such a right is
heritable but non-alienable, and the assignee cannot transfer the land.

(ii) On the requisition of the District Educational Officer, Kurnool for transfer of the
subject land for the construction of the District Institute of Education & Training
(DIET) building. A notice was issued in the village giving due chances for any
objections, and the Gram Panchayat, Dinnedevarapadu also gave its consent. The
Government took possession of the land vide proceedings No.Rc.C.184/89 of the
Mandal Revenue Officer dated 03.02.1989 and the possession was given to the
Education Department on 01.05.1989. The DIET building was constructed, and has
been functioning since 1995.

(iii) However, after the construction of the building, a Suit being OS No.115/96 was filed before the
Ld. Principal Subordinate Judge, Kurnool, wherein the present Petitioner was Plaintiff No.2,
praying for declaration of title and recovery of possession of the Subject Land. The Plaintiffs claimed
their title to the land based on a sale deed dated 10.12.1970, by way of which the Plaintiffs’
predecessor purchased the property from one Kuruva Ramanna, who had bought the subject
property in a Court auction vide a Sale Certificate dated 01.07.1970.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

20

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

The said Court auction allegedly took place since the assignee Harijan Govindu had mortgaged the
subject property, and thereafter his LRs had defaulted in the mortgage. Apart from a bare averment
that Harijan Govindu mortgaged the subject property vide mortgage deed dated 6.6.1943 (thereby
implying that the assignment to Harijan Govindu was prior to 1943), there was no material
produced to show the date of the assignment. No documents whatsoever prior to 1970 were
produced establishing the date of assignment in any way.

(iv) Petitioner No.1 was the sole Plaintiff Witness and examined as PW1. She specifically deposed
that she was not aware of the assignment of the land to Harijan Govindu and the conditions in the
Patta.

(v) The Mandal Revenue Officer (MRO) was examined as DW2 and specifically stated that the land
had been assigned to Harijan Govindu subject to the condition of non-alienation.

(vi) By way of the decree dated 05.08.1999, the Ld. Trial Court decreed the Suit in favour of the
Plaintiffs. A perusal of the said decree/order reveals that there has been no examination of the
title/possession of the Petitioners/Plaintiff. Further, for establishing the Petitioners/Plaintiffs’ case
that they had been dispossessed illegally, instead of relying on the Plaintiff to establish their case,
the Ld. Trial Court placed the burden on the Defendant/Government to refute it (Pg 101-102). The
consideration of the Ld. Trial Court nowhere relies on/finds that the assignment to Harijan Govindu
was in/before 1943, but only on the sale deed of 1970 (Pg 102-106). The Ld. Trial Court directed
recovery of possession to the Plaintiffs/Petitioner.

(vii) Aggrieved by the order of the Ld. Trial Court, the State filed an Appeal being Appeal Suit
No.1931 of 2002 before the Hon’ble High Court, in which the impugned order came to be passed,
whereby the Hon’ble High Court set aside the order of the Ld. Trial Court. The Hon’ble High Court
inter alia observed that the Petitioners/Plaintiffs did not file any document showing the title of
Harijan Govindu (Pg11, Pg15). The Hon’ble High Court primarily based the impugned order on the
fact that rather than placing the burden on the Plaintiffs to prove their case, the Ld. Trial Court
erroneously placed the burden on the Defendant/State and drew an adverse inference (Pg 12-13).
The Hon’ble High Court also duly noted that the Petitioners herein accepted that buildings had been
constructed and the Government was running an educational institution in the subject land since
1995 (Pg 14). The Hon’ble High Court also noted that no evidence of cultivation was adduced by the
Plaintiffs. There is only 1 stray sentence that the assignment was in 1943, but the same is not borne
out from any material/evidence on record whatsoever, especially in light of Petitioner No.1’s
admission that she did not know the conditions of the assignment, and it is not the basis of the
impugned order. The Hon’ble High Court also correctly relied on the Full Bench Judgment of the
Hon’ble High Court, whereby the operation of the A.P. Assigned Lands (Prohibition of Transfers)
Act, 1977 were held to be retrospective. Accordingly, the Hon’ble High Court allowed the Appeal. B.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT/STATE TO DEMONSTRATE THAT THE
JUDGMENT DOES NOT SUFFER FROM ANY INFIRMITY:

(viii) The Petitioners Have Not Proved Title to the Subject Land:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

21

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

● The Petitioners claim their title as a subsequent purchaser of the assignee Harijan
Govindu. It is admittedly the Petitioners’ own case that after 1954, any assignment to
landless poor contained the condition of non-alienation (Pg C). However, apart from
relying on a bare, unsupported observation of the Hon’ble High Court and a bare
statement that Harijan Govindu mortgaged the property in 1943, there is no material
adduced to demonstrate that the assignment was before 1954. To the contrary, the
land record produced by the Respondent State before this Hon’ble Court showing
assignment being of the year 1955 (Pg 9 of the Affidavit dt 30.12.2021 filed by the
State of Andhra Pradesh) as well as the deposition of DW1, Mandal Revenue Officer
before the Ld. Trial Court clearly demonstrates that there the assignment was one,
which contained the condition of non-alienation. ● In this regard, reliance may be
placed on Sections 91 and 92 of the Indian Evidence Act, which cover evidence of
documents including grants. Section 91 clearly states that no evidence of such
document is acceptable “..except the document itself, or secondary evidence of its
contents in cases in which secondary evidence is admissible..” In the present case, the
Plaintiffs/Petitioners have not produced the document/any admissible evidence in
terms of the Indian Evidence Act to prove assignment to Harijan Govindu being prior
to 1954. ● To the contrary, the Respondent State has produced the Extract of the
Land Register showing the assignment to be of 1955 as well as the oral evidence of
DW2 before the Ld. Trial Court, wherein he asserts that the assignment had a
condition of non-alienation, which is not controverted by the Petitioner/Plaintiff in
any manner.

● The Petitioner has relied on the full Bench judgment of the Hon’ble High Court in
the case of Dharma Reddy v. Sub- Collector, Bodhan & Ors. AIR 1987 AP 160 (pg109-
of the Compilation for Final Hearing on Behalf of the Petitioner). The said judgment,
in para 2, frames the issue being that whether the operation of the A.P. Assigned
Lands (Prohibition of Transfers) Act, 1977 is retrospective. The said question was
answered holding the operation of the Act to be retrospective, and any transfer of an
assigned land even prior to coming into force of the Act to be illegal. It was held as
follows:

“10. After having considered all aspects of the matter in depth, due regard having
been had to the submissions made by the counsel for the writ petitioners agreeing
with the views of the Second Division Bench in the judgment in W.P. Nos. 3972/78
and batch dt. 9-10-1980 V. C. Kondayya's case, (supra) we answer the question
formulated for our decision in the affirmative holding that S. 3(1) of the Act not only
prohibits transfer of the assigned lands on or after the commencement of the Act, but
also declares retrospectively that all transfers of such assigned land which took place
prior to the coming into force of the Act shall also be null and void, non est in the eye
of law, and no right or title in such assigned land shall vest in any person acquiring
the land by such transfer. Having thus answered the question of law, which arose out
of the order of reference to the Full Bench we direct these writ petitions to be posted
before a learned single Judge to deal with the other points, if any arising out of the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

22

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

pleadings, and to finally dispose them of…” (Emphasis supplied) ● On the issue of
possession/cultivation, it is pertinent to point out that admittedly, as per the
statement of the Petitioner as well as the finding of the Hon’ble High Court, the
buildings had been erected and were operational by 1995. Thus, the possession must
have been taken by the Government much earlier in order to construct the said
building. However, the Petitioner/Plaintiff instituted the suit only in 1996. If the land
had been in continuous possession/cultivation, it is submitted that the
P e t i t i o n e r s / P l a i n t i f f s   w o u l d   h a v e   k n o w n   o f   t h e   t a k i n g   o v e r   b y   t h e
Government/resumption, yet the Suit was filed years later, thereby demonstrating
that the Petitioners were not in continuous possession/cultivation.

● Thus, viewed from any angle, the Plaintiffs/Petitioners did not have valid title to
the land, as the land was land assigned to a landless poor, and could not be
transferred in any manner. Such a sale is illegal and void ab initio. The assignee,
Harijan Govindu could not have legally mortgaged the land, and therefore the
Petitioners’ vendor did not have any right/title to the land. Consequently, the sale
deed based on which the Petitioners claim ownership is unlawful/void, and cannot
create any right in favour of the Petitioners.

(ix) The Decree Was Passed by the Trial Court on Absolutely Erroneous Grounds:

(a) The Plaintiff did not Prove the Cause of Action:

● As discussed above, the Ld. Trial Court did not base its decree on the case set up by
the Petitioner/Plaintiffs. The Plaintiffs therein made vague assertions of valid title
a n d   t h e   l a n d   b e i n g   t a k e n   “ w i t h o u t   c o n s e n t ”   a n d   f a i l e d   t o   a d d u c e   a n y
documents/material to prove their title or the right of the assignee Harijan Govindu
to transfer the land. On the contrary, the Mandal Revenue Officer gave clear and
cogent oral evidence that the assignment to Harijan Govindu was conditional, and
nonalienable. Yet, without examining any document to prove their title, the Ld. Trial
Court instead placed the burden on the State/Defendant, and drew an adverse
inference.

● In light of the Petitioner/Plaintiff’s specific admission before the Ld. Trial Court
that she did not know the conditions of the Patta, it is humbly submitted that she
cannot now be permitted to claim knowledge of the date/conditions of the
assignment, unsupported by any document/evidence.

● It is submitted that it is the most fundamental principle of civil law that the
Plaintiff must prove its case/cause of action independently, which as rightly found by
the Hon’ble High Court, the Petitioner herein failed to do.

xxx xxx xxx In the case of R. Hanumaiah v. State of Karnataka; (2010) 5 SCC 203,
this Hon’ble Court has laid down extensive guidelines on how Trial Courts ought to

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

23

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

consider title suits against the Government. Court held as follows:

“19. Suits for declaration of title against the government, though similar to suits for
declaration of title against private individuals differ significantly in some aspects. The
first difference is in regard to the presumption available in favour of the government.
All lands which are not the property of any person or which are not vested in a local
authority, belong to the government. All unoccupied lands are the property of the
government, unless any person can establish his right or title to any such land. This
presumption available to the government, is not available to any person or individual.
The second difference is in regard to the period for which title and/or possession
have to be established by a person suing for declaration of title. Establishing
title/possession for a period exceeding twelve years may be adequate to establish title
in a declaratory suit against any individual. On the other hand, title/possession for a
period exceeding thirty years will have to be established to succeed in a declaratory
suit for title against government. This follows from Article 112 of Limitation Act,
1963, which prescribes a longer period of thirty years as limitation in regard to suits
by government as against the period of 12 years for suits by private individuals. The
reason is obvious. Government properties are spread over the entire state and it is
not always possible for the government to protect or safeguard its properties from
encroachments. Many a time, its own officers who are expected to protect its
properties and maintain proper records, either due to negligence or collusion, create
entries in records to help private parties, to lay claim of ownership or possession
against the government. Any loss of government property is ultimately the loss to the
community. Courts owe a duty to be vigilant to ensure that public property is not
converted into private property by unscrupulous elements.

20. Many civil courts deal with suits for declaration of title and injunction against
government, in a casual manner, ignoring or overlooking the special features relating
to government properties.

Instances of such suits against government being routinely decreed, either ex parte or for want of
proper contest, merely acting upon the oral assertions of plaintiffs or stray revenue entries are
common. Whether the government contests the suit or not, before a suit for declaration of title
against a government is decreed, the plaintiff should establish, either his title by producing the title
deeds which satisfactorily trace title for a minimum period of thirty years prior to the date of the suit
(except where title is claimed with reference to a grant or transfer by the government or a statutory
development authority), or by establishing adverse possession for a period of more than thirty years.
In such suits, courts cannot, ignoring the presumptions available in favour of the government, grant
declaratory or injunctive decrees against the government by relying upon one of the principles
underlying pleadings that plaint averments which are not denied or traversed are deemed to have
been accepted or admitted.

21. A court should necessarily seek an answer to the following question, before it grants a decree
declaring title against the government : whether the plaintiff has produced title deeds tracing the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

24

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

title for a period of more than thirty years; or whether the plaintiff has established his adverse
possession to the knowledge of the government for a period of more than thirty years, so as to
convert his possession into title. Incidental to that question, the court should also find out whether
the plaintiff is recorded to be the owner or holder or occupant of the property in the revenue records
or municipal records, for more than thirty years, and what is the nature of possession claimed by the
plaintiff, if he is in possession - authorized or unauthorized; permissive; casual and occasional;
furtive and clandestine; open, continuous and hostile; deemed or implied (following a title).”
(Emphasis supplied) xxx xxx xxx

(c) In a Suit for Possession, the Burden of Proof of Ownership Lies on the Plaintiff as per Sec 110 of
the Indian Evidence Act:

● The Suit was filed in 1996, by which time the Government was admittedly in
possession of the Subject Land. The Petitioners/Plaintiffs inter alia prayed for
recovery of possession. In this regard, Section 110 of the Indian Evidence Act states
that, “When the question is whether any person is owner of anything of which he is
shown to be in possession, the burden of proving that he is not the owner is on the
person who affirms that he is not the owner.” ● The same has also been reiterated on
a number of occasions by this Hon’ble Court, illustratively in the case of Chuharmal
v. CIT; 1988 SCR (3) 788, wherein it was held by this Hon’ble Court that:

“6…Section 110 of the Evidence Act is material in this respect and the High Court
relied on the same which stipulates that when the question is whether any person is
owner of anything of which he is shown to be in possession, the onus of proving that
he is not the owner, is on the person who affirms that he is not the owner. In other
words, it follows from well settled principle of law that normally, unless contrary is
established, title always follows possession..” xxx xxx xxx

(x) The Petitioner’s Suit was Barred by Limitation:

● It is the clear and unequivocal stand of the Respondent/State that the land was
resumed vide proceedings dated 03.02.1989. however, the Suit was filed only in the
year 1996, without any proper cause of action, vague and artfully drafted averments
to conceal the delay, and thus the Suit was not maintainable.” E. ANALYSIS

37. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having gone
through the materials on record, the only question that falls for our consideration is
whether the High Court committed any error in passing the impugned judgment and
order.

38.Before adverting to the rival submissions canvassed on either side, we must try to
understand as to who is a Pattadar: A “Pattadar” is essentially a landowner who holds
a land deed (Patta) directly from the government and is registered in the land
revenue accounts as the holder or occupant of the land, liable to pay land revenue.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

25

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

39. To put it more elaborately, a “Patta” is a type of land deed issued by the
government, indicating ownership or the right to hold land. Consequentially, the
person who holds this land deed (Patta) is called a Pattadar. The Pattadars are
responsible for paying land revenue to the government and their names are
registered in the land revenue accounts of the government as a Pattadar, or as an
occupant, or a khatadar. A Pattadar Passbook is a document that contains all the
information about the landowner, including their landownership details. Revenue
officials, such as Tehsildars, are responsible for maintaining land records and
verifying, modifying, and registering Pattas. The Patwari is the land record official at
the village level, who maintains records of rights and other records concerning land.

40. Upon a comparison between a Land Patta Holder and a Land Allottee, it can be
seen that a Land Patta Holder is a person who has been granted a Patta (a legal
document) that confers rights over a specific piece of land, typically indicating
ownership or entitlement to use the land. On the other hand, a Land Allottee is a
person to whom land has been allotted by the Government or relevant authority,
often under specific conditions and for designated purposes.

41. There exist several key differences between a Land Patta Holder and a Land
Allottee. With respect to the nature of rights, it can be seen that a Land Patta Holder
possesses rights that are often permanent, heritable, and transferrable, as established
under various land revenue regulations. For instance, the Assam Land and Revenue
Regulation, 1886, states that a Patta Holder has a permanent, heritable and
transferable right of use and occupancy in their land.

However, a Land Allottee, may not have the same level of rights. Allotment can be conditional and
may not confer full ownership rights. For example, the conditions of allotment may restrict
transferability or impose specific usage requirement.

42. As far as their legal standing is concerned, the Patta Holder is recognized as having a legal claim
to the land, which can be defended in court. The Patta serves as evidence of ownership or
entitlement. A Land Allottee, on the other hand, may have limited rights, especially if the allotment
was made under specific government schemes or conditions that restrict ownership rights. For
instance, the Andhra Pradesh Assigned Lands (Prohibition of Transfers) Act, 1977 (the “Act of
1977”), imposes restrictions on the transfer of assigned lands. While Land Patta Holders generally
have the right to transfer their interests in the land, subject to any conditions specified in the patta,
the allottees may face restrictions on transferring their rights, particularly within a specified period
or without government permission.

43. At this juncture, we must also look into a few relevant legal provisions, particularly the Act of
1971 and the Act of 1977 respectively, as they existed during the date on which, according to the
respondents herein, the alleged resumption proceedings took place i.e., on 03.02.1989.

i. The Andhra Pradesh (Record of Rights in Land and Pattadar Pass Books) Act, 1971

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

26

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

44. A bare perusal of the Act of 1971 indicates that the purpose of a Pattadar Passbook is to ensure
that there remains a record of rights in respect of a particular stretch of land. Therefore, a person
holding a Pattadar Passbook is mandated under the said Act to have necessary entries of alienation,
transfer of land, etc. The Act of 1971 is reproduced below:

“1. Short title, extent and commencement: - (1) This Act may be called the Andhra
Pradesh (Record of Rights in Land and Pattadar Pass Books) Act, 1971.

(2) It extends to the whole of the State of Andhra Pradesh. (3) It shall come into force
in such area or areas and on such date or dates as the Government may, by
notification, from time to time specify in this behalf.” Section 2(4) defines the term
“land” as under:

“(4) "Land" means land which is used or is capable of being used for purposes of
agriculture, including horticulture but does not include land used exclusively for
non-agricultural purposes” Section 2(4-a) defines who is “Mandal Revenue Officer”
as under:

“[(4-a) "Mandal Revenue Officer" means the Officer-in charge of a Revenue Mandal
and includes any Officer of the Revenue Department authorised by the Commissioner
to perform the functions of the Mandal Revenue Officer under this Act” Section 2(6)
defines the term “Occupant” as under:

“(6) "Occupant" means a person in actual possession of land, other than a tenant or a
usufructuary mortgagee.” Section 2(7) defines who is “Pattadar” as under:

“(7) “Pattadar” includes every person who holds land directly under the Government
under a patta whose name is registered in the land revenue accounts of the
Government as pattadar or an occupant or khatadar and who is liable to pay land
revenue.” Section 2(9) defines “Records of Rights” as under:

“(9) “Record of Rights” means records prepared and maintained under the
provisions, or for the purposes of this Act” Sections 6, 6-A and 6-B read thus:

“6. Presumption of correctness of entries in record of rights

- Every entry in the record of rights shall be presumed to be true until the contrary is
proved or until it is otherwise amended in accordance with the provisions of this Act.

6-A. Passbook holder to have entries of alienation etc. recorded in Passbook:- (1)
Every Owner, Pattadar, mortagee, occupant, or tenant of any land shall apply for the
issue of a Passbook to the Mandal Revenue Officer on payment of such fee, as may be
prescribed:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

27

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

Provided that where no application is made under this sub- section, the Mandal
Revenue Officer may suo-moto issue a passbook after following the procedure
prescribed under sub- section (2) and collect the fee prescribed therefor.

(2) On making such application, the Mandal Revenue Officer shall cause an enquiry
to be made in such manner as may be prescribed and shall issue a passbook in
accordance with the Record of Rights with such particulars and in such form as may
be prescribed:

Provided that no such passbook shall be issued by the Mandal Revenue Officer unless
the Record of Rights have been brought up to date.

(3) The entries in the passbook may be corrected either suo-moto or on application
made to the Mandal Revenue Officer in the manner prescribed.

(4) The Government may prescribe by rules the manner in which the pass book may
be issued to all owners, pattadars, mortgagees or tenants and to such other person in
accordance with the Records of Rights.

(5) The passbook issued under sub-section (1) and duly certified by the Mandal
Revenue Officer and any other authority as may be prescribed shall be the record of
the title in respect of an owner and the rights and interests in land in respect of
others. Every entry in the passbook shall be presumed to be correct and true unless
the contrary is proved.

6-B. Passbook holder to have entries of alienation etc. recorded in passbook:- Notwithstanding
anything contained in the Registration Act, 1908, every passbook holder presenting a document of
title-deed before a registering officer appointed under the said Act, on or after coming into force of
the Andhra Pradesh Record of Rights in Land (Amendment) Act, 1980, relating to alienation or
transfer recorded in the passbook by such registering officer or by the recording authority in respect
of all other cases of transfers of land effected otherwise than under a registered document. ”

45. Thus, mere recording of right under the Act of 1971, by itself, may not be a conclusive proof of
title and ownership, but it definitely records rights of the person. Once the recording is done,
followed by the issuance of a pattadar pass book, the presumption in favour of the holder of the pass
book is that he is having right in the land in question. In the case on hand, the appellants have a sale
deed in their favour which never came to be questioned by the State at any point of time.

ii. The Andhra Pradesh Assigned Lands (Prohibition of Transfers) Act, 1977

46. The Act of 1977 restricts the transfer of assigned lands, indicating that an allotment does not
equate to full ownership rights. The Act of 1977 is another piece of legislation, which is protective in
its nature, with a view to prevent transfers and alienations of assigned lands. The said Act further
provides for restoration of such lands to the assignees. Section 3 of the Act of 1977 declares that

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

28

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any other law for the time being in force, no land
assigned to a landless poor person for the purpose of cultivation or as a house site shall be
transferred and shall be deemed never to have been transferred; and accordingly no right or title in
such assigned land shall vest in any person acquiring the land by such transfer. However, such
transfer of assigned land, if any, in favour of another landless poor person in good faith, for a
valuable consideration, is saved. The Competent Authority is assigned with the duty to take
possession of the assigned land after evicting the purchaser in possession and restore the assigned
land to the original assignee or his legal heir, or where it is not reasonably practicable to do so, to
resume the same to government for assignment to landless poor persons in accordance with the
Rules.

47. Section 2(1) defines the expression “assigned lands”. The same reads thus:

“Section 2. Definitions :- In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, (1)
“assigned lands” means lands assigned by the Government to the landless poor
persons under the rules for the time being in force, subject to the condition of non
alienation and includes lands allotted or transfered to landless poor persons under
the relevant law for the time being in force relating to land ceilings; and the word
"assigned" shall be construed accordingly.”

48. Section 2(3) defines who is a “landless poor person” and the same reads thus:

“(3) “landless poor person” means a person who owns an extent of land not more
than 1.011715 hectares (two and half acres) of wet land or 2.023430 hectares (five
acres) of dry land or such other extent of land as has been or may be specified by the
Government in this behalf from time to time, and who has no other means of
livelihood.”

49. Section 2(6) defines the term “transfer” as under:

“(6) “transfer” means any sale, gift, exchange, mortgage with or without possession,
lease or any other transaction with assigned lands, not being a testamentary
disposition and includes a charge on such property or a contract relating to assigned
lands in respect of such sale, gift, exchange, mortgage, lease or other transaction.”

50.A plain reading of the above provisions would show that three types of land are treated as
assigned lands for the purpose of the Act of 1977 : (i) the land assigned by the Government to a
landless poor person under the rules for the time being in force; (ii) the land allotted/transferred to
the landless poor person under relevant law relating to land ceilings; (iii) the land which is allotted
or transferred subject to the condition of non-alienation. Any person who owns an extent of less
than 1.011715 hectares (2.50 acres) of wet land or 2.023430 hectares (5.00 acres) of dry land is a
landless poor person. Assigned land is heritable and it can be transferred by testamentary
disposition. However, any sale, gift, exchange, lease, or any other transaction in relation to assigned
land is treated as transfer and Section 3(1) declares that such land shall not be transferred and shall

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

29

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

be deemed never to have been transferred. Any such transfer of assigned land shall not confer any
right on the purchaser of such assigned land and the land shall not vest in any person acquiring the
land by any such transaction.

51. Section 3 of the Act of 1977 reads thus:

“Section 3. Prohibition of transfer of assigned lands :- (1) Where, before or after the
commencement of this Act, any land has been assigned by the Government to a
landless poor person for purposes of cultivation or as a house site, then,
notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any other law for the time being in force
or in the deed of transfer or other document relating to such land, it shall not be
transferred and shall be deemed never to have been transferred; and accordingly no
right or title in such assigned land shall vest in any person acquiring the land by such
transfer.

(2) No landless poor person shall transfer any assigned land, and no person shall
acquire any assigned land, either by purchase, gift, 1ease, mortgage, exchange or
otherwise.

(3) Any transfer or acquisition made in contravention of the provisions of subsection
(1) or sub-section (2) shall be deemed to be null and void.

(4) The provisions of this section shall apply to any transaction of the nature referred
to in sub-section (2) in execution of a decree or order of a civil court or of any award
or order of any other authority.

(5) Nothing in this section shall apply to an assigned land which was purchased by a
landless poor person in good faith and for valuable consideration from the original
assignee or his transferee prior to the commencement of this Act and which is in the
possession of such person for purposes of cultivation or as a house site on the date of
such commencement.”

52.Section 3(2) of the Act of 1977 declares that no landless poor person shall transfer any assigned
land and no person shall acquire any assigned land. Sub- section (3) of Section 3 declares that any
transfer or acquisition made in contravention of the provisions of sub-section (1) or sub-section (2)
shall be deemed to be null and void. Sub-section (5) carves out an exception and a plain reading of
sub-section (5) would show that nothing in sub-sections (1) to (4) of Section 3 shall apply to the
assigned land which was purchased by a landless poor person in good faith and for valuable
consideration from the original assignee or his transferee, prior to the commencement of the Act
provided that such person is in possession of the land “as a person cultivating the land or uses it as a
house-site” on the date of such commencement.

53. Section 4 of the Act of 1977 reads thus:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

30

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

“Section 4. Consequence of breach of provisions of Section 3:-

(1) If, in any case, the District Collector or any other officer not below the rank of a
Tahsildar, authorised by him in this behalf, is satisfied that the provisions of
sub-section (1) of Section 3, have been contravened in respect of any assigned land,
he may, by order -

(a) take possession of the assigned land, after evicting the person in possession in
such manner as may be prescribed; and

(b) restore the assigned land to the original assignee or his legal heir, or where it is
not reasonably practicable to restore the land to such assignee or legal heir, resume
the assigned land to Government for assignment to landless poor persons in
accordance with the rules for the time being in force:

Provided that the assigned land shall not be so restored to the original assignee or his
legal heir more than once, and in case the original assignee or his legal heir transfers
the assigned land again after such restoration, it shall be resumed to the Government
for assignment to any other landless poor person.

(2) Any order passed under sub-section (1) shall be final and shall not be questioned
in any court of law and no injunction shall be granted by any court in respect of any
proceeding taken or about to be taken by any officer or authority or Government in
pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Act.

(3) For the purposes of this section, where any assigned land is in possession of a
person, other than the original assignee or his legal heir, it shall be presumed, until
the contrary is proved, that there is a contravention of the provisions of sub-section
(1) of section 3.”

54.Section 4 deals with consequences of breach of provisions of Section 3 and mandates that the
District Collector or any other officer not below the rank of a Tahsildar can take possession of the
assigned land after evicting the person in possession when provisions of sub-section (1) of Section 3
are contravened. Clause (b) of sub-section (1) of Section 4 requires the land to be restored to the
original assignee or his legal heirs, or where it is not reasonably practicable, the same can be
resumed for assignment to landless poor persons in accordance with the rules which are in force.
Such restoration of land to the original assignee after resumption from the purchaser shall not be
more than once. Even after restoration, if the land is transferred again, it shall be resumed to the
Government for assignment to any other landless poor person. Sub- section (3) of Section 4 throws
the burden on the person who is in possession of the assigned land to show that he has not
contravened the provisions of Section 3(1) of the Act of 1977.

55.Few other provisions of the Act of 1977 namely, Sections 5, 6 and 7 respectively are also relevant
for appreciating the question raised in this appeal and read as under:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

31

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

“Section 5. Prohibition of registration of assigned lands:--

Notwithstanding anything in the Registration Act, 1908 on or after the
commencement of this Act, no registering officer shall accept for registration any
document relating to the transfer of, or the creation of any interest in, any assigned
land included in a list of assigned lands in the district which shall be prepared by the
District Collector and furnished to the registering officer except after, obtaining prior
permission of the District Collector concerned for such registration.

Section 6. Exemption:--Nothing in this Act shall apply to the assigned lands held on
mortgage by the State or Central Government, any local authority, a Co-operative
Society, a scheduled bank or such other financial institution owned, controlled or
managed by a State Government or the Central Government, as may be notified by
the Government in this behalf.

Section 7. Penalty: - (1) Whoever acquires any assigned land in contravention of the
provisions of sub-section (2) of section 3 shall be punished with imprisonment which
may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees or
both.

(2) Whoever opposes or impedes the District Collector or any person authorised, in
taking possession of any assigned land under this Act shall be punished with
imprisonment which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to five
thousand rupees or with both.

(3) No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this section, except
with the previous sanction of the District Collector.”

56. Section 5 contains a non-obstante clause. It lays down that notwithstanding
anything in the Registration Act, 1908, after coming into force of the Act of 1977, no
registering officer shall accept registration of any document relating to transfer of any
assigned land. Nonetheless, as per the second part of Section 5, if the transfer of
assigned land is effected after obtaining prior permission of the District Collector
concerned for registration, it is open for any registering officer to accept any
document for registration relating to transfer of an assigned land. Section 6 enables
the assignee to mortgage the assigned land to a Co-operative Society, scheduled bank
and any financial institution owned, controlled or managed by the State Government
or the Central Government as may be notified by the State Government. It is also
necessary to notice that Section 7 prescribes imprisonment upto six months and fine
up to Rs. 2,000/- in case when there is contravention of the provisions of Section
3(2) of the Act of 1977.

57.It may be noted that the word “Tahsildar” occurring in sub-section (1) of Section 4
was later substituted with the words “Mandal Revenue Officer” vide Act No. 32 of

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

32

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

1989 which amended the Act of 1977. The amendment was published in the Official
Gazette on 05.12.1989. However, it has been brought to our attention that there
neither exists any difference in rank nor in functions between these two officers and
that the terms “Tehsildar” and “Mandal Revenue Officer” are used interchangeably.
Therefore, the existence of the expression “Tahsildar” during the time of the alleged
resumption proceedings No. R.C.C. 184/89 dated 03.02.1989 and its subsequent
substitution with the words “Mandal Revenue Officer” at a later point in time, does
not bear any significant importance as far as the issue at hand is concerned.

iii. Oral Evidence on record

58.We must now look into the oral evidence on record. A perusal of the transcripts thereof, shows
that the entire approach of the courts below in the present litigation was wrong. The Trial Court all
throughout proceeded to consider whether the resumption of the subject land was in accordance
with law, whereas, the High Court all throughout proceeded on the footing that since the subject
land was an assigned land and there was a breach of conditions on which the land was assigned, the
government was well within its power to resume the land for the purpose of construction of building
for the Education Department. The High Court seems to have totally ignored or rather overlooked
the fact that the appellants herein were indisputably in possession of the land from the year 1970 till
the subject land was resumed and the appellants came to be dispossessed. The High Court failed to
consider the legal effect of this period of twenty years.

59.It is in the aforesaid context that we must first look into the oral evidence of P.W.1-
Y.Sunkalamma, the appellant no.1 (second plaintiff) and thereafter, we shall look into the oral
evidence of D.W.1 – B.L. Chinnakesava Rao, Mandal Revenue Officer, who led evidence on behalf of
the State.

60. The oral evidence of PW1 reads thus:

“CHIEF – EXAMINATION: First plaintiff is my husband, 3rd plaintiff is my son. I am
2nd plaintiff in this suit. First plaintiff died after filing of the suit. Hence, myself and
3rd plaintiff are brought on record as L.Rs. of deceased first plaintiff. The suit land
called ‘Thippalanaduma Chenu’ is in our possession even prior to my marriage i.e., 10
to 15 years prior to my marriage. My marriage took place more than twenty years
back. The plaint schedule land originally belonged to one Madiga Govindu and he is
resident of Dinnedevarapadu. The said Govindu subsequently alienated the suit
schedule property to one Perugu Swamy Reddy. Again witness says the said Govindu
mortgaged the suit schedule property to Swamy Reddy even ten years prior to my
marriage. The said Govindu did not pay the amount under mortgage to Swamy Reddy
and hence he filed a suit against said Govindu. Hence, the suit is decree.

At request for continuation of chief-examination posted to 20.1.1999.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

33

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

10.06.99: P.W. recalled and sworn in for continuation of chief examination:
Accordingly preliminary decree was passed the properties were brought to sale. In
the said sale one K. Ramanna purchased the said property in the court auction and
took delivery of the same through court. Ex.A1 registration extract of sale certificate
in E .P. 51/69 in O.S. 178/67. In turn Kurva Ramanna sold the schedule property to
Yerikala Rosanna my father in law.

Ex.A2 is the registration extract of sale deed dt. 10.12.70 for having conveyed sale by K. Ramanna in
favour of Y. Rosanna my father in law. Yerikala Rosanna my father in law was in possession and
enjoyment of said property during his life time. Considering the possession and enjoyment the
Government has issued patta pass book in favour of my father in law in respect of suit schedule
property and other properties. Ex.A3 is the such pass book issued by revenue authorities. My father
in law has paid revenue during his life time. Ex.A4 to A6 are such land revenue receipts. Rosanna
my lather in law died about 15 years back and after his death my husband has succeeded the suit
schedule property being the legal representative of my father in law. My husband was in possession
and enjoyment of suit schedule property during his life time. My husband died about two years
back. My father in law and after him husband were in exclusive possession of the suit schedule
property one have raised any objection to our peaceful possession including the defendants for suit
schedule property. The suit schedule property is an agricultural land and we are raising crops in the
suit schedule property. The Govt. took the possession of the suit schedule land for the purpose of
constructing a school without our consent. The Govt. have no right what so ever to take possession
of our land without our consent. 1st plaintiff my husband also gave application to the District
Collector, Kurnool for taking possession of suit land without our consent by the defendants.

Ex.A7, is copy of such petition sent my husband to the Dist.

Collector, Kurnool. The Dist. Collector did not act on Ex.A 7. I issued Sec. 80 CPC notice prior to
filing of the suit. Ex.A8 is such notice dt. 4.1.96. Ex.A9 is served acknowledgment relating to Ex.A8
.notice. The Dist. Collector Kurnool also issued replied to our notice dt. 28.4.96, 31.5.96 and 6.5.96
Exs.A10 to A12 are copies of notices.

We belong to Yerikala Community which is a Schedule Tribes Caste. The M.R.O., Kurnool has issued
caste certificate to us. Ex.A13 is the caste certificate issued by M.R.O., Kurnool. Ex.A14 is the nativity
certificate issued by M.R.O., Kurnool. The allegation that we never in possession and enjoyment of
suit schedule property is false. The suit land is not a assigned land. The defendants have no right
what so ever to interfere our peaceful possession and enjoyment of our property. We pray the court
declare our title and also deliver possession of the suit schedule property. Hence I pray the court to
pass decree as prayed for.

Cross-examination: Deferred.

8.7.99: P.W. 1 recalled and sworn in for cross-examination by AGP:-

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

34

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

I do not know how Govindu the original owner acquired the suit schedule property. I
do not know whether the Govt. has assigned the suit property to the said Govindu. I
do not know the conditions mentioned in the D. Form patta assigned to Govindu in
respect of suit schedule property. I do not know whether the Govt. Properties are
situated surrounding the suit land in question. The suit schedule property and other
properties situated near the suit property are not same level. It is not true to say that
the suit land is not fit for cultivation. The Govt. has taken over the suit property to
construct school building. It· is not true to say that the concerned MRO and revenue
inspector enquired prior to taken over the suit property and they thought that the suit
property is suitable to construct District Institution of Education Training Centre. I
do not know whether the suit property is not fit for cultivation even as per village
accounts. It is not true to say that the Govt. also made proclamations in the village
prior to taken over of the suit land. It is not true to say that nobody has raised any
objections including we the plaintiffs at any point of time for taking over the suit
property by Government for the above said purpose.

The suit property is situated within the limits of Dinnedevarapadu village. It is not
true to say that since the suit land is a Govt. land it is free from encumbrances and
the Govt. had every right to take back the suit land for the public purpose. It is not
true to say that we the plaintiffs have no right in the suit schedule property
whatsoever. I do not know whether the concerned M.R.O. handed over the suit
property to District Educational Officer, Kurnool on 1.5.1989. I do not know whether
the MRO has transferred the suit property to Dist. Educational Officer, Kurnool in
the year 1989.

It is true that the buildings were constructed in the year 1995 in the suit property. It is not true to
say that the Govt. has constructed the buildings in the suit property for the purpose of interest of
general public. It is not true to say that the Govt. constructed the buildings in the suit property as
per board standing orders within their limits. It is not true to say that we the plaintiffs neither
owners nor possessors of suit property. It is not true to say that we filed the present suit only to
harass the Govt. with a view to extract money. It not true to say that our claim is barred by
limitation. It is not true to say that the suit is also barred by limitation.” (Emphasis supplied)

61. Thus, P.W.1 in her examination-in-chief gave more than a fair idea as to how her father-in-law,
Y. Rosanna acquired the subject land by way of a registered sale deed. She has deposed that the
Government had issued Pattadar Passbook in favour of her father-in-law. Ex. A3 is the passbook
that she produced before the Trial Court. Ex. A4 to Ex. A6 are the land revenue receipts produced in
evidence. She has deposed that about fifteen years back her father-in-law passed away and her
husband succeeded the subject land. Two years before the date of deposition, her husband also
passed away. However, she along with her children remained in peaceful possession of the subject
land. She has deposed about the issue of statutory notice to the State under Section 80 of the CPC.
She has categorically deposed that the Subject Land is not an assigned land. In her cross
examination, she deposed that she had no idea if the government had assigned the Subject Land to
Harijana Govindu and that she was also unaware of the conditions mentioned in the alleged “D”

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

35

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

Form Patta assigned to Harijana Govindu.

62. We shall now look into the evidence of D.W.1 B.L. Chinnakesava Rao, the Mandal Revenue
Officer. In his examination in chief, he has deposed as under:

“CHIEF - EXAMINATION: I have been working as M.R.O., Kurnool from 25.3.1998.
I am acquainted with the facts of the case. We were not aware that one Govindanna
m o r t g a g e d   t h e   s u i t   s c h e d u l e   p r o p e r t y   t o   o n e   P e r u g u   S w a m y   R e d d y   o f
Dinnedevarapadu village. We were not aware the suit in O.S. 178/ 1967 which was
filed by L. Rs of Swamy Reddy against L.Rs of Govindanna. The plaintiffs were never
in possession and enjoyment of suit schedule properties. The Government assigned
the suit schedule survey number to Harijana Govindanna. Similarly the Govt. have
assigned lands to others in S. No. 451/23, 451/4 and 451/3, 549/1, 449/2, 449/3 and
449/4. The properties covered in the above said survey numbers are Government
lands. The land was assigned to Harijana Govindu subject to certain conditions one
among them the Government may resume land for any public purpose. The assignees
have no right whatsoever to alienate D. Form patta lands. The suit land is a waste
land, comprising rocky and pits. The suit land is sloppy land. The suit land is not fit
for cultivation Govindu had no right whatsoever to mortgage assigned land to P.
Swamy Reddy. The Government had resumed Ac. 31.19 cents from assignees for the
purpose of construction of Dist. Institution of Education Training Centre. In the year
1989 the Govt. resumed the lands under RCB 184/89, dt. 3.2.1989. The M.R.O. and
Mandal Surveyor inspected the suit land prior to resume of the suit land. The M.R.O.
and surveyor have also prepared a report for resuming land for public purpose.

Sub-Division records were also prepared and scrutinized by Dy. Inspector of survey for resuming of
the land. There was a general notice and proclamation in the village inviting any objections for
transfer of lands in favour of Educational Department. None have given any objections nor
submitted anything in writing objecting for resuming the lands. The Grampanchayat,
Dinnedevarapadu also gave consent for transfer of above land in favour of Education Department.
The Education Department took possession of the suit land on 1.5.1989. The Education Department
started construction in the year 1995 and entire buildings were constructed and the buildings are in
operation.

Govindanna the assignee have no right whatsoever over the suit schedule property or to alienate to
anybody. We followed board standing orders and entire process was done in accordance with rules.
The suit is barred by limitation. Since the Education Department running buildings in the suit
property the question of declaring the plaintiff's title in respect of suit property does not arise. The
plaintiff's are no way connected or related to original assignee Govindu. The plaintiffs are strangers
and they have no way connected or related to suit property. Hence I pray the court to dismiss the
suit.” (Emphasis supplied)

63. In his cross examination, he deposed as under:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

36

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

“Cross-examination: We has record to show that in which year the Government
assigned the suit land to Govindanna. I do not have patta readily on which the land
was assigned to Govindanna. As per Board standing orders 15 we issue pattas on
some conditions to assignees. The conditions embodied the BSO 15 only
administrative conditions. Ex.A3 patta pass book was issued by our department in
favour of first plaintiffs father. Ex.A4 to Ex.A6 land revenue receipts were issued by
our department. The suit land is a Government land. After assigning the Government
land to any body such land being called patta land. I do not know whether any notices
were given to occupiers of suit land prior to resumption. We did not conduct any
enquiry u/s 3 of A.P. assigned land prohibition Act as the assignee has violated the
conditions embodied in D.Form patta.

It is not true to say that the suit land assigned to Govindanna on market value and
that the suit land is patta land of Govindanna. I do not know whether the said
Govindanna mortgaged the suit property to one P. Swamy Reddy in the year 1944. I
do not know whether as the Govindanna did not redeem the mortgage, a suit was
filed by P. Swamy Reddy and brought the suit property for sale and suit property was
put into court auction in the year 1970. I was not aware whether one K. Ramanna
purchased the suit property in the court auction. I was not aware whether the father
of first plaintiff purchased the suit property from K. Ramanna in the year 1970. It is
not true to say that the plaintiff's family were in possession and enjoyment of suit
schedule property from 1970 onwards. I was not aware whether any reply was given
by our department to the sec. 80 C.P.C. issued by the first plaintiff which is. Ex. A8. it
is not true to say that we have not followed correct procedure and manipulated
records and occupied the lands forcibly from the possession of the plaintiff. It is not
true to say that the plaintiffs are owners of the suit schedule land. It is not true to say
that the Government had highhandedly occupied the suit land from the possession of
the plaintiffs. It is not true to say that the suit land is a cultivable land and the
plaintiff were raising crops in the suit land. The suit land is situated near to G. Pulla
Reddy Engineering College, Kurnool. Recently house plots raised around the suit
land.

It is not true to say that the we the Government highhandedly occupied the suit property which
belongs to plaintiffs.

Re-examination with permission: The other assignees never raised any objections for resuming their
lands to construct buildings by Education Department. Further cross-examination: I do not know
the names of other assignees.” (Emphasis supplied)

64.Thus, the first admission on the part of the Mandal Revenue Officer in his examination-in-chief
is that the State had no idea or knowledge that Harijana Govindu had mortgaged the subject land in
favour of one Perugu Swami Reddy of Village Dinnedevarapadu. He pleaded absolute ignorance of
the Original Suit No. 178 of 1967 instituted by the legal heirs of Swamy Reddy against the legal heirs
of Govindanna for enforcement of mortgage. He has thereafter said that the appellants herein

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

37

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

(plaintiffs) were never in possession of the Subject Land. He has deposed that the Government had
assigned the suit land in favour of Harijana Govindu. However, his cross examination is important.
In his cross examination, he has stated that the State has the record to show the year in which the
Government assigned the land to Harijana Govindu. However, the fact remains that no such record
was produced. He has admitted that he does not have the “D” Form Patta said to have been issued in
favour of Harijana Govindu and had no idea of the terms and conditions on which the land was
assigned to Harijana Govindu. He admitted that Ex. A3 Patta Passbook was issued by the revenue
department in favour of the first plaintiffs’ father, i.e., the father-in-law of PW1 - Y. Sunkulamma.

He admits that Ex. A4 to Ex. A6 are the land revenue receipts issued by the revenue department in
favour of the appellants. He admitted that if a government land is assigned to any person, the same
assumes the character of being a Patta Land. He has said that he had no idea whether any notice was
issued to the occupiers of the suit land prior to its resumption. He has admitted that no inquiry
under Section 3 of the Act of 1977 was undertaken for the purpose of ascertaining whether the
assignee had violated the conditions laid in the “D” Form Patta. He deposed that he had no
knowledge whether any reply was given by the department to the Section 80 CPC notice or not. He
denied that the family of the plaintiffs were in possession and enjoyment of the said schedule
property from 1970 onwards.

65.Having regard to the oral as well as documentary evidence on record, the picture that emerges is
as under:

a. The Subject Land belonged to Harijana Govindu. Whether it was an assigned land
or was of his ownership, is not clear. If it is the case of the State that the same was an
assigned land, the State has miserably failed to establish the same. They could have
produced the record while asserting that in fact it was an assigned land and there was
a “D” Form Patta issued in favour of Harijana Govindu. b. Harijana Govindu had
borrowed money from one Perugu Swamy Reddy. Harijana was not in a position to
repay the money he had borrowed and in such circumstances, Perugu Swamy Reddy
enforced the mortgage by filing civil Original Suit no. 178 of 1967. The same came to
be decreed. The Subject Land was ultimately put to auction by the court. In the court
auction, one Kuruva Ramanna purchased the same and Kuruva Ramanna in turn
sold the subject land in favour of PW1’s father-in-law by way of a registered sale deed
dated 10.12.1970. To this extent, the State has no say in the matter.

c. Indisputably, since the date of the registration of sale deed by Kuruva Ramanna in
favour of Y. Rosanna i.e., the father-in-law of PW1, the plaintiffs remained in
possession of the Subject Land till the time they were dispossessed by the State
Authorities. Even this cannot be disputed in any manner by the State.

d. It appears that the State conceived the idea of putting up construction on few
parcels of land owned by it other than the Subject Land. However, as the Subject
Land is in between the parcels of land owned by the Government, they exerted
pressure on the appellants herein to give up their land saying that the Subject Land

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

38

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

was assigned to Harijana Govindu and he could not have mortgaged the land.
Harijana Govindu, according to the State, could be said to have violated the terms
and conditions of assignment.

e. Why did the State maintain silence all throughout or why the State has no answer
to the issue of “D” Form Patta Passbook in favour of the appellants?

f. What is the explanation of the State in so far as the Ex. A4 to Ex. A6, i.e., the land
revenue receipts are concerned? Why is the State silent on all this?

g. What is the basis for the State to say that the appellants at no point of time were in
possession of the suit land?

h. The crux of the matter is that the State could not have taken over the land in a
highhanded and arbitrary manner? In other words, could the State have resumed the
land saying that the appellants were in illegal possession of the same without
following due process of law? It goes without saying that be it an assigned land or of
individual ownership, if the State is in need of the land for any public purpose, it can
always acquire the same in accordance with law, more particularly in accordance with
the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act by paying appropriate compensation in
terms of money. However, what the State did in the present case was nothing but an
exhibit of raw power by taking over the possession forcibly. The matter of concern is
that the State knew very well that the appellants were in lawful possession of the land
for more than 20 years. Well, if the State was in need of the land occupied by the
appellants, it could have informed the appellants that the land is required for public
purpose and that the State intends to acquire the same and that they would be paid
adequate compensation in terms of money in accordance with law. However, the
intention of the State was to take over the possession without paying any
compensation. In the process, what the State did was that it conveniently shut its
eyes towards four things, viz. (i) the civil suit filed by the original mortgagee, (ii) the
decree passed by the competent Civil Court, (iii) sale of the land by court auction and
the sale certificate issued by the court, and (iv) the appellants purchasing the land in
question by a sale deed from the person who had participated in the court auction
and purchased the land in question.

i. It appears that way back in 1995, the construction was completed, and, in such
circumstances, the appellants were left with no choice but to institute the suit.

66. We have been able to lay our hands on a very lucid and erudite decision rendered by the Bombay
High Court more than a century ago i.e., in 1912, in Narayan Anandram Marwadi v. Gowbai, widow
of Dhondiba reported in ILR 37 Bom. 415. We could not resist the temptation to refer to and rely
upon this decision of the Bombay High Court. In the said case, the property of an agriculturist
mortgagor was sold in an execution of money decree by the civil court and the auction purchaser’s
rights subsequently came to be vested in the mortgagee. As Section 22 of the Dekkhan

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

39

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

Agriculturists’ Relief Act, 1879 prohibited execution of sale of agriculturists’ properties, the
mortgagor treated the sale as void and sued to redeem the mortgage. The mortgagee, in turn, relied
on the court-sale to contend that the mortgagor had no right to redeem. The Subordinate Judge, the
District Judge on appeal and the High Court in second appeal held that the court-sale was void ─ but
on Letters Patent Appeal, Scott, C.J., speaking for himself and Chandavarkar, J., held:

“Now the provisions of section 22 of the Dekkhan Agriculturists’ Relief Act are
provisions conferring upon members of a certain class great privileges in litigation.
The section confers upon a person who is shown to be a member of the privileged
class the right to resist the attachment or sale of any of his immovable property and
to contend that if an attachment or sale took place in violation of the provisions of the
section, such attachment or sale shall be held to be void.

How then is the Court to know when it is authorized to attach and sell property and
when it is not? The ordinary rule is that set out in the Civil Procedure Code, section
60, which reproduces section 266 of the Code of 1882. It provides that property liable
to attachment and sale in execution of a decree is lands, houses, etc., belonging to the
judgment-debtor. An agriculturist in order to resist the application of that general
rule must, we think, show that he belongs to the privileged class so as to render
section 22 of the Dekkhan Agriculturists’ Relief Act applicable to his case. That
conclusion seems to follow from the provisions of Sections 101, 102 and 103 of the
Evidence Act. In the absence of proof we, therefore, hold that there is no reason to
treat the immovable property sold by the Vinchur Court as the property of an
agriculturist.” (Emphasis supplied)

67.Consequently, the suit was dismissed adopting the following dictum of Sir Lawrence Jenkins in
Pandurang Balaji v. Krishnaji Govind reported in (1903) 28 Bom. 125:

“It is a general rule that in Courts of law only those facts can be taken to exist which
are proved; so that it is manifest that in the absence of proof the exemption from
liability to attachment or sale did not exist for the purpose of the execution
proceedings. Therefore the executing Court had complete jurisdiction to make the
order it did.” (Emphasis supplied)

68.The dictum as laid down in the decision referred to above of the Bombay High Court accords
with our own view of the matter.

69.Having regard to the aforesaid, is there anything to indicate that the Subject Land is of the
ownership of the Government? If there is a Pattadar Pass Book issued in favour of the appellants
and if they have been able to establish that land revenue was also being paid over a period of years,
then the appellants could be said to be owners of the suit land as Pattadars. Unfortunately, even the
“D” Form Patta admitted by the State to have been issued in favour of the Harijana Govindu is not
on record. Had it been on record, we could have looked into its terms and conditions. It appears
from the evidence on record that the Pattadar Passbook was issued in favour of the appellants

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

40

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

keeping in mind their long-standing possession and occupancy on the Subject Land by virtue of the
sale deed dated 10.12.1970. Why the State remained silent right from the time Harijana Govindu
mortgaged the land? Why no action was taken from 1943 onwards till the time the State decided to
put up construction of a building for the Education Department? It is difficult to believe that the
State Authorities had no idea of the developments that had taken place over a period of almost
forty-five years.

70.The oral and documentary evidence should now be tested on the anvil of Section 113 of the
Bhartiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023 (for short, the “BSA”) which corresponds to Section 110 of the
repealed Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (for short, the Evidence Act”) .

iv. Section 113 of the Bhartiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023

71. Section 113 of the BSA reads as follows:

“When the question is whether any person is owner of anything of which he is shown
to be in possession, the burden of proving that he is not the owner is on the person
who affirms that he is not the owner.”

72. The Section embodies the well-recognised principle that possession is prima facie proof of
ownership. A person in possession is entitled to remain in possession until another person can
disclose a better title under Section 113 of the BSA. Therefore, once the plaintiff proves that he has
been in possession of the suit property, the burden of proving that the plaintiff is not the owner is on
the defendant who affirms that the plaintiff is not the owner. The Section does not make a
distinction between the Government and a private citizen. Section 113 is, therefore, equally
applicable where a Government claims to be the owner or challenges the ownership of the plaintiff
who is in possession of the property. It is not disputed that before the possession of the Subject Land
was taken over, the plaintiffs were in possession of the property for more than twenty years. The
onus, therefore, under section 113 of the BSA was on the State to prove that the Government had a
subsisting title to the Subject Land.

73. In M. Krishna Aiyar v. The Secretary of State for India reported in (1910) I.L.R. 33 Mad. 173, a
Bench of the Madras High Court held that:

“Where in a suit for declaration of title against the Government the plaintiff proves
possession for a period of more than 12 years, the Government must prove that it has
a subsisting title. When the Government fails to prove such title or possession within
sixty years, the plaintiff is entitled to a declaration of title and not merely to a
declaration that he is lawfully in possession of such land.” (Emphasis supplied)

74. It must be remembered that what Section 113 of the BSA does is to raise a statutory presumption
in favour of a person who is in possession that he is the owner and places a burden upon the other
persons who say that the plaintiff is not the owner.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

41

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

75. Section 113 of the BSA provides that when the question is whether any person is the owner of
anything of which he is shown to be in possession, the burden of proving that he is not the owner is
on the person who affirms that he is not the owner. The application of this Section to lands claimed
by the Government or the Municipality has been considered by the Madhya Pradesh High Court in
Jagannath Shivnarayan v. Municipal Commissioner, City Municipality, Indore reported in AIR 1951
MB 80.

76. Sanghi, J., discussed the case law on the subject and held that to apply the provisions of Section
110 of the Evidence Act (now section 113 of the BSA), to a plaintiff's possession, the possession must
be founded on a ‘prima facie’ right. According to the learned Judge, mere acts of the user would not
lead to a presumption of title in case the possession was ‘prima facie’ not proved to be lawful.

77. The same view was taken by a Division Bench of the Bombay High Court in Suraji Fulaji v.
Secretary of State reported in AIR 1937 Bom 193. It was a suit against the Government for
declaration that the plaintiff was the owner of certain plots in a village. The plaintiff adduced oral
evidence to show that he had been using a large area of land for the purposes of tethering cattle and
storing grass and that he had been in possession thereon for a number of years. It was also proved
by him that he had erected badges to the west and south of the plot.

78. In the aforesaid case, it was held that although the Government had not succeeded in rebutting
the plaintiff's evidence as to its act of user, yet it could not be said that the plaintiff had been able to
prove such possession as would raise a presumption of title in his favour. Broomfield, J., approved
the view taken by Ranade, J. in Hanmantrao v. Secretary of State reported in (1901) 25 Bom 287 and
held that to come within the scope of Section 110 of the Evidence Act, the possession of the plaintiff
must be based on a ‘prima facie’ right. This case was followed by another Division Bench of the same
High Court in The Secretary of State for India in Council v. Chimanlal Jamnadas and others
reported in AIR 1942 Bom 161.

79. Chimanlal Jamnadas (supra) was also a suit against the Government for declaration that certain
property consisting of land was of the absolute ownership of the plaintiff. The plaintiff had proved
some kind of possession, and the question arose whether it was sufficient to give rise to a
presumption under Section 110 of the Evidence Act. Divatia, J., discussed the case law on the subject
and observed as follows:

“[…] It is necessary, in my opinion, therefore for the plaintiffs to prove that their
possession was of such a character as would lead to the presumption of title, and not
such a sort of possession as would be regarded as wrongful in its origin. In my
opinion it could not be the law that a man might usurp somebody else's land and
without the plea of adverse possession say that ‘I am in long possession of this land. I
have erected buildings on it, and although, I have no title in my favour and even
though I have got possession of the land by usurpation or encroachment, I am
entitled to remain in possession under Section 110 and that nobody can oust me’. The
presumption under Section 110 would apply only if the conditions are satisfied, viz.,
that the possession of the plaintiff is not ‘prima facie’ wrongful, and, secondly, the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

42

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

title of the defendant is not proved.” (Emphasis supplied)

80. In Gurunath Manohar Pavaskar v. Nagesh Siddappa Navalgund reported in (2007) 13 SCC 565
this Court held as under:

“12. A revenue record is not a document of title. It merely raises a presumption in
regard to possession. Presumption of possession and/or continuity thereof both
forward and backward can also be raised under Section 110 of the Evidence Act.”

81. In Nair Service Society Ltd. v. Rev. Father K.C. Alexander reported in AIR 1968 SC 1165, dealing
with the provisions of Section 110 of the Evidence Act, this Court held as under:

“17. […]possession may prima facie raise a presumption of title no one can deny but
this presumption can hardly arise when the facts are known. When the facts disclose
no title in either party, possession alone decides.” (Emphasis supplied)

82. In Chief Conservator of Forests, Govt. of A.P. v. Collector reported in (2003) 3 SCC 472, this
Court held that:

“20. … presumption, which is rebuttable, is attracted when the possession is prima
facie lawful and when the contesting party has no title.” (Emphasis supplied)

83. The principle enshrined in Section 110 of the Evidence Act (now Section 113 of the BSA) is based
on public policy with the object of preventing persons from committing breach of peace by taking
law into their own hands, however good their title over the land in question may be. It is for this
purpose that the provisions of Section 6 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963, Section 145 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, and Sections 154 and 158 of the India Penal Code, 1860, were enacted. All
the aforesaid provisions have the same objective. The said presumption is read under Section 114 of
the Evidence Act and applies only in a case where there is either no proof, or very little proof of
ownership on either side. The maxim “possession follows title” is applicable in cases where proof of
actual possession cannot reasonably be expected, for instance, in the case of wastelands, or where
nothing is known about possession one way or another. Presumption of title as a result of possession
can arise only where facts disclose that no title vests in any party and the possession of the plaintiff
is not prima facie wrongful. It certainly does not mean that because a man has title over some land,
he is necessarily in possession of it. It, in fact, means, that if at any time a man with title was in
possession of the said property, the law allows the presumption that such possession was in
continuation of the title vested in him. A person must establish that he has continued possession of
t h e   s u i t   p r o p e r t y ,   w h i l e   t h e   o t h e r   s i d e   c l a i m i n g   t i t l e ,   m u s t   m a k e   o u t   a   c a s e   o f
trespass/encroachment, etc. Where the apparent title is with the plaintiffs, it is incumbent upon the
defendant, that in order to displace this claim of apparent title and to establish beneficial title in
himself, he must establish by way of satisfactory evidence, circumstances that favour his version.
Even a revenue record is not a document of title. It merely raises a presumption in regard to
possession. Presumption of possession and/or continuity thereof, both forward and backward, can
also be raised under Section 110 of the Evidence Act. [See: State of Andhra Pradesh and Ors. v. Star

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

43

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

Bone Mill and Fertiliser Company reported in (2013) 9 SCC 319]

84. Section 113 of the BSA as discussed aforesaid, embodies the principle that possession of a
property furnishes prima facie principle of ownership of the possessor and casts burden of proof on
the party who denies his ownership.

The presumption, which is rebuttable, is attracted when the possession is prima facie lawful and
when the contesting party has no title.

85. The appellants could be said to have established their possession over the suit land in question
right from the year 1970. There is cogent and convincing evidence in this regard. They were in
peaceful enjoyment of the suit land in question. In our opinion, the respondent State has not been
able to prove its title to the suit land. Just because the suit land is surrounded by few other parcels of
land owned by the Government, that by itself will not make the suit land of the ownership of the
Government. If the Government claims title over the land, it has to establish it by producing relevant
records in the form of revenue records etc. In our opinion, the State has failed to advance any
credible evidence on record to rebut the presumption. Consequently, the appellants have Pattadars’
title to the suit land in question.

86. There was no need for the High Court to look into and follow the dictum as laid in its Full Bench
decision in the case of Dharma Reddy (supra). The Full Bench decision in Dharma Reddy (supra)
has only discussed the retrospective effect of the Act, 1977.

v. How is the Court expected to consider title suits against the Government

87. In the case of R. Hanumaiah v. Secretary to Govt. of Karnataka, Revenue Department reported
in (2010) 5 SCC 203, this Court has explained as to how the Trial Courts are expected to consider
title suits against the Government. This Court held as follows:

“19. Suits for declaration of title against the Government, though similar to suits for
declaration of title against private individuals differ significantly in some aspects. The
first difference is in regard to the presumption available in favour of the Government.
All lands which are not the property of any person or which are not vested in a local
authority, belong to the Government. All unoccupied lands are the property of the
Government, unless any person can establish his right or title to any such land. This
presumption available to the Government, is not available to any person or
individual. The second difference is in regard to the period for which title and/or
possession has to be established by a person suing for declaration of title.
Establishing title/possession for a period exceeding twelve years may be adequate to
establish title in a declaratory suit against any individual. On the other hand,
title/possession for a period exceeding thirty years will have to be established to
succeed in a declaratory suit for title against the Government. This follows from
Article 112 of the Limitation Act, 1963, which prescribes a longer period of thirty
years as limitation in regard to suits by the Government as against the period of 12

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

44

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

years for suits by private individuals. The reason is obvious. Government properties
are spread over the entire State and it is not always possible for the Government to
protect or safeguard its properties from encroachments. Many a time, its own officers
who are expected to protect its properties and maintain proper records, either due to
negligence or collusion, create entries in records to help private parties, to lay claim
of ownership or possession against the Government. Any loss of government property
is ultimately the loss to the community. Courts owe a duty to be vigilant to ensure
that public property is not converted into private property by unscrupulous elements.

20. Many civil courts deal with suits for declaration of title and injunction against the
Government, in a casual manner, ignoring or overlooking the special features relating
to government properties.

Instances of such suits against the Government being routinely decreed, either ex parte or for want
of proper contest, merely acting upon the oral assertions of plaintiffs or stray revenue entries are
common. Whether the Government contests the suit or not, before a suit for declaration of title
against a Government is decreed, the plaintiff should establish, either his title by producing the title
deeds which satisfactorily trace title for a minimum period of thirty years prior to the date of the suit
(except where title is claimed with reference to a grant or transfer by the Government or a statutory
development authority), or by establishing adverse possession for a period of more than thirty years.
In such suits, courts cannot, ignoring the presumptions available in favour of the Government, grant
declaratory or injunctive decrees against the Government by relying upon one of the principles
underlying pleadings that plaint averments which are not denied or traversed are deemed to have
been accepted or admitted.

21. A court should necessarily seek an answer to the following question, before it grants a decree
declaring title against the Government: whether the plaintiff has produced title deeds tracing the
title for a period of more than thirty years; or whether the plaintiff has established his adverse
possession to the knowledge of the Government for a period of more than thirty years, so as to
convert his possession into title. Incidental to that question, the court should also find out whether
the plaintiff is recorded to be the owner or holder or occupant of the property in the revenue records
or municipal records, for more than thirty years, and what is the nature of possession claimed by the
plaintiff, if he is in possession— authorised or unauthorised; permissive; casual and occasional;
furtive and clandestine; open, continuous and hostile; deemed or implied (following a title).”
(Emphasis supplied)

88. We are of the view that the following principles, as elucidated in R. Hanumaiah (supra), must
govern the adjudication of declaratory title suits against the Government:

i. Suits for declaration of title against the government differ from suits against private
parties on two counts:

a. First, there is a presumption in favour of the Government in such suits, as all lands
which are unoccupied or not vested in any individual or local authority, are presumed

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

45

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

to belong exclusively to the Government.

b. Secondly, there is an additional burden of proof on the party seeking declaration of
title against the Government. The plaintiff has to establish its possession over the
land in question for a period of thirty years as opposed to twelve years in the case of
adverse possession against a private party.

ii. A decree declaring title against the Government must not be passed casually.
Before granting any such decree, the trial court must ensure that the plaintiff has
furnished adequate documentary evidence, either through title deeds tracing
ownership for over thirty years or by establishing adverse possession for a period of
thirty years. iii. The trial court must verify whether the name of the plaintiff has been
recorded as the owner, holder, or occupant in the relevant revenue or municipal
records for more than thirty years.

iv. Finally, the trial court must carefully scrutinize the nature of the possession as
may be asserted, determining whether the same is authorized or unauthorized,
permissive or casual, furtive or clandestine, as well as open, continuous, and hostile,
or implied by title, to ensure that public property is not inadvertently converted into
private ownership by unscrupulous elements.

89. As held by this Court in R.V.E Venkatachala Gounder v. Arulmigu Viswesaraswami & V.P.
Temple and Another reported in (2003) 8 SCC 752, whether a civil or a criminal case, the anvil for
testing of “proved”, “disproved” and “not proved”, as defined in Section 3 of the Evidence Act, is one
and the same. A fact is said to be “proved” when, considering the matters before it, the court either
believes it to exist, or considers its existence so probable that a prudent man ought to, under the
circumstances of a particular case, act upon the supposition that it exists. It is the evaluation of the
result drawn by the applicability of the rule, which makes the difference. The relevant portion of the
said judgment is reproduced below:

“The probative effects of evidence in civil and criminal cases are not, however, always
the same and it has been laid down that a fact may be regarded as proved for
purposes of a civil suit, though the evidence may not be considered sufficient for a
conviction in a criminal case. Best says: ‘There is a strong and marked difference as to
the effect of evidence in civil and criminal proceedings. In the former a mere
preponderance of probability, due regard being had to the burden of proof, is a
sufficient basis of decision: but in the latter, especially when the offence charged
amounts to treason or felony, a much higher degree of assurance is required.’ (Best, §
95) While civil cases may be proved by a mere preponderance of evidence, in criminal
cases the prosecution must prove the charge beyond reasonable doubt.” (See Sarkar
on Evidence, 15th Edn., pp. 58-59.)” (Emphasis supplied)

90.In the words of Denning, L.J. (Bater v. Bater reported in (1950) 2 All ER

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

46

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

458):

“[…]It is of course true that by our law a higher standard of proof is required in
criminal cases than in civil cases. But this is subject to the qualification that there is
no absolute standard in either case. In criminal cases the charge must be proved
beyond reasonable doubt, but there may be degrees of proof within that standard. As
Best, C.J., and many other great judges have said, “in proportion as the crime is
enormous, so ought the proof to be clear”. So also in civil cases, the case may be
proved by a preponderance of probability, but there may be degrees of probability
within that standard. The degree depends on the subject-matter. A civil court, when
considering a charge of fraud, will naturally require for itself a higher degree of
probability than that which it would require when asking if negligence is established.
It does not adopt so high a degree as a criminal court, even when it is considering a
charge of a criminal nature; but still it does require a degree of probability which is
commensurate with the occasion. Likewise, a divorce court should require a degree of
probability which is proportionate to the subject-matter.” (Emphasis supplied)

91. Agreeing with this statement of law, Hodson, L.J. said:

“Just as in civil cases the balance of probability may be more readily tilted in one case
than in another, so in criminal cases proof beyond reasonable doubt may more
readily be attained in some cases than in others.” (Hornal v. Neuberger Products Ltd.
[(1956) 3 All ER 970 : (1957) 1 QB 247 : (1956) 3 WLR 1034 (CA)] , All ER at p. 977
D).

92. In a suit for recovery of possession based on title, it is for the plaintiff to prove his title and
satisfy the court that he, in law, is entitled to dispossess the defendant from his possession over the
suit property and for the possession to be restored to him. However, as held in Addagada
Raghavamma v. A. Addagada Chenchamma reported in AIR 1964 SC 136, there is an essential
distinction between burden of proof and onus of proof. Burden of proof lies upon a person who has
to prove the fact and which never shifts. Onus of proof shifts. Such a shifting of onus is a continuous
process in the evaluation of evidence. In our opinion, in a suit for possession based on title once the
plaintiff has been able to create a high degree of probability so as to shift the onus on the defendant,
it is for the defendant to discharge his onus and in the absence thereof, the burden of proof lying on
the plaintiff shall be held to have been discharged so as to amount to proof of the plaintiff's title.

vi. Section 80 of CPC

93. Before we close this matter, we must say something as regards Section 80 of the CPC. It is not in
dispute that in the case on hand, before the institution of the suit by the appellants herein, they had
issued statutory Notice under Section 80 of the CPC. However, there is nothing on record to indicate
that any reply to the same was given by the State Authorities.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

47

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

94. Sections 79, 80 and Order XXVII respectively of the CPC deal with the procedure where the suits
are brought by or against the Government or Public officers acting in an official capacity. Section 79
is a procedural provision and contains provisions in relation to the suits by or against the
Government. It states that in a suit by or against the Government, the authority to be named as
plaintiff or defendant, as the case may be, shall be—

(a) in the case of a suit by or against the Central Government, the Union of India, and

(b) in the case of a suit by or against a State Government, the State.

95. Section 80 of the CPC deals with the provisions relating to notice which is a condition precedent
before filing a suit against the government or against a public servant. It states that – “(1) Save as
otherwise provided in sub-section (2), no suits shall be instituted against the Government or against
a public officer in respect of any act purporting to be done by such public officer in his official
capacity, until the expiration of two months after notice in writing has been delivered to, or left at
the office of—

(a) in the case of a suit against the Central Government, except where it relates to a railways, a
Secretary to that Government;

(b) in the case of a suit against the Central Government where it relates to railway, the General
Manager of that railway;

(c) in the case of a suit against any other State Government, a Secretary to that Government or the
Collector of the district and, in the case of a public officer, delivered to him or left at his office,
stating the cause of action, the name, description and place of residence of the plaintiff and the relief
which he claims; and the plaint shall contain a statement that such notice has been so delivered or
left.

(2) A suit to obtain an urgent or immediate relief against the Government or any public officer in
respect of any act purporting to be done by such public officer in his official capacity, may be
instituted, with the leave of the Court, without serving any notice as required by sub-section (1); but
the Court shall not grant relief in the suit, whether interim or otherwise, except after giving to the
Government or public officer, as the case may be, a reasonable opportunity of showing cause in
respect of the relief prayed for in the suit.

Provided that the Court shall, if it is satisfied, after hearing the parties, that no urgent or immediate
relief needs to be granted in the suit, return the plaint for presentation to it after complying with the
requirements of sub-section (1).

(3) No suit instituted against the Government or against a public officer in respect of any act
purporting to be done by such public officer in his official capacity shall be dismissed merely by
reason of any error or defect in the notice referred to in sub-section (1), if in such notice—

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

48

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

(a) the name, description and the residence of the plaintiff had been so given as to enable the
appropriate authority or the public officer to identify the person serving the notice and such notice
had been delivered or left at the office of the appropriate authority specified in sub-section (1), and

(b) the cause of action and the relief claimed by the plaintiff had been substantially indicated.”

96.Order XXVII, CPC enumerates the following:

i. This Order deals with the Suits by or against the government or public officers in
their official capacity.

ii. Rule 1 of Order XXVII states that in any suit by or against the Government, the
plaint or written statement shall be signed by such person as the Government may,
by general or special order, appoint in this behalf, and shall be verified by any person
whom the Government may so appoint and who is acquainted with the facts of the
case. iii. Rule 2 of Order XXVII states that the persons being ex-officio or otherwise
authorized act for the Government in respect of any judicial proceeding shall be
deemed to be recognized agents by whom appearances, acts and applications under
this Code may be made or done on behalf of the Government.

iv. Rule 3 of Order XXVII states that in suits by or against the Government, instead of
inserting in the plaint the name and description and place of residence of the plaintiff
or defendant, it shall be sufficient to insert the appropriate name as provided in
section 79 of CPC. v. Rule 4 of Order XXVII provides that the Government Pleader
shall be the agent of the Government for the purpose of receiving processes against
the Government by the Court.

vi. Rule 5 of Order XXVII provides that the Court shall, in fixing the day for the
Government to answer the plaint, allow a reasonable time for the necessary
communication with the Government through the proper channel.

a. Rule 5A of Order XXVII provides that the Government will be joined as a party in a
suit against a public officer in respect of any act alleged to have been done by him in
his official capacity. b. Rule 5B of Order XXVII deals with the duty of the Court in
suits against the Government or a public officer to assist in arriving at a settlement.

vii. Rule 6 of Order XXVII provides that the Court can direct the attendance of a
person who is able to answer any material question relating to the suit against the
Government.

viii. Rule 7 of Order XXVII deals with the extension of time to enable public officers
to make reference to the Government.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

49

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

ix. Rule 8 of Order XXVII provides that where the government undertakes a defense
of suit against a public officer, the government pleader will apply to the Court for the
same and the Court upon such application shall cause a note of his authority to be
entered in the register of civil court. If no application is made by a government
pleader, then the case shall proceed as in a suit between private parties:

a. Rule 8A of Order XXVII provides that no such security as is mentioned in rules 5
and 6 of Order XLI shall be required from the Government.

b. Rule 8B of Order XXVII contains the definitions of Government and Government
pleader.

vii. Object of Notice in Government Suits

97. The primary objective behind Section 80 of the CPC is to provide the Government or a public
officer with an opportunity to assess the legal merits of a claim and potentially settle it if it appears
to be just and reasonable.

98. Unlike private parties, the Government is expected to objectively and impartially evaluate the
matter, seek appropriate legal advice, and make decisions in public interest within the two-month
period mandated by the section. This serves to save both time and taxpayer’s money by preventing
needless litigation.

99. The legislative intent is to ensure that public funds are not squandered on unnecessary legal
battles. The provision of the notice is intended to prompt the Government or public officer to engage
in negotiations for a fair settlement or, at the very least, to explain to the potential plaintiff why their
claim is being contested.

100. In the case of Bihari Chowdhary and another v. State of Bihar and others reported in (1984) 2
SCC 627, this Court emphasised the purpose of the provision, stating that it is a measure of public
policy aimed at allowing the Government or the relevant officer to scrutinise the proposed claim
and, if deemed just, take prompt action to settle it, thereby avoiding protracted litigation and saving
public resources.

101. The Government's obligation differs from that of private parties, as it is expected to objectively
assess the claim, seek legal advice as necessary, and make decisions in public interest within the
stipulated two-month timeframe

102. The overarching goal of this mandatory provision is to promote justice and the public good by
minimising unnecessary legal disputes.

viii. Essentials of Section 80 CPC

103. A notice issued under Section 80 must include:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

50

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

i. The name, description, and place of residence of the person providing the notice.

         ii.       A statement outlining the cause of action.
        iii.       The relief sought by the plaintiff.

104. When determining whether the essential requirements of the Section have been
met, the court should consider the following questions:

(i) Has the notice provided adequate information to allow the authorities to identify
the person issuing the notice?

(ii) Have the cause of action and the relief sought by the plaintiff been sufficiently
detailed?

(iii) Has the written notice been delivered to or left at the office of the appropriate
authority as specified in the section?

(iv) Has the suit been initiated after the expiration of two months following the
delivery or submission of the notice, and does the plaint include a statement
confirming that such notice has been provided as required?

105. A statutory notice holds significance beyond mere formality. Its purpose is to provide the
Government or a public officer with an opportunity to reconsider the matter in light of established
legal principles and make a decision in accordance with the law. However, in practice, such notices
have often become empty formalities.

106. The administration frequently remains unresponsive and fails to even inform the aggrieved
party why their claim has been rejected.

107. In the case of State of Punjab v. Geeta Iron & Brass Works Ltd. reported in (1978) 1 SCC 68,
Krishna Iyer J. emphasised the need for accountability of Governments regarding wasteful litigation
expenses borne by the community due to governmental inaction. It was highlighted therein that the
statutory notice under Section 80 of the CPC is meant to prompt the State to negotiate a fair
settlement or, at the very least, to explain to the affected party why their claim is being resisted.

108. However, Section 80 has become more of a ritual due to the administration's lack of
responsiveness, despite recommendations from the Central Law Commission for its removal from
the Code.

109. Krishna Iyer J. further noted that opportunities for dispute resolution through arbitration are
often missed due to governmental inaction. He advocated for a litigative policy that prioritises
conciliation over confrontation, suggesting that it should be a directive for the State to empower its
legal officers to resolve disputes rather than prolonging them in court.

110. In Geeta Iron & Brass Works Ltd. (supra) referred to above, this Court observed thus:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

51

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

“3. While dismissing the Special Leave petition for the reasons mentioned above, we
would like to emphasise that the deserved defeat of the State in the Courts below
demonstrates the gross indifference of the administration towards litigative diligence.
In the present case a notice under Section 80 CPC was sent. No response. A suit was
filed and summons taken out to the Chief Secretary. Shockingly enough, the
summons was refused. An ex parte proceeding was taken when the lethargic
Government woke up.

4. We like to emphasise that Governments must be made accountable by
Parliamentary social audit for wasteful litigative expenditure inflicted on the
community by inaction. A statutory notice of the proposed action under Section 80
CPC is intended to alert the State to negotiate a just settlement or at least have the
courtesy to tell the potential outsider why the claim is being resisted. Now Section 80
has become a ritual because the administration is often unresponsive and hardly lives
up to the Parliament's expectation in continuing Section 80 in the Code despite the
Central Law Commission's recommendations for its deletion. An opportunity for
settling the dispute through arbitration was thrown away by sheer inaction. A
litigative policy for the State involves settlement of governmental disputes with
citizens in a sense of conciliation rather than in a fighting mood. Indeed, it should be
a directive on the part of the State to empower its law officer to take steps to compose
disputes rather than continue them in Court. We are constrained to make these
observations because much of the litigation in which Governments are involved adds
to the case load accumulation in Courts for which there is public criticism. We hope
that a more responsive spirit will be brought to bear upon governmental litigation so
as to avoid waste of public money and promote expeditious work in Courts of cases
which deserve to be attended to.” (Emphasis supplied)

111. In Bihari Chowdhary (supra), this Court observed thus:

“3. … The effect of the section is clearly to impose a bar against the institution of a
suit against the Government or a public officer in respect of any act purported to be
done by him in his official capacity until the expiration of two months after notice in
writing has been delivered to or left at the office of the Secretary to Government or
Collector of the concerned district and in the case of a public officer delivered to him
or left at his office, stating the particulars enumerated in the last part of sub-section
(1) of the section. When we examine the scheme of the section it becomes obvious
that the section has been enacted as a measure of public policy with the object of
ensuring that before a suit is instituted against the Government or a public officer,
the Government or the officer concerned is afforded an opportunity to scrutinise the
claim in respect of which the suit is proposed to be filed and if it be found to be a just
claim, to take immediate action and thereby avoid unnecessary litigation and save
public time and money by settling the claim without driving the person, who has
issued the notice, to institute the suit involving considerable expenditure and delay.
The Government, unlike private parties, is expected to consider the matter covered by

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

52

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

the notice in a most objective manner, after obtaining such legal advice as they may
think fit, and take a decision in public interest within the period of two months
allowed by the section as to whether the claim is just and reasonable and the
contemplated suit should, therefore, be avoided by speedy negotiations and
settlement or whether the claim should be resisted by fighting out the suit if and
when it is instituted. There is clearly a public purpose underlying the mandatory
provision contained in the section insisting on the issuance of a notice setting out the
particulars of the proposed suit and giving two months' time to Government or a
public officer before a suit can be instituted against them. The object of the section is
the advancement of justice and the securing of public good by avoidance of
unnecessary litigation.

4. When the language used in the statute is clear and unambiguous, it is the plain
duty of the Court to give effect to it and considerations of hardship will not be a
legitimate ground for not faithfully implementing the mandate of the Legislature.

5. The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council had occasion to consider the scope
and effect of Section 80 CPC in an almost similar situation in Bhagchand Dagadusa v.
Secretary of State [AIR 1927 PC 176 : 54 IA 338, 357] . In that case though a notice
had been issued by the plaintiffs under Section 80 CPC on June 26, 1922, the suit was
instituted before the expiry of the period of two months from the said date. It was
contended before the Privy Council, relying on some early decisions of High Court of
Bombay, that because one of the reliefs claimed in the suit was the grant of a
perpetual injunction and the claim for the said relief would have become infructuous
if the plaintiffs were to wait for the statutory period of two months prescribed in
Section 80 CPC before they filed the suit, the rigour of the section should be relaxed
by implication of a suitable exception or a qualification in respect of a suit for
emergent relief, such as one for injunction.

That contention did not find favour with the Privy Council and it was held that Section 80 is express,
explicit and mandatory and it admits no implications or exceptions. The Judicial Committee
observed:

“To argue, as the appellants did, that the plaintiffs had a right urgently calling for a
remedy, while Section 80 is mere procedure, is fallacious, for Section 80 imposes a
statutory and unqualified obligation upon the Court....” This decision was
subsequently followed by the Judicial Committee in Vellayan v. Madras Province
[AIR 1947 PC 197 :

(1946-47) 74 IA 223] . The dictum laid down by the Judicial Committee in
Bhagchand Dagadusa v. Secretary of State for India [AIR 1927 PC 176 : 54 IA 338,
357] , was cited with approval and followed by a Bench of five Judges of this Court in
Sawai Singhai Nirmal Chand v. Union of India [AIR 1966 SC 1068 : (1966) 1 SCR 986
: 1966 Mah LJ 371] .

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

53

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

6. It must now be regarded as settled law that a suit against the Government or a
public officer, to which the requirement of a prior notice under Section 80 CPC is
attracted, cannot be validly instituted until the expiration of the period of two months
next after the notice in writing has been delivered to the authorities concerned in the
manner prescribed for in the section and if filed before the expiry of the said period,
the suit has to be dismissed as not maintainable.

7. On behalf of the appellants, strong reliance was placed on the decision of a learned
Single Judge of the High Court of Kerala in Nani Amma Nannini Amma v. State of
Kerala [AIR 1963 Ker 114 : 1962 Ker LJ 1267] . Therein the learned Judge has
expressed the view that Section 80 is not a provision of public policy and there is
nothing in the section expressly affecting the jurisdiction of the Court to try a suit
instituted before the expiry of the period prescribed therein. The reasons stated by
the learned Judge in justification of his taking the said view despite the clear
pronouncement of the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in Bhagchand case
[AIR 1927 PC 176 : 54 IA 338, 357] do not appeal to us as correct or sound. In the
light of the conclusion expressed by us in the foregoing paragraphs about the true
scope and effect of Section 80 CPC, the aforecited decision of the learned Single
Judge of the Kerala High Court cannot be accepted as laying down good law.”
(Emphasis supplied)

112. In Raghunath Das v. Union of India and another reported in 1968 SCC OnLine SC 199, this
Court observed that the object of notice contemplated by Section 80 of the CPC was to give to the
concerned Government and public officers, an opportunity to reconsider the legal position and to
make amends or settle the claim, if so advised, without litigation.

113. The purpose of law is the advancement of justice. The least that was required in the present case
was for the State Authorities to acknowledge the notice issued by the appellants herein and inform
them as regards their stance. We make it abundantly clear that the Public Authorities must take
statutory notice issued to them in all seriousness. The Public Authorities must not sit over such
notices and force the citizens to the vagaries of litigation. They are expected to let the plaintiff know
their stand within the statutory period or in any case before he embarks upon the litigation. In
certain cases, courts may be obliged to draw adverse presumption against the Public Authorities for
not acknowledging the notice or telling the plaintiff of its stand and in the absence of that, a stand
taken during the course of trial may be considered as an afterthought. This is exactly what has
happened in the present case.

114. In view of the foregoing discussion, we should have allowed this appeal and decreed the suit in
favour of the appellants herein. We could have directed the State Authorities to put the appellants
back in possession. However, it is too late in the day to pass such a decree as it is going to be
extremely difficult to give effect to such a decree. The construction stood completed almost thirty
years back. It would be too much for this Court to ask the State Authorities to demolish that part of
the construction made over the suit land. In such circumstances, we have reached the conclusion
that the State must be asked to compensate the appellants in terms of money.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

54

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

ix. Payment of compensation in cases of resumption of land.

115. In Land Acquisition Officer-cum-R.D.O. v. Mekala Pandu, reported in 2004 SCC OnLine AP
217, a Full Bench comprising of 7 Judges had to be constituted in the High Court of Andhra Pradesh
for the purpose of answering the reference – “whether the claimants are entitled to payment of
compensation under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (for short, the Act, 1894”)
when the assigned lands are resumed by the Government for a public purpose?”

116. For the sake of clarity, we find it necessary to give a background of how the aforesaid question
came to be referred to the High Court in Mekala Pandu (supra). The High Court had the occasion to
address the issue of compensation in lieu of assigned lands resumed by the Government initially in
State of A.P. and Anr. v. P. Peda Chinnayya & Ors., reported in 1996 SCC OnLine AP 60, wherein it
held thus:

“Where the Government resorts to the provisions of the Act for acquisition of the
patta lands without resorting to the terms of the grant for resumption, it is liable to
pay compensation under the Act, but such compensation will be only the market
value of the interest of the owner or the assignee of the land, subject to the clog. In
such cases of acquisition, the claimant would also be entitled to consequential reliefs,
such as those of solatium and interest etc., under the Act. In a case where the patta
lands are resumed by the Government, the assignees cannot claim compensation
under the Act, but can claim compensation equal to the market value of their interest
in the land, subject to the clog. In such cases, no solatium may be payable but interest
may be claimed on the amount of compensation from the date of dispossession and
till the date of payment of compensation. In a case where the assignees are
dispossessed from their patta lands without resuming the lands in terms of the grant
and/or initiation of proceedings under the Act, the Government may be directed to
initiate proceedings under the Act and to pay compensation under the Act as
indicated.”

117. The very same issue as above once again was referred to and came up for consideration before
another Full Bench of the Andhra Pradesh High Court in State of Andhra Pradesh v. Bondapalli
Sanyasi, reported in 2001 SCC OnLine AP 1037. The reference in the matter reads thus:

“Furthermore, we are prima facie of the opinion that that part of the law laid down by
the judgment of the Full Bench that the plaintiffs would be entitled to the market
value together with interest may not be correct, particularly, in view of the fact that
the right of assignees of the Government land is subordinate to the State. The lands
assigned under such patta are resumable. In that view of the matter, they may not be
treated to be owners of the lands so as to claim entire compensation calculated at the
market value for acquisition thereof under the Land Acquisition Act.”

118. That is how the matter once again came up for consideration before a larger five Judge Bench in
Bondapalli Sanyasi (supra). While answering the reference, the High Court observed and held that:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

55

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

“34. (…) the Full Bench committed error insofar as it held that where patta lands are
resumed by the Government, the assignee would be entitled to compensation which
would be equal to the market value of their interest in the land subject to the clog.
Quantum of damages has to be ascertained having regard to the fact situation of each
case. The right of the State to resume land is conditional only to the extent referred to
in D-Form patta. Once such conditions are fulfilled, which have been done in the
instant case, no grant of compensation would be payable towards resumption of land.
Compensation may, however, be payable if lands have not been resumed by following
due process of law. The act of the State in such cases would be tortuous in nature.”

119. However, the correctness of the view taken in Bondapalli Sanyasi (supra) came to be challenged
before a Division Bench, which once again referred the matter to another Bench consisting of five
Judges. When the matter was taken up, objections were raised by the Government Pleader inter alia
contending that the Division Bench is bound by the decision of the five Judge Bench in Bondapalli
Sanyasi (supra) and, therefore, it was not correct to make a Reference to a Bench of five Judges.

120. As a consequence, the Bench of five Judges, having regard to the fact that the subject matter
that arose for its consideration was of very great public importance, placed the matter before the
Chief Justice for constitution of a larger Bench of seven Judges to resolve the issue in public interest.
That is how the matter came to be heard by seven Judges in Mekala Pandu (supra).

121. The question that fell for the consideration in Mekala Pandu (supra) was whether the terms of
grant or patta enabling the State to resume the assigned land for a public purpose without paying
compensation equivalent to the market value of the land to the assignees, are valid in law. In other
words, whether such restrictive conditions or covenants suffer from any constitutional infirmity?
Answering the question, the Full Bench (seven Judges) held as under:

“81. The State while directing no compensation be paid equivalent to the market
value of the assigned lands never took into consideration and had any regard to the
length of time the land held by the grantee or assignee, the social objectives for which
the assignment had been made by the State in discharge of its constitutional
obligation of providing public assistance to the weaker sections of the society, the
improvements or developments upon the land made by the assignees on any
legitimate expectation of continuance of the assignment, heritable nature of the right
under the grant, etc.

82. The question is whether the ‘no compensation clause’ imposed in the grant of
assignment, in effect, requires the assignee to relinquish some constitutional right?
Whether the conditions imposed at the time of assignment are “unconstitutional
conditions”?

83. The assignees are constitutional claimants. The constitutional claim cannot be
subjected to governmental restrictions or sanctions except pursuant to the
constitutionally valid rule or law.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

56

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

There is no legislation enacted by the State compelling it to assign the lands to the weaker sections
of the society. The State obviously assigned and granted pattas as a measure of providing public
assistance to the weaker sections of the society. The proposition is that as a general rule the State
may grant privilege upon such conditions as it sees fit to impose; but the power of the State in that
regard is not unlimited, and one of the limitations that it may not impose conditions which require
the relinquishment of constitutional rights. That whenever State is required to make laws,
regulations or policies, it must do so consistently with the directive principles with a view to
securing social and economic freedom so essential for establishment of an egalitarian society. The
Directive Principles of State Policy reflect the hopes and aspirations of people of this great country.
The fact that they are not enforceable by any Court in no manner reduces their importance. They are
nevertheless fundamental in the governance of the country and the State is under obligation to apply
them in making laws and framing its policies particularly concerning the weaker sections of the
society.

84. Dr. Ambedkar characterised the Directive Principles of State Policy enshrined in Part IV of the
Constitution of India as “Instruments of Instructions”. He said “whoever captures power will not be
free to do what he likes with it. In exercise of it, he will have to respect these “Instruments of
instructions”, which are called Directive Principles. He cannot ignore them.”

85. The Directive Principles fix the socio-economic goals, which the State must strive to attain. By
incorporating unconstitutional clause of ‘no compensation’ the State kept the democles sword
suspended over the head of the assignee forever. The State cannot act as a private giver.

86. In Ahmedabad St. Xavier's College Society v. State of Gujarat, 1974 (1) SCC 717, Mathew, J.,
expounded the doctrine of ‘unconstitutional condition’:

“The doctrine of “unconstitutional condition” means any stipulation imposed upon
the grant of a governmental privilege which in effect requires the recipient of the
privilege to relinquish some constitutional right. This doctrine takes for granted that
‘the petitioner has no right to be a policeman’ but it emphasizes the right he is
conceded to possess by reason of an explicit provision of the Constitution, namely,
his right “to talk politics”. The major requirement of the doctrine is that the person
complaining of the condition must demonstrate that it is unreasonable in the special
sense that it takes away or abridges the exercise of a right protected by an explicit
provision of the Constitution.”

87. After referring to the decision in Frost and Frost Trucking Co. v. Railroad Comm., of the
Supreme Court of United States (271 US 583), the learned Judge observed:

“ ……..though the State may have privileges within its control which it may withhold,
it cannot use a grant of those privileges to secure a valid consent to acts which, if
imposed upon the grantee in invitum would be beyond its constitutional power.”

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

57

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

88. In Jilubhai Nanbhai Khachar v. State of Gujarat, 1995 Supp.(1) SCC 596, the Supreme Court
observed:

“Those without land suffer not only from an economic disadvantage, but also a
concomitant social disadvantage. In the very nature of things, it is not possible to
provide land to all landless persons but that cannot furnish an alibi for not
undertaking at all a programme for the redistribution of agricultural land. Agrarian
reforms therefore require, inter alia, the reduction of the larger holdings and
distribution of the excess land according to social and economic considerations. We
embarked upon a constitutional era holding forth the promise that we will secure to
all citizens justice, social economic and political, equality of status and of
opportunity; and, last but not the least, dignity of the individual …….. Indeed, if there
is one place in an agriculture dominated society like ours where citizens can hope to
have equal justice, it is on the strip of land which they till and love, the land which
assures to them dignity of their person by providing to them a near decent means of
livelihood.” It is further held:

“Property, therefore, accords status. Due to its lack man suffers from economic
disadvantages and disabilities to gain social and economic inequality leading to his
servitude. Providing facilities and opportunities to hold property furthers the basic
structure of egalitarian social order guaranteeing economic and social equality. In
other words, it removes disabilities and inequalities, accords status, social and
economic and dignity of person ……. Property in a comprehensive term is an essential
guarantee to lead full life with human dignity, for, in order that a man may be able to
develop himself in a human fashion with full blossom, he needs a certain freedom
and a certain security. The economic and social justice, equality of status and dignity
of person are assured to him only through property.” (Emphasis is supplied)

89. The purpose of assignment of land either under the Board Standing Orders or under the land
reforms legislations to the weaker sections of the society by the State is obviously in pursuance of its
policy to empower the weaker sections of the society. Having assigned the land, the State cannot
deprive him of the welfare benefit or public assistance. Deprivation of assignee's right to enjoy the
property assigned to him may affect his dignity and security. It may adversely affect the equality of
status and dignity.

90. It is said that the institution called property guards the troubled boundary between individual
man and the State. Even if the assignment granted is considered to be government largess it should
not be able to impose any condition on largess that would be invalid if imposed on something other
than a “gratuity”. The most clearly defined problem posed by government largess is the way it can be
used to apply pressure against the exercise of constitutional rights. A first principle should be that
government must have no power to “buy up” rights guaranteed by the Constitution. The forms of
largess, which are closely linked to status, must be deemed to be held as of right. These interests
should be “vested”. If revocation is necessary, not by reason of the fault of the individual holder, but
by reason of overriding demands of public policy, perhaps payment of just compensation would be

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

58

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

appropriate. The individual should not bear the entire loss for a remedy primarily intended to
benefit the community. The benefits granted are based upon a recognition that misfortune and
deprivation are often caused by forces far beyond the control of the individual, such as technological
change, variations in demand for goods, depressions, or wars. The aim of these benefits is to
preserve the self-sufficiency of the individual, to rehabilitate him where necessary, and to allow him
to be a valuable member of a family and a community; in theory they represent part of the
individual's rightful share in the commonwealth. Only by making such benefits into rights can the
welfare State achieve its goal of providing a secured minimum basis for individual well-being and
dignity in a society where each man cannot be wholly the master of his own destiny.

91. There is an interesting article in Harvard Law Review — Volume 73 — Page 1595:

“Conditioning the extension of a governmental benefit or “privilege” upon the
surrender of constitutional rights has long appealed to Congress and the State
Legislatures as a means of regulating private conduct. This appeal is principally
attributable to the superficially compelling logic of the arguments upon which the
validity of such conditions is supposed to rest. It is contended that if the government
may withhold the benefit in the first instance, without giving a reason, it may
withhold or revoke the benefit even though its reason for doing so may be the
individual's refusal to surrender his constitutional rights. This argument is often
phrased in syllogistic terms; if the Legislature may withhold a particular benefit, it
may grant it in a limited form since the greater power of withholding absolutely must
necessarily include the lesser power of granting with restrictions. As a corollary to
this argument, the contention is made that the recipient of the benefit is not deprived
of a right since he may retain it simply by rejecting the proffered benefit.

Were this logic accepted in all cases, dangerous consequences would follow. The
rapid rise in the number of government regulatory and welfare programs, coupled
with the multiplication of government contracts resulting from expanded budgets,
has greatly increased the total benefits extended, thus affording the government
countless new opportunities to bargain for the surrender of constitutional rights. The
potential erosion of fundamental liberties through the use of this bargaining
technique has prompted the development of the doctrine of “unconstitutional
conditions”.

Since the government is under no obligation to grant a benefit, failure to grant may
appear to be a positive power to withhold. The arbitrary character of this apparent
power seems to justify the withholding or revocation of benefits where the individual
fails to comply with conditions requiring the surrender of constitutional rights. But
withholding is really a non-exercise of power, and the absence of a requirement that
there be constitutional justification for inaction offers no logical support for the
positive assertion of an authority to extend benefits and impose conditions which
limit the rights of the recipient. In the latter case, the State is asserting its spending
power which is limited by the due process clause of the fourteenth amendment. The

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

59

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

cases limiting State spending power draw a dichotomy between spending for public
and for private uses; however, they seem to imply a broader limitation, namely that
the fourteenth amendment limits spending to purposes related to the general welfare.
Despite the wide discretion this term suggests, it is at least arguable that State
spending power cannot be exercised to “ buy up” rights guaranteed by the
Constitution. Since federal spending power is explicitly restricted to general welfare
purposes, this limitation is even more likely to apply to the national government. Its
application to either governmental entity would require the invalidation of conditions
unrelated to the achievement of the benefit's objective since in such cases the
spending power is being exercised to encourage, through subsidies the non-assertion
of constitutional rights, as well as to finance a “welfare” program. Although the
individual deprived of the benefit does not have standing to assert this misuse of the
spending power in his capacity as taxpayer, he should have it as a beneficiary, since in
that capacity he has suffered as immediate and measurable injury; it is evident that,
but for the assertion of the right, he would have received the benefit.”

92. ‘No compensation’ clause which virtually enables the State to withdraw the privilege granted
without payment of just compensation is an “unconstitutional condition” imposed by the State
adversely affects the life, liberty, equality and dignity guaranteed by the Constitution. The
assignment of lands to the exploited and vulnerable sections of the society is neither a formality nor
a gratis. The privilege granted is with a view to ensure and protect the rights of the exploited
sections of the people to live with human dignity free from exploitation. The privilege or largesse
once granted acquires the status of vested interest. The policy to assign the government land by the
State was obviously designed to protect the socio-economic status of a vulnerable citizenry; its
deprivation would be universally perceived as a misfortune.” (Emphasis supplied)

122. The Full Bench thereafter proceeded to examine the matter keeping in mind the right to life. It
proceeded to observe as under:

“93. Section 2(d) of the Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993 (Act 10 of 1994)
defines “human rights” that the rights relating to life, liberty, equality and dignity of
the individual guaranteed by the Constitution or embodied in the International
Covenants and enforceable by Courts in India.

94. Article 21 of the Constitution of India guarantees right to life. The right to life
includes the right to livelihood.

95. Time and again the Courts in India held that Article 21 is one of the great silences
of the Constitution. The right to livelihood cannot be subjected to individual fancies
of the persons in authority. The sweep of the right to life conferred by Art. 21 is wide
and far reaching. An important facet of that right is the right to livelihood because, no
person can live without the means of living, that is, the means of livelihood. If the
right to livelihood is not treated as a part of the constitutional right to life, the easiest
way of depriving a person of his right to life would be to deprive him of his means of

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

60

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

livelihood to the point of abrogation.

96. Chandrachud, C.J., in Olga Tellis v. Bombay Municipal Corporation, 1985 (3) SCC
545, observed:

“If there is an obligation upon the State to secure to the citizens an adequate means of
livelihood and the right to work, it would be sheer pedantry to exclude the right to
livelihood from the content of the right to life. The State may not, by affirmative
action, be compellable to provide adequate means of livelihood or work to the
citizens. But, any person, who is deprived of his right to livelihood except according
to just and fair procedure established by law, can challenge the deprivation as
offending the right to life conferred by Article 21.” (Emphasis is supplied).

97. The right to live with human dignity, free from exploitation is enshrined in Art. 21
and derives its life breath from the Directive Principles of State Policy and
particularly Clauses (e) and (f) of Article 39 and Articles 41 and 42 and at least,
therefore, it must include the right to live with human dignity, the right to take any
action which will deprive a person of enjoyment of basic right to live with dignity as
an integral part of the constitutional right guaranteed under Article 21 of the
Constitution of India.

98. In Delhi Transport Corporation v. D.T.C. Mazdoor Congress, AIR 1991 SC 101, the
Supreme Court while reiterating the principle observed that the right to life includes
right to livelihood. The right to livelihood therefore cannot hang on to the fancies of
individuals in authority ….. Income is the foundation of many fundamental rights
……… Fundamental rights can ill-

afford to be consigned to the limbo of undefined premises and uncertain applications. That will be a
mockery of them.

99. The function of human rights is to protect the individual from the leviathan of the State. A
welfare State provides a wide range of benefits to the citizens as of right, but at the same time it
enhances the power of administration, since the benefits provided are inevitably administered by
government departments or their agents. A welfare State will continue to grow leading to a more
just distribution of the resources resulting in greater governmental regulation. These developments
may add further dimension to the relationship between the individuals and the State. There will be
more and more assertions claiming entitlements to basic social benefits from the State in addition to
civil and political rights.

100. The deprivation of the assignee's right to payment of just compensation equivalent to the
market value of the assigned land may amount to deprivation of right to livelihood. The denial of
constitutional claim to receive just compensation after depriving the assignee of his land is
impermissible except pursuant to a constitutionally valid rule or law.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

61

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

101. The contention is that if the Government may withhold the benefit in the first instance itself
without giving a reason, it may withhold or revoke the benefit even though its reason for doing so
may be the individual's refusal to surrender his constitutional rights. This argument is often phrased
in syllogistic terms: if the State may withhold a particular benefit, it may grant it in a limited form
since the greater power of withholding absolutely must necessarily include the lesser power of
granting with restrictions. The contention often advanced is that the recipient of the benefit is not
deprived of a right since he may retain all his rights simply by rejecting the proffered benefit. This
contention is fraught with dangerous consequences. The number of ‘social choices’ programmes
resulting from expanded social welfare activities, has greatly increased the total benefits extended,
thus affording the government countless new opportunities to bargain for the surrender of
constitutional rights. The potential erosion of fundamental liberties through the use of this
bargaining technique has prompted the development of the doctrine of “unconstitutional
conditions”. Reasonable conditions may be imposed in order to see that the interest in ensuring that
the benefit or facility extended to the individual is maintained for the purposes intended, in order to
protect the effectiveness of the benefit itself.

102. The recipients of public assistance are not estopped from setting up their fundamental rights as
a defence as against “no compensation clause”. It is very well settled and needs no restatement at
our hands that there can be no estoppel against the Constitution.

103. In Olga Tellis (18 supra), the Supreme Court observed:. “The Constitution is not only the
paramount law of the land but it is the source and sustenance of all laws. Its provisions are
conceived in public interest and are intended to serve a public purpose. The doctrine of estoppel is
based on the principle that consistency in word and action imparts certainty and honesty to human
affairs. If a person makes a representation to another, on the faith of which the latter acts to his
prejudice, the former cannot resile from the representation made by him. He must make it good.
This principle can have no application to representations made regarding the assertion or
enforcement of fundamental rights. For example, the concession made by a person that he does not
possess and would not exercise his right to free speech and expression or the right to move freely
throughout the territory of India cannot deprive him of those constitutional rights, any more than a
concession that a person has no right of personal liberty can justify his detention contrary to the
terms of Article 22 of the Constitution. Fundamental rights are undoubtedly conferred by the
Constitution upon individuals which have to be asserted and enforced by them, if those rights are
violated. But, the high purpose which the Constitution seeks to achieve by conferment of
fundamental rights is not only to benefit individuals but to secure the larger interests of the
community. The Preamble of the Constitution says that India is a democratic Republic. It is in order
to fulfil the promise of the Preamble that fundamental rights are conferred by the Constitution,
some on citizens like those guaranteed by Articles 15, 16, 19, 21 and 29 and, some on citizens and
non-citizens alike, like those guaranteed by Articles, 14, 21, 22 and 25 of the Constitution. No
individual can barter away the freedoms conferred upon him by the Constitution. A concession
made by him in a proceeding, whether under a mistake of law or otherwise, that he does not possess
or will not enforce any particular fundamental right, cannot create an estoppel against him in that or
any subsequent proceeding. Such a concession, if enforced would defeat the purpose of the
Constitution. Were the argument of estoppel valid, and all-powerful State could easily tempt an

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

62

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

individual to forego his precious personal freedom on promise of transitory, immediate benefits.”

104. Therefore, notwithstanding the fact that the recipients had accepted the assignment subject to
‘no compensation clause’ and that they will not object to the resumption of the assigned lands for a
public purpose, they are entitled to assert that any such action on the part of the authorities will be
in violation of their guaranteed fundamental rights. How far the argument regarding the existence
and scope of the right claimed by the recipients is well-founded is another matter. But, the argument
has to be examined despite the concession.

105. In the matter of distribution of material resources of the community to the vulnerable sections
of the society by the State in furtherance of its constitutional obligations no argument can be heard
from the State contending that the recipient of the benefit may either accept with the restrictions or
not to accept the benefit at all. The whole idea of distributive justice is to empower the weaker
sections of the society and to provide them their share of cake in the material resources of the
community of which they were deprived from times immemorial for no fault of theirs.

Having resolved to extend the benefits as a welfare measure, no unconstitutional condition can be
imposed depriving the recipients of the benefits of their legitimate right to get compensation in case
of taking over of the benefit even for a valid public purpose. The recipients cannot be at the mercy of
the State forever.

106. Justice K.K. Mathew, in his Democracy, Equality and Freedom has observed that property is a
legal institution the essence of which is the creation and protection of certain private rights in
wealth of any kind. The learned Judge stated:

“In a society with a mixed economy, who can be sure that freedom in relation to
property might not be regarded as an aspect of individual freedom? People without
property have a tendency to become slaves. They become the property of others as
they have no property themselves. They will come to say: ‘Make us slaves, but feed
us.’ Liberty, independence, self-respect, have their roots in property. To denigrate the
institution of property is to shut one's eyes to the stark reality evidenced by the innate
instinct and the steady object of pursuit of the vast majority of people. Protection of
property interest may quite fairly be deemed in appropriate circumstances an aspect
of freedom. There is no surer way to give men the courage to be free than to insure
them a competence upon which they can rely. This is why the Constitution-makers
wanted that the ownership of the material resources of the community should be so
distributed as to subserve the common good. People become a society based upon
relationship and status.”

107. In Murlidhar Dayandeo Keskar v. Vishwanath Pandu Barde, 1995 Supp. (2) SCC 549, the
Supreme Court observed:

“Economic empowerment to the poor, Dalits and Tribes, is an integral constitutional
scheme of socio-economic democracy and a way of life of political democracy.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

63

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

Economic empowerment is, therefore, a basic human right and a fundamental right
as part of right to live, equality and of status and dignity to the poor, weaker sections,
Dalits and Tribes. The State has evolved, by its legislative and executive action, the
policy to allot lands to the Dalits and Tribes and other weaker sections for their
economic empowerment. The Government evolved two-pronged economic policies to
render economic justice to the poor. The Planning Commission evolved policies like
DRDL for economic empowerment of the weaker sections of the society; the Dalits
and Tribes in particular. There should be short-term policy for immediate sustenance
and long-term policy for stable and permanent economic empowerment. All the State
Governments also evolved assignment of its lands or the lands acquired under the
ceiling laws to them. Appropriate legislative enactments are brought on statute books
to prevent alienation of the assigned lands or the property had under the planned
schemes, and imposed prohibition thereunder of alienation, declaring any
conveyance in contravention thereof as void or illegal and inoperative not to bind the
State or the assignee. In case the assignee was disqualified or not available, on
resumption of such land, the authorities are enjoined to resume the property and
assign to an heir or others eligible among the Dalits and Tribes or weaker sections in
terms of the policy. The prohibition is to effectuate the constitutional policy of
economic empowerment under Articles 14, 21, 38, 39 and 46 read with the Preamble
to the Constitution. Even in respect of private sales of the lands belonging to tribes,
statutes prohibit alienation without prior sanction of the Competent Authority.”

108. Be it noted, the land by way of assignment is let for purposes of agriculture or for purposes
ancillary thereto, for personal occupation and cultivation by the agricultural labourers and others
belonging to weaker sections of the society. It may be lawful for the State to acquire any portion of
such land as is within the ceiling limit but not without providing for compensation at a rate which
shall not be less than the market value thereof. The acquisition of such land even for a public
purpose without payment of compensation shall be in the teeth of Article 31 -A of the Constitution of
India.

109. The masses have suffered socio-economic injustice too long and been separated by the poverty
curtain too strong that if peaceful transformation of the nation into an egalitarian society were not
achieved, chaos, upsurge may destroy the peaceful progress and orderly development of the society.

110. In the result, we hold that ‘no compensation’ clause, restricting the right of the assignees to
claim full compensation in respect of the land resumed equivalent to the market value of the land, is
unconstitutional. The ‘no compensation clause’ infringes the fundamental rights guaranteed by
Articles 14 and 31-A of the Constitution. We are conscious that Article 21 essentially deals with
personal liberty. But in cases where deprivation of property would lead to deprivation of life or
liberty or livelihood, Article 21 springs into action and any such deprivation without just payment of
compensation amounts to infringement of the right guaranteed thereunder. The doctrine of
‘unconstitutional conditions’ applies in all its force.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

64

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

111. In the circumstances, we hold that the assignees of the government lands are entitled to
payment of compensation equivalent to the full market value of the land and other benefits on par
with full owners of the land even in cases where the assigned lands are taken possession of by the
State in accordance with the terms of grant or patta, though such resumption is for a public purpose.
We further hold that even in cases where the State does not invoke the covenant of the grant or patta
to resume the land for such public purpose and resorts to acquisition of the land under the
provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, the assignees shall be entitled to compensation as
owners of the land and for all other consequential benefits under the provisions of the Land
Acquisition Act, 1894. No condition incorporated in patta/deed of assignment shall operate as a clog
putting any restriction on the right of the assignee to claim full compensation as owner of the land.”
(Emphasis supplied)

123. The State has admitted that Pattadar Passbook was issued to the appellants years back. They
have also not disputed that the appellants were paying revenue to the government and the revenue
receipts have also been exhibited in the form of documentary evidence. Even if we were to ignore the
sale deed executed in 1970 for the time being and treat the appellants as mere occupants with the
right to possession, cultivation and enjoyment, we still must remain cognizant of the rights
specifically vested in the appellants by way of issuance of Pattadar Passbook. Thus, what was vested
in the appellant with the issuance of a Pattadar Passbook was a “property” within the meaning of
Article 300-A of the Constitution.

124. Article 300-A provides that no person shall be deprived of his property save by authority of law.
This Article has been inserted by the Constitution (44th Amendment) Act, 1978. Prior to this
amendment, the right to property was guaranteed by Article 31. While Clause (1) of that Article has
been shifted from Part III to Article 300-A, Clause (2) of that Article, which dealt with compulsory
acquisition of property, has been repealed. Sub-Clause (f) of Clause (1) of Article 19, which
guaranteed the right to acquire and hold property, has also been omitted by the same 44th
Amendment Act, 1978. The result of these changes, in short, is that the right to hold property has
ceased to be a fundamental right under the Constitution and it has been left to the Legislature to
deprive a person by the authority of law.

125. Article 300-A provides that the property of a person can be deprived by authority of law. The
phrase “save by authority of law” came before the Court for interpretation. This Court in the case of
Wazir Chand v. State of H.P., reported in (1954) 1 SCC 787 held that under the Constitution, the
Executive cannot deprive a person of his property of any kind without specific legal authority which
can be established in Court of law, however laudable the motive behind such deprivation may be. In
the same decision, this Court also held that in case of dispossession of property except under the
authority of law, the owner may obtain restoration of possession by a proceeding for mandamus
against the governmental authorities. Further, this Court in Bishambhar Dayal Chandra Mohan v.
State of Uttar Pradesh reported in (1982) 1 SCC 39 held that the phrase “by authority of law” means
by or under a law made by the competent Legislature. The same position is reiterated by this Court
in the case of Jilubhai Nanbhai Khachar v. State of Gujarat reported in 1995 Supp. (1) SCC 596
wherein it has been observed that “Article 300-A only limits the powers of the State that no person
shall be deprived of his property save by authority of law. There has to be no deprivation without

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

65

Yerikala Sunkalamma vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh And Ors. ... on 24 March, 2025

any sanction of law. Deprivation by any other mode is not acquisition or taking possession under
Article 300-A. In other words, if there is no law, there is no deprivation.”

126. In Delhi Airtech Services Pvt. Ltd. and Anr. v. State of U.P. and Anr.

reported in (2011) 9 SCC 354, this Court recognized the right to property as a basic human right in
the following words:

“30. It is accepted in every jurisprudence and by different political thinkers that some
amount of property right is an indispensable safeguard against tyranny and economic
oppression of the Government. Jefferson was of the view that liberty cannot long
subsist without the support of property.” Property must be secured, else liberty
cannot subsist” was the opinion of John Adams. Indeed the view that property itself
is the seed bed which must be conserved if other constitutional values are to flourish
is the consensus among political thinkers and jurists.” (Emphasis supplied) F.
CONCLUSION

127. Having regard to the nature of the land, the area of the suit land which is approximately three
acres and the time spent pursuing this litigation for the past thirty years, we believe that the State
should pay an amount of Rs. 70 lakhs towards compensation to the appellants.

128. We dispose of this appeal with the direction to the respondents to pay an amount of Rs. 70
lakhs to the appellants by way of compensation within a period of three months from the date of this
judgment.

129. The Registry is directed to circulate one copy each of this judgment to all the High Courts
across the country and one copy each to all the Chief Secretaries of the respective State
Governments with more emphasis on the chapter of Section 80 CPC as discussed by this Court in
the judgment.

.......................................................... J.

(J.B. Pardiwala) .......................................................... J.

(R. Mahadevan) New Delhi.

March 24, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184866874/

66

