Yuvraj Laxmilal Kanther vs The State Of Maharashtra on 7 March, 2025

Yuvraj Laxmilal Kanther vs The State Of Maharashtra on 7
March, 2025

Author: Abhay S. Oka

Bench: Abhay S. Oka

2025 INSC 338                                                             REPORTABLE

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2356 OF 2024

                            YUVRAJ LAXMILAL KANTHER & ANR.                APPELLANT(S)

                                                      VERSUS

                            STATE OF MAHARASHTRA                        RESPONDENT(S)

                                                  JUDGMENT

UJJAL BHUYAN, J.

This appeal by special leave is directed against the judgment and order dated 02.11.2017 passed by
the High Court of Judicature at Bombay (briefly ‘the High Court’ hereinafter) in Criminal Revision
Application No. 269 of 2017.

2. By the aforesaid judgment and order dated 02.11.2017, the revision application filed by the
appellants assailing the order dated 01.04.2017 passed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge,
Pune in Sessions Case No. 749 of 2014 came to be dismissed.

2.1. Be it stated that by the aforesaid order dated 01.04.2017, learned Additional Sessions Judge,
Pune dismissed the discharge applications filed by the appellants being Exhibit Nos. 6 and 10 in
Sessions Case No.749 of 2014.

3. Appellants are Yuvraj Laxmilal Kanther and Nimesh Pravinchandra Shah.

4. Appellant No. 1 was doing interior decoration of the concerned shop in Pune on contract basis.
Appellant No. 2 was the Store Operation Manager of M/s. lntergold Gems Private Limited which
had taken the concerned shop on lease. 4.1. On 27.09.2013, at about 09:00 PM, the work of
decoration of the front side of the shop was being undertaken by two employees of appellant No.1,

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/104970138/

1

Yuvraj Laxmilal Kanther vs The State Of Maharashtra on 7 March, 2025

Salauddin Shaikh and Arun Sharma. It is alleged that both the employees viz. Salauddin Shaikh and
Arun Sharma were provided with an iron ladder and they were working on the sign board which was
approximately at a height of 12 feet from the ground level. While they were working on the sign
board, they were struck by electricity as a result of which they got electrocuted and fell down. Due to
the fall, they suffered head injuries as well as injuries on their arms. They were taken to Pune
Hospital and Research Centre where they were declared dead on arrival.

4.2. Accidental reports bearing Nos. 67/23 and 68/23 under Section 174 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) were registered.

4.3. After more than two months, on 04.12.2013, FIR was lodged at Vishrambag Police Station, Pune
by the Police Sub-Inspector Shri S.G. Patil against the appellants which was registered as FIR No.
316/2013. It was stated that the appellants did not provide any safety equipments like belt, helmet,
rubber shoes etc to the two deceased employees. According to the investigating officer, the two
accused persons had not taken proper care and caution by providing safety shoes, safety belt etc to
the two employees though the work assigned to them was quite risky. Informant opined that both
the appellants were responsible for the unnatural death of the two employees since they had
knowledge that there was risk to the lives of the employees. Therefore, the first informant summed
up by saying that both the accused persons were responsible for the unnatural death of the two
deceased persons. Accordingly, it was alleged that appellants had committed offences under
Sections 304 and 304A IPC. 4.4. On 04.12.2013 itself both the appellants were arrested in
connection with the aforesaid FIR. They were subsequently released on the same day. After
completion of investigation, police submitted chargesheet in which the two appellants were arrayed
as accused. Appellants were chargesheeted for committing an offence under Sections 304A/182/201
read with Section 34 IPC.

4.5. Learned Judicial Magistrate First Class, Pune, before whom the chargesheet was filed, was of
the view that there were material to attract Section 304 Part II IPC. Since it became a sessions
triable case, the same was committed to the Court of Additional Sessions Judge, Pune where it was
registered as Sessions Case No.749 of 2014.

5. Appellants filed Exhibit Nos. 6 and 10 applications in the Court of Additional Sessions Judge,
Pune seeking their discharge under Section 227 of CrPC.

5.1. Contention of the appellants in the discharge applications was that there were no materials to
show that the appellants had committed the alleged offence. Ingredients of the alleged offence
charged were not even prima facie established against the appellants. Charge levelled by the
prosecution against the appellants was groundless. FIR was totally silent about any overt act of the
appellants. Appellants were not present at the place of occurrence when the incident took place.
There was no negligence on the part of the appellants; not to speak of having any knowledge or
intention to cause the death of the two employees or such bodily injury as would likely cause their
death.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/104970138/

2

Yuvraj Laxmilal Kanther vs The State Of Maharashtra on 7 March, 2025

5.2. Even if all the statements of the witnesses were considered and accepted as correct, the trial
would not end in conviction of the appellants. Going ahead with the trial would be a futile exercise.
There were no materials to show that appellants had committed the offence as charged. In the
circumstances, appellants sought for discharge as contemplated under Section 227 of the CrPC.

6. Learned Additional Sessions Judge, Pune vide his order dated 01.04.2017 dismissed both the
discharge applications. He held that the two appellants were certainly not oblivious of the fact that
they had not provided safety gear to the employees which was certainly dangerous to them as they
got exposed to electrocution risk. Learned Additional Sessions Judge was also of the view that there
was much force in the argument advanced on behalf of the prosecution that there was sufficient
material justifying framing of charge against the accused for the offence punishable under Section
304 Part II read with Section 34 IPC. In that view of the matter, the discharge applications were
dismissed.

7. Aggrieved by the aforesaid decision, appellants preferred Criminal Revision Application No. 269
of 2017 before the High Court. After going through the materials on record and after hearing the
parties, High Court was of the view that there was strong suspicion against both the appellants for
committing the offence for which they were charged. It could not be said that there were no grounds
to proceed against the appellants. No case for interference was made out. Hence, the revision
petition was dismissed vide the judgment and order dated 02.11.2017.

8. Assailing the aforesaid judgment and order dated 02.11.2017 of the High Court, appellants
preferred the related SLP(Crl.) No. 9928 of 2017. By order dated 09.01.2018, this Court had issued
notice and granted stay of further proceedings in Sessions Case No. 749 of 2014 pending on the file
of the Additional Sessions Judge, Pune. 8.1. The matter was heard on 30.04.2024 when leave was
granted. Hence, the appeal.

9. Learned counsel for the appellants submits that both the Trial Court and the High Court fell in
error in rejecting the discharge applications filed by the appellants. Though the prosecution had
submitted chargesheet alleging commission of offence under Sections 304A/182/201 IPC read with
Section 34 IPC, learned Magistrate while committing the case to the Court of Sessions concluded
that there was material to invoke Section 304 Part II IPC. Trial Court took the view that there is
sufficient material justifying framing of charge against the appellants for the offence punishable
under Section 304 Part II read with Section 34 IPC. Interestingly, High Court proceeded on the
basis that appellants were accused of committing offences under Sections 304 and 304A IPC while
dismissing the revision application of the appellants.

9.1. Learned counsel submits that no offence is made out against the appellants under Section 304
Part II IPC or even under Section 304A IPC. The two deceased employees of appellant No. 1 were
working on the sign board as part of cleaning the front side of the shop. It was an accident that they
got electrocuted and fell down because of which they suffered multiple injuries leading to their
death. 9.2. The only reason for filing of chargesheet against the appellants is that according to the
prosecution, appellants had not provided safety equipments to the two deceased employees such as
rubber shoes, safety belt etc. He submits that non-furnishing of such equipments would not make it

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/104970138/

3

a criminal offence.

Yuvraj Laxmilal Kanther vs The State Of Maharashtra on 7 March, 2025

9.3. Adverting to the order of the High Court, learned counsel submits that the High Court
proceeded on the basis that it was expected from a prudent person to have provided the deceased
employees wooden scaffolding instead of an iron ladder. Therefore, by applying the test of a prudent
person, High Court found shortcomings on the conduct of the appellants. Therefore, it observed that
a strong suspicion could be inferred against the appellants that they had knowledge that by asking
the two deceased employees to work in the manner in which they did would cause their death.

9.4. Learned counsel submits that such observations by the High Court are way off the mark and
cannot justify initiation of criminal proceedings against the appellants. Neither any negligent or rash
act was committed by the appellants nor any specific overt act can be attributed to the appellants. It
was a case of sudden accident. 9.5. Learned counsel also submits that appellants have paid
compensation to the legal heirs of the two deceased employees to the extent of Rs. 5,91,180.00
(Arun Sharma) and Rs. 5,20,584.00 (Salauddin Shaikh). Appellant No. 1 has also provided
employment to the brother of the deceased Salauddin Shaikh. That apart, educational expenses of
the children of Arun Sharma have been taken care of by appellant No. 1.

9.6. In that view of the matter, learned counsel for the appellants submits that there is no material
to justify launch of criminal trial against the appellants. Therefore, the appellants should be
discharged.

10. Per contra, learned counsel for the respondent submits that appellants knew fully well about the
risk that the two deceased employees had to undertake to do the work assigned to them. Yet the
appellants did not provide any safety equipments to them. The two deceased employees sustained
electric shock and fell down because of which they suffered multiple injuries causing their death.
There is, thus, a strong prima facie case made out against the appellants. 10.1. Learned counsel
submits that there is sufficient material to justify framing of charge against the appellants for the
offence punishable under Section 302 Part II IPC read with Section 34 thereof. In any case, police
had filed the charge-sheet alleging commission of offence under Section 304A IPC by the appellants.
There are sufficient materials to substantiate such a charge. In this connection, learned counsel has
placed reliance on the decision of this Court in Keshub Mahindra Vs. State of M.P.1 10.2. Finally,
learned counsel for the respondent submits that there is no merit in the appeal and, therefore, the
same should be dismissed.

11. Submissions made by learned counsel for the parties have received the due consideration of the
court. 11.1. At the outset, it would apposite to deal with the relevant legal provisions.

12. We have noted above that the appellants have been charged for committing offence under
Section 304 Part II IPC read with Section 34 IPC. Since Section 34 IPC covers common intention,
the substantive charge against the appellants is under Section 304 Part II IPC which reads as under:

Punishment for culpable homicide not amounting to murder – (1996) 6 SCC 129
Whoever commits culpable homicide not amounting to murder shall be punished

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/104970138/

4

Yuvraj Laxmilal Kanther vs The State Of Maharashtra on 7 March, 2025

with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years or
with fine or with both, if the act is done with the knowledge that it is likely to cause
death; but without any intention to cause death or to cause such bodily injury as is
likely to cause death.

12.1. The ingredients constituting an offence under Section 304 Part II IPC are as follows:

        (i) he   must   commit       culpable   homicide   not
        amounting to murder;

(ii) the act must be done with the knowledge that it is likely to cause death;

(iii) but such act is done without any intention to cause death or to cause such bodily injury as is
likely to cause death.

12.2. Therefore, the first important expression is ‘culpable homicide not amounting to murder’.
Culpable homicide is defined in Section 299 IPC. It says that whoever causes death by doing an act
with the intention of causing death or with the intention of causing such bodily injury as is likely to
cause death or with the knowledge that he is likely by such act to cause death, commits the offence
of culpable homicide.

12.3. All culpable homicides are murders except in the cases excepted under Section 300 IPC. Thus,
except the cases specifically exempted under Section 300 IPC, all other acts within the meaning of
Section 299 IPC would amount to committing the offence of culpable homicide. However, what is
important to note is that for committing the offence of culpable homicide, a positive act must be
done by the doer with the intention that such act would cause death or cause such bodily injury as is
likely to cause death or he having the knowledge that by such an act, death may be caused. What,
therefore, is significant is that the doer of the act must have the intention of causing death or the
intention of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death or has the knowledge that by doing
such an act he is likely to cause death. Therefore, to commit the offence of culpable homicide,
intention or knowledge is of crucial importance. 12.4. Coming back to Section 304 Part II IPC, we
find that the said section would be attracted if anyone commits culpable homicide not amounting to
murder if the act is done with the knowledge that it is likely to cause death but without any intention
to cause death or to cause such bodily injury as is likely to cause death. Therefore, the requirement
of Section 304 Part II IPC is that the doer must have the knowledge that the act performed is likely
to cause death or to cause such bodily injury as is likely to cause death but without any intention to
cause death. Thus, the basic ingredient of Section 304 Part II IPC is presence of knowledge and
absence of intention. The doer must have the knowledge that the act performed by him would likely
cause death etc but there should not be any intention to cause death.

13. This being the legal framework, let us now deal with the charge against the appellants taking the
same as correct. According to the prosecution and accepted by the Trial Court and the High Court,
the two accused persons had not taken proper care and caution by providing safety shoes, safety belt
etc to the two employees though they were asked to perform the job of working on the sign board as
part of decorating the front side of the shop which was approximately at a height of 12 feet from the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/104970138/

5

Yuvraj Laxmilal Kanther vs The State Of Maharashtra on 7 March, 2025

ground level. The accused persons had provided only an iron ladder to the two employees but while
working they were struck by electricity as a result of which they suffered electrocution and fell down.
They suffered multiple injuries which led to their death. Therefore, both the accused persons were
declared to be responsible for the unnatural death of the two deceased employees.

14. Even if we take the allegation against the appellants as correct, we are afraid no prima facie case
can be said to have been made out against the appellants for committing an offence under Section
304 Part II IPC. From the record of the case, it is evident that there was no intention on the part of
the two appellants to cause the death or cause such bodily injury as was likely to cause the death of
the two deceased employees. It cannot also be said that the appellants had knowledge that by asking
the two deceased employees to work on the sign board as part of the work of decoration of the
frontage of the shop, they had the knowledge that such an act was likely to cause the death of the
two deceased employees. As such, no prima facie case of culpable homicide can be said to have been
made out against the appellants. If that be so, the subsequent requirement of having knowledge that
the act was likely to cause the death but not having any intention to cause death would become
irrelevant though we may hasten to add that nothing is discernible from the record of the case that
the appellants had the knowledge that by asking the two employees to work on the sign board would
likely cause their death or cause such bodily injury as is likely to cause their death.

15. Therefore, the basic ingredients for commission of offence under Section 304 Part II IPC are
absent in the present case.

16. Section 227 CrPC deals with discharge. What Section 227 CrPC contemplates is that if upon
consideration of the record of the case and the documents submitted therewith and after hearing the
submissions of the accused and the prosecution in this behalf, the judge considers that there is no
sufficient grounds for proceeding against the accused, he shall discharge the accused and record his
reasons for doing so. At the stage of consideration of discharge, the court is not required to
undertake a threadbare analysis of the materials gathered by the prosecution. All that is required to
be seen at this stage is that there are sufficient grounds to proceed against the accused. In other
words, the materials should be sufficient to enable the court to initiate a criminal trial against the
accused. It may be so that at the end of the trial, the accused may still be acquitted. At the stage of
discharge, court is only required to consider as to whether there are sufficient materials which can
justify launch of a criminal trial against the accused. By its very nature, a discharge is at a higher
pedestal than an acquittal. Acquittal is at the end of the trial process, may be for a technicality or on
benefit of doubt or the prosecution could not prove the charge against the accused; but when an
accused is discharged, it means that there are no materials to justify launch of a criminal trial
against the accused. Once he is discharged, he is no longer an accused.

17. Learned counsel for the respondent has placed reliance on a decision of this Court in Keshub
Mahindra (supra). However, on going through the aforesaid judgment, we are of the view that facts
in Keshub Mahindra and facts in the present case are poles apart. Keshub Mahindra arose out of the
in-famous Bhopal Gas tragedy. A highly dangerous and toxic gas escaped from a tank in the Bhopal
factory belonging to Union Carbide India Limited. As a result of such leakage, 3828 human beings
lost their lives; 18922 suffered permanent injuries; 7172 suffered temporary disablement; 1313

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/104970138/

6

Yuvraj Laxmilal Kanther vs The State Of Maharashtra on 7 March, 2025

suffered temporary disablement caused by permanent injuries; and permanent partial disablement
was suffered by 2680 persons. While 40 human beings suffered from permanent total disablement,
a total of 2544 animals died. Criminal proceedings were initiated against the company and officials
belonging to the company. Charges were framed under Sections 304 Part II/324/326/429 IPC read
with Section 35 IPC. Some of the accused persons challenged such framing of charge before the High
Court of M.P. at Jabalpur. However, the High Court dismissed the criminal revision application
whereafter the matter came up before this Court. In Keshub Mahindra (supra), this Court upon
perusal of the material on record held that charges under Section 304 Part II, 324, 326 and 429 of
IPC were not attracted at all. Framing of such charges against the concerned accused persons fell
short of even prima-facie case. It was observed that mere act of running a plant as per permission
granted by the authorities would not be a criminal act. This Court held that:

20. …….Consequently in our view taking the entire material as aforesaid on its face
value and assuming it to represent the correct factual position in connection with the
operation of the plant at Bhopal on that fateful night it could not be said that the said
material even prima facie called for framing of a charge against the accused
concerned under Section 304 Part II IPC on the specious plea that the said act of the
accused amounted to culpable homicide only because the operation of the plant on
that night ultimately resulted in deaths of a number of human beings and cattle.

17.1. However, considering the gravity of the incident, this Court exercised power
under Article 142 of the Constitution of India and examined the question as to
whether the material led by the prosecution could prima facie support a charge under
Section 304A IPC against the concerned accused persons. This Court thereafter
opined as under:

22. ……..It cannot be gainsaid that the voluminous evidence led by the prosecution in
this connection at least prima facie shows that the accused concerned who operated
the plant on that fateful night at Bhopal could be alleged to be at least guilty of rash
and negligent act in the way this highly volatile substance MIC was handled by them
and which ultimately escaped in vaporous form and extinguished the lives of
thousands of human beings and animals apart from causing serious bodily injuries to
thousands of others.

* * * * * * However for framing charge under Section 304-A on the aforesaid material
it cannot be said that the said material even prima facie did not point out the
culpability of the accused concerned in running a defective plant having a number of
operational defects and in being prima facie guilty of illegal omissions to take safety
measures in running such a limping plant on that fateful night which resulted into
this colossal tragedy. The aforesaid conclusion of ours, therefore, would make out a
prima facie case against accused 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9 who were in actual charge of running
of the Bhopal Plant and would require them to face the trial for charge under Section
304-A of the IPC.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/104970138/

7

Yuvraj Laxmilal Kanther vs The State Of Maharashtra on 7 March, 2025

17.2. The aforesaid conclusion of this Court and the consequential directions issued
was in exercise of power under Article 142 of the Constitution of India considering
the gravity and magnitude of the incident.

17.3. In so far facts of the present case is concerned, the two deceased employees of
appellant No. 1 were undertaking the work of decoration of the front side of the shop.
As part of the said work, they were working on the sign board which was
approximately at a height of 12 feet from the ground level. For this purpose, they
were provided with an iron ladder. While working on the sign board, they were struck
by electricity as a result of which they got electrocuted and fell down resulting in
multiple injuries leading to their death.

It was purely accidental. On these basic facts, no prima facie case can be said to be made out against
the appellants for committing an offence under Section 304A IPC, not to speak of Section 304 Part
II IPC. In any case, the Trial Court only considered culpability of the appellants qua Section 304
Part II IPC as the committing Magistrate had committed the case to the Court of Sessions confining
the allegations against the appellant to Section 304 Part II IPC and not Section 304A IPC.

17.4 Therefore, Keshub Mahindra (supra) can be of no assistance to the respondent.

18. That being the position and having regard to the discussions made above, we are of the view that
both the Trial Court and the High Court fell in error in rejecting the discharge applications of the
appellants. For the reasons stated above, the order of the Trial Court dated 01.04.2017 and that of
the High Court dated 02.11.2017 are hereby set aside and quashed. Consequently, the discharge
applications being Exhibit Nos. 6 and 10 in Sessions Case No. 749 of 2014 are hereby allowed.
Appellants are discharged from Sessions Case No. 749 of 2014. Consequently, Criminal Appeal No.
2356 of 2024 is allowed.

………………………………J. [ABHAY S. OKA] ………………………………J. [UJJAL BHUYAN] NEW DELHI;

MARCH 07, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/104970138/

8

