Athar Parwez vs Union Of India on 17 December, 2024

Athar Parwez vs Union Of India on 17 December, 2024

Author: Abhay S. Oka

Bench: Abhay S. Oka

2024 INSC 995

                                                                               REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                    CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 5387 OF 2024
                               [ARISING OUT OF SLP (CRL) NO. 9209 OF 2024]

                              ATHAR PARWEZ                                     … APPELLANT

                                                              Versus

                              UNION OF INDIA                             …. RESPONDENT

                                                        JUDGMENT

AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH, J.

1. Leave granted.

2. The Appellant herein has approached this Court seeking bail during the pendency of trial after
dismissal of his bail application by the High Court of Patna vide impugned Order dated 28.11.2023
in Criminal Appeal (DB) No.516 of 2023. The Appellant is booked as Accused No.01 in FIR No.
KAVITA PAHUJA 827 of 2022, which was registered at Police Station Date: 2024.12.17 18:04:26
IST Reason:

Phulwari Sharif, Patna under Sections 120, 120-B, 121, 121A, 153A, 153B, & 34 of the
Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as the “IPC”).

3. The Appellant along with a co-accused Jalaluddin Khan alias Md. Jalaluddin was
arrested on 12.07.2022. Allegations against the Appellant are that he is an active
member of the Popular Front of India (hereinafter referred to as the “PFI”), and he

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2729585/

1

Athar Parwez vs Union Of India on 17 December, 2024

along with his associates were planning to cause disturbance during the proposed
visit of Prime Minister of India to Patna, this led to the raid being conducted on
11.07.2022 at first floor Ahmad Palace, Phulwari Sharif, Patna which was taken on
rent by the Appellant from co-accused Md.

Jalaluddin.

4. During the raid certain recoveries were carried out, prominent amongst them was a document
titled “India 2047 towards rule of Islam in India, internal Document not for circulation”. Assertions
have been made in the complaint on the basis of the documents seized that the Appellant along with
the other members of the PFI aimed at disrupting the sovereignty of India and cause disaffection
against the country.

5. Keeping in view the seriousness of the allegations and the offences involved, Government of India
vide Official Order dated 22.07.2022 directed the National Investigating Agency (hereinafter
referred to as the “NIA”) to take up the investigation. Accordingly, the NIA re-registered a case as
R.C- 31/2022/NIA/DLI dated 22.07.2022 under Sections 120, 120B, 121, 121A, 153A, and Section 13
of the of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (hereinafter referred to as the “UAPA 1967”)
and took up the investigation. After investigation, chargesheet against the Appellant was filed on
07.01.2023 under Sections 121, 121A, 122, 153A & 153B of the IPC and Sections 13, 17, 18, 18A, 18B &
20 of UAPA, 1967. However, charges till date have not been framed.

6. The learned Senior Counsel for the Appellant has asserted that the seizure of documents as has
been alleged from the rented accommodation of the Appellant is highly suspicious and doubtful
rather it is concocted and manufactured. As per the seizure memo/list, the recovery has been made
from the second floor of Ahmad Palace which according to the prosecution itself was never in
possession of the Appellant rather it is the first floor which was on rent with the Appellant. Even the
rent deed on which reliance has been placed mentions explicitly about the first floor.

7. It is contended that going by the allegations against the Appellant, no offence under the UAPA,
1967 or even the predicate offence is made out. He submits that primary allegations are with regard
to the alleged recovery seven-page document titled “India 2047 towards rule of Islam in India,
internal document, not for circulation” which contained various recitals relatable to an Islamic rule
which is to be established in India. It is contended that there are no independent witnesses to the
alleged recovery seizure memo/list. As also the said document does not in any manner talk about
any terrorist activities or overt act to be carried out which would create disharmony or religious
hatred.

8. The learned Senior Counsel for the Appellant further submits that PFI has been banned vide a
Gazette Notification dated 28.09.2022 issued by the Government of India for a period of five years.
On the date when the raid was conducted i.e. 11.07.2022 and on the date of the Appellant’s arrest i.e.
12.07.2022, PFI was legally constituted organisation. Till date, this organisation has not been
declared a terrorist organisation. He asserted that the chargesheet as has been filed by the
prosecution would not indicate any active role played by the Appellant except that he had

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2729585/

2

Athar Parwez vs Union Of India on 17 December, 2024

participated in some demonstrations and protests against the policies of the State or rather in the
backdrop of remarks made by one Nupur Sharma against Prophet Mohammad.

9. Another allegation is with regard to having organized a meeting on 6th and 7th of July 2022 in
the rented first floor premises of Ahmad Palace. The statements of the witnesses also according to
the allegations do not indicate that the Appellant had actively participated in any discussions or had
instigated any of the persons present there to commit any of the offence which would fall within the
purview of the offences mentioned in the chargesheet.

10. The learned Senior Counsel has further asserted that the co-accused of the Appellant (Jalaluddin
Khan) whose application was also considered for grant of bail by the High Court along with that of
the Appellant, had been granted bail by this Court in Criminal Appeal No. 3173 of 20241. His role is
similar to that of the Appellant except that he was said to be the person who was the owner of the
building and had rented the accommodation to the Appellant. As regards his participation in the
meeting on 6th and 7th July 2022 is concerned, he is in a same position with the co-accused already
granted bail by this Court. Mere participation in the meeting would not be enough. The other
co-accused against whom similar allegations of being a member of the PFI and participating in
protests where alleged communal slogans were raised have been enlarged on bail by the High Court.
Even the 2024 SCC OnLine SC 1945/ Criminal Appeal No. 3173 of 2024 decided on 13.08.2024.

testimony of the protected witnesses does not implicate the Appellant in the alleged crime as per the
chargesheet.

11. Learned Senior Counsel has also drawn attention of this Court to the statement made by
prosecution witness Saiyed Abu Monawwar to submit that as per this witness, there are commercial
establishments such as shops and pathology labs on the ground floor of the building where the raid
was conducted. CCTV cameras would not have been permitted to be installed in the said premises or
on the first floor also had some objectionable activities being carried out by the PFI. This also
reflects that it does not stand to logic. It is not therefore logical and does not make sense where such
objectionable activities were to be carried out as has been alleged the same would be in such an area
as has been described by the prosecution.

12. Another submission which has been put forth is that there are 354 witnesses cited by the
prosecution and the Appellant is in custody since 12.07.2022 for more than two years and four
months with the trial not likely to conclude in the near future. The Appellant deserves to be released
on bail as this would amount to violation of Article 21 of the Constitution of India.

13. On the other hand, the learned Additional Solicitor General for the Respondent has asserted that
during the raid conducted by the Bihar Police, not only the incriminating material/documents were
recovered from the premises in question, but other electronic items have also been recovered which
clearly establishes that the Appellant was an active member of the PFI and had not only participated
in the protests but has actively organized the same. She contends that training and meeting was
conducted in the rented premises of the Appellant in furtherance and establishment of the Islamic
rule in India. In these meetings, the participants who were from different States joined and

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2729585/

3

Athar Parwez vs Union Of India on 17 December, 2024

directions were given in the said meeting to kill and attack those who make derogatory statements
about Prophet Mohammad and Islam.

14. It is further submitted that the Appellant had been working to create a secret group of
ex-Student Islamic Movement of India (hereinafter referred to as the “SIMI”) members, which is the
banned organisation, in order to take revenge against the persons who made or make derogatory
statements against Islam. The Appellant and other co-accused had participated in protest and
videos were recovered where communal sloganeering was recorded and circulated which not only
was intended to create disturbance but religious disharmony and discord within the society. The
CDR records established that the Appellant was in touch with other co-accused and had conspired to
expand the unlawful ideology of the PFI. About the participation of the Appellant and the other co-
accused named in the First Information Report, she states that CCTV footage of 6th and 7th July
installed at the Ahmad Palace depicts the same which establishes the involvement of the Appellant
in conspiracy for carrying out unlawful activities with an intention to disturb the security, integrity
and sovereignty of the country and promote feeling of enmity and hatred between different groups.
The Courts below and especially the Special Judge, NIA Patna has taken cognizance of the
chargesheet on 28.04.2023.

15. Learned Additional Solicitor General, however could not dispute the stage of the trial as no
charges have been framed. Emphasis has been laid by the Learned Additional Solicitor General
upon the statements of the protected witnesses, with special emphasis upon that of Z, Y & X.
Reliance has also been placed upon the statement of witness Murtuj Ali. Reference has also been
made to the chargesheet paragraph 15.2 with regard to the protest march and sloganeering on
09.06.2022 in the area of Police Station, Pirbahor, Patna. Paragraph 15.5 relating to electronic
evidence where the hard disk/DVR of the CCTV installed in Ahmad Palace were recovered showing
the presence of the Appellant in meeting held on 6th and 7th of July 2022. Paragraph 17.2 again
refers to the details with regard to the training conducted in the rented premises as also the
Appellant’s connection with the SIMI. Paragraphs 17.3 and 17.4 are with regard to the document
titled ‘India 2047 towards rule of Islam in India, internal document, not for circulation’, the
contents thereof have been mentioned therein. Paragraph 17.13 highlights the call data records of
the mobile numbers used by the accused persons revealing their location and connection with each
other in the meeting dated 6th and 7th of July 2022. Paragraphs 17.15 and 17.16 - statement of
protected witness ‘Z’. Paragraph 17.33 relates to the collection of funds for Zakat and donations by
the Appellant and others on directions of the senior members of the PFI. Paragraph 17.34 relates to
the statement of the protected witness ‘Y’ with reference to these allegations in the chargesheet.

16. The learned Additional Solicitor General has thus asserted that there are serious allegations
against the Appellant and therefore the Orders as has been passed by the Courts below are fully
justified and the prayer made in the present Appeal deserves to be rejected.

17. We have considered the submissions made by the Counsel for the parties and with their able
assistance have gone through the chargesheet. Before we proceed in the matter, the principles which
have to be kept in mind while considering the prayer for grant of bail under Section 43-D (5) of
UAPA, 1967 have to be looked into.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2729585/

4

Athar Parwez vs Union Of India on 17 December, 2024

18. This Court had an occasion to deal with the case of an accused charged under Chapters IV and VI
of the UAPA, 1967, who sought bail during the pendency of the trial in the case of National
Investigation Agency v. Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali2. In that case, this Court had gone to the extent
of stating that the statutory bar on grant of bail could not be an impediment if the court on
appreciation of totality of evidence is satisfied that the accusations are prima facie not true. The
court is required to consider and examine not only the FIR but the case diary and chargesheet and to
examine them on broad probabilities regarding involvement of the accused in the crime to
determine whether the accusations are prima facie true as compared to holding the accused not
guilty, which would entitle (2019) 5 SCC 1 the provisions of Section 43-D(5) of UAPA, 1967, being
not an impediment in grant of bail.

The Court further concluded that if on perusal of the case diary and chargesheet, an opinion is
formed that there are no reasonable grounds for believing that the accusations against such person
are prima facie true, the accused can be released on bail. It may be added here that while forming an
opinion as to whether there are reasonable grounds for believing that the accusation against the
accused is prima facie true or otherwise the said documents have to be accepted as it is. The Court is
merely expected to record a finding on the basis of broad probabilities regarding the involvement of
the accused in the commission of the stated offence or otherwise.

19. Long incarceration and unlikely likelihood of trial being completed in near future has also been
taken as a ground for exercising its constitutional role by the Constitutional Courts to grant bail on
violation of Article 21 of the Constitution of India which guarantees trial to be concluded within a
reasonable time. Gross delay in conclusion of the trial would justify such invocation leading to a
conclusion of violation of Part III the Constitution of India, which may be taken as a ground to
release an undertrial on bail. A reference in this regard may be made to the judgment of this Court
in Union of India v. K.A. Najeeb3. It requires mention that in that case this Court considered the
factum that there were 276 witnesses left to be examined which would lead to a prolong trial
resulting in no possibility of the trial coming to an end at an early date resulting in suffering of
incarceration for a significant period of time by an accused, making it an obligation on the Court on
such consideration to enlarge such an accused on bail. It may be mentioned here that the Court was
cautious enough to mention that the restrictions under the statute as in this case, Section 43-D (5) of
UAPA, 1967 as well as the powers exercisable under the Constitutional jurisdiction by the Court
need to be harmonized.

20. At the initial stage, the legislative policy needs to be appreciated and followed by the Courts.
Keeping the 3(2021) 3 SCC 713 statutory provisions in mind but with the passage of time the effect
of that statutory provision would in fact have to be diluted giving way to the mandate of Part III of
the Constitution where the accused as of now is not a convict and is facing the charges.
Constitutional right of speedy trial in such circumstances will have precedence over the bar/strict
provisions of the statute and cannot be made the sole reason for denial of bail. Therefore, the period
of incarceration of an accused could also be a relevant factor to be considered by the constitutional
courts not to be merely governed by the statutory provisions.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2729585/

5

Athar Parwez vs Union Of India on 17 December, 2024

21. Reference can also be made to the judgments of this Court in Thwaha Fasal v. Union of India4 as
also Javed Gulam Nabi Shaikh v. State of Maharashtra and Anr.5 where again, the Court was dealing
with the provisions of UAPA, 1967 and had reiterated the abovesaid principles. Giving precedence to
the protection of Fundamental Rights and emphasising upon their primacy over the statutory
provisions in 4(2022) 14 SCC 766 5 2024 SCC OnLine SC 1693 case of delayed trial. In the above
judgments, this Court had even gone to the extent of asserting that the seriousness of the crime for
which the accused is facing the trial would not be material as an accused is presumed to be innocent
until proven guilty.

22. With these basic principles in mind, we now proceed to consider the position with regard to the
present Appeal. The allegations against the Appellant as has been stated above primarily are that he
is an active member of the PFI, which according to the prosecution is an organisation committed to
bringing about Islamic rule in India. For the said purpose, disharmony and internal conflicts are
sought to be brought about within the society so that there is discontentment and the peace and
calm within the society gets disturbed. Resort to violence and violent means has also been alleged to
be preached and practiced by the said organisation in which the Appellant had been taking an active
role. He is the person who participated in the protest held on 09.06.2022 against the remarks made
by Nupur Sharma against Prophet Mohammad and Islam. In the said protest, not only was he a
participant but an organizer and had been encouraging the protesters to use provocative slogans.
Apart from this, there are allegations that he had taken first floor of Ahmad Palace on rent where
activities of PFI were being carried out. Specific reference has been made to the meeting/training
program of the PFI held on 29th May 2022 and 6th and 7th July 2022.

23. In these meetings, not only was there participation on the part of the Appellant but 30-40 other
members of the PFI. The allegation against the Appellant is that he had organized the said meetings,
used his own premises and had also stored and kept documents and material relatable to PFI which
were objectionable. In the said meetings, discussions to fulfil the agenda of India 2047 rule of Islam
in India was planned and steps to be taken for giving it effect were being worked upon. The
members present were called upon to target and neutralize persons who make remarks against
Prophet Mohammad and Islam.

24. Reliance has been placed with regard to the statements of the protected witnesses especially X, Y
and Z to substantiate the said allegations as also the recovered documents from the premises. The
factual aspect with regard to the number of witnesses, the period of incarceration and that there are
40 accused in the case has not been disputed. Reference at this stage is to be made to the judgment
of this Court in Jalaluddin Khan v. Union of India6 which related to the co-accused of the Appellant
whose appeal for grant of bail under the UAPA, 1967 along with that of the present Appellant was
rejected by a common impugned judgment of the High Court. The only distinction between the case
of the present Appellant and Md. Jalaluddin was that he was the owner of the premises whereas the
Appellant is a tenant thereof. Participation of the Appellant, as well as co-accused Md. Jalaluddin
along with the other accused in the meeting of 6th and 7th July 2022 had not been disputed. The
evidence against the Appellant as also the co-accused Md. Jalaluddin is almost the same.

2024 SCC OnLine SC 1945/ Criminal Appeal No. 317 of 2024 decided on 13.08.2024.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2729585/

6

Athar Parwez vs Union Of India on 17 December, 2024

25. The most prominent evidence is the testimony of the protected witness ‘Z’ who was alleged to be
inducted into the PFI for providing physical training to its members. In his statement, there is no
mention of the Appellant taking part in or leading any of those meetings/trainings where physical
training was imparted teaching attack and defensive techniques using sticks, knives or other
weapons. As regards the meeting held on 29th May 2022 at Ahmad Palace what has been stated by
him is merely that the Appellant along with 40-45 persons participated in the meeting which was
presided over by one Riyaz Firnagipet. In this meeting, issues like expansion of organisation,
strengthening of Muslims on political, educational and administrative fronts were discussed.
Nothing incriminating is alleged to have been mentioned which would attract charges under the
UAPA, 1967 especially the ones which have been alleged to have been committed by the Appellant.
Reference has also been made with regard to the meeting held on 6th and 7th of July 2022 at
Ahmad Palace. In the said meeting, no active role is attributed to the Appellant except for he being
present and that the premises where this meeting was held was in his possession being a tenant.
Again, there is nothing incriminating against the Appellant in the statement given by witness “Z”
with regard to the present meeting. The witness has merely stated that the meeting was convened in
view of the derogatory statements made by one Nupur Sharma against Prophet Mohammad.

26. This Court in the case dealing with the bail application of Md. Jalaluddin, the co-accused of the
Appellant and the owner of the premises had an occasion to deal with the paragraphs of the
chargesheet where reference to the meetings held on 29th May 2022 and 6th and 7th of July, 2022
were made. The said paragraphs had been reproduced hereinunder. On consideration of the
allegations made therein, when seen in the context of the statement of the protected witness ‘Z’ as
has been supplied to the Court for perusal it was stated in Paragraph 11 of the said judgment
(relevant part) reads as follows:

“11. xxx xxx xxx xxx Paragraph 17.16 alleges that protected witness Z stated that in the meeting,
subjects such as the expansion of the organisation, basic and advanced training of PFI members and
future PFI plans were discussed, and a direction was given to trained PFI cadre to eliminate one
Nupur Sharma. In the statement of protected witness Z, all that is not found. In fact, protected
witness Z stated that during the meeting, emphasis was given on strengthening the status of
Muslims, imparting them basic and advanced training and strengthening the status of education,
politics and administration of Muslims and Muslim empowerment. Going by the witness’s version,
we find that there was no discussion about the activities of PFI in the meeting held on 29th May
2022. We are not reproducing the statement of the protected witness Z as it has been kept in a
sealed cover. Suffice it to say that what is reproduced in paragraph 17.16 is not correct. The material
portion of witness Z’s actual statement has been completely distorted in paragraph of the charge
sheet. Several things which protected witness Z did not state have been incorporated in paragraph
17.16. Unfortunately, paragraph 17.16 attributes certain statements to protected witness Z, which he
did not make. NIA owes an explanation for that. The investigating machinery has to be fair. But, in
this case, paragraph 17.16 indicates to the contrary.”

27. The Court had further gone to the extent of saying and rightly so that in the chargesheet there is
no allegation that the Appellant was a member of a terrorist gang or organisation. It is worth
mentioning here that the PFI of which the Appellant was a member has not been declared a terrorist

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2729585/

7

Athar Parwez vs Union Of India on 17 December, 2024

organisation within the meaning of Section 2(m) of the UAPA, 1967. It was also found that the PFI is
not mentioned as a terrorist organisation in the first schedule of UAPA, 1967. The chargesheet and
the statement of witness ‘Z’ when seen as it is, it would not be possible to record prima facie finding
that commission of offence under the UAPA, 1967 would be attracted as there are no reasonable
grounds for believing that the accusations are prima facie correct.

28. Now, moving on to the statement of the protected witness ‘Y’. The testimony of the protected
witness ‘Y’ when perused indicates that the Appellant is alleged to be a person of staunch religious
nature who used to participate in religious processions and demonstrations against the policies of
the Government. He had been motivating the people of his locality to join the activities of the PFI.
The meetings held at Ahmad Palace has been acknowledged by him to be so held where lot of
outsiders had come. He is, however, completely silent with regard to the nature of the activities or
the meetings held therein.

29. As regards protected witness ‘X’, although he had identified the Appellant to be involved in the
protest/demonstration held on 09.06.2022 against the remarks made by Nupur Sharma against
Prophet Mohammad where provocative slogans were raised. The allegation against the Appellant is
that he had been encouraging others to do so. Beyond that, there is nothing which is alleged against
the Appellant which would bring the act or omission of the Appellant within the ambit of the alleged
offences committed by him under the UAPA, 1967.

30. Allegations against the Appellant with regard to having collected Zakat from the people for
helping the PFI or recruiting members of PFI. Suffice it to say at this stage, that on the day such
activities were carried out by the Appellant, PFI was not a banned organisation. None of the
witnesses or the protected witnesses stated that the money so collected in the form of Zakat was ever
misappropriated by the Appellant or was in any manner used for illegal activities. The statement of
the protected witnesses has not mentioned anything specific that would be attributed to the
Appellant which could prima facie attract charges under the UAPA, 1967.

31. It is thus apparent that the first test as has been laid down by the various judgments of this Court
referred to above, stands satisfied relating to Section 43-D(5) of the UAPA, 1967. Another aspect
which cannot be ignored is that the material which has been allegedly recovered from the Appellant
especially the documents which according to the prosecution contained the incriminating contents
as per the seizure memo were from the second floor. As is apparent from the rent deed, on which the
prosecution itself has placed reliance, only the first floor was rented out of Ahmad Palace to the
Appellant, and he was in exclusive possession thereof. This also raises some doubt with regard to the
recovery of the material.

32. The Appellant was arrested on 12.07.2022. He has undergone custody for more than two years
and four months. Chargesheet was filed on 07.01.2023 but till date charges have not been framed
which is an admitted position. There are 40 accused and 354 witnesses cited by the prosecution to
be examined. There can be no doubt that the trial is not likely to complete soon, and as has been laid
down by various judgments of this Court as has been referred to above, the Appellant cannot be
allowed to languish in jail indefinitely and that too without a trial. If such an approach is allowed

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2729585/

8

Athar Parwez vs Union Of India on 17 December, 2024

Article 21 of the Constitution of India would stand violated. The ratio as laid down by this Court in
Union of India v. K.A. Najeeb (supra) as also the other judgments in Javed Ghulam Nabi Shaikh v.
State of Maharashtra and Anr. (supra) and Thwaha Fasal v. Union of India (supra) would be
applicable to this case and would squarely apply entitling the Appellant for grant of bail.

33. The co-accused of the Appellant, Md. Jalaluddin has on similar grounds been granted the same
benefit.

In the said case, this Court in paragraph 21 has held as follows:

“21. Before we part with the Judgment, we must mention here that the Special Court
and the High Court did not consider the material in the charge sheet objectively.
Perhaps the focus was more on the activities of PFI, and therefore, the appellant’s
case could not be properly appreciated. When a case is made out for a grant of bail,
the Courts should not have any hesitation in granting bail. The allegations of the
prosecution may be very serious. But, the duty of the Courts is to consider the case for
grant of bail in accordance with the law. Even in a case like the present case where
there are stringent conditions for the grant of bail in the relevant statutes, the same
rule holds good with only modification that the bail can be granted if the conditions
in the statute are satisfied. The rule also means that once a case is made out for the
grant of bail, the Court cannot decline to grant bail. If the Courts start denying bail in
deserving cases, it will be a violation of the rights guaranteed under Article 21 of our
Constitution.” (Emphasis Supplied)

34. In the light of the above, the impugned judgment is set aside. The Appeal is accordingly allowed
with a direction that the Appellant be enlarged on bail on the appropriate terms and conditions to be
fixed by the Special Court.

35. The Appellant for this purpose shall be produced before the Special Court within a maximum
period of 07 days from today. The Special Court shall enlarge the Appellant on bail until the
conclusion of the trial on appropriate terms and conditions after hearing the Counsel for the
Respondent.

36. It is clarified here that the observations made hereinabove are tentative in nature, with reference
to the prayer made in the present Appeal confining it to the case of the Appellant. It shall have no
bearing on the trial or on the case of the co-accused.

37. Pending applications if any stand disposed of.

………………………………. J.

(ABHAY S. OKA) ……………………………………. J.

(AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH) NEW DELHI;

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2729585/

9

DECEMBER 17, 2024.

Athar Parwez vs Union Of India on 17 December, 2024

(cid:12)ITEM NO.1501                   COURT NO.5                     SECTION II-A

                 S U P R E M E C O U R T O F           I N D I A
                         RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

                    Criminal Appeal No.5387/2024

[@ Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Crl.) No(s). 9209/2024] (Arising out of impugned final
judgment and order dated 28-11-2023 in CRADB No. 516/2023 passed by the High Court of
Judicature at Patna) ATHAR PARWEZ Petitioner(s) VERSUS UNION OF INDIA Respondent(s) (IA
No. 167621/2024 - EXEMPTION FROM FILING O.T., IA No. 167620/2024 - PERMISSION TO
FILE ADDITIONAL DOCUMENTS/FACTS/ ANNEXURES) Date : 17-12-2024 This matter was
called on for pronouncement of judgment.

For Appellant(s) Dr. Aditya Sondhi, Sr. Adv.

Mr. Divyesh Pratap Singh, Adv.

Mr. Adil Sharfuddin, Adv.

Mr. Shashank Singh, AOR Mr. Anubhav Kumar, Adv.

Mr. Maeen Mavaram, Adv.

Ms. Prapti Shrivastava, Adv.

For Respondent(s) Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, A.S.G. Ms. Shivika Mehra, Adv.

Ms. Bani Dikshit, Adv.

Ms. Seema Bengani, Adv.

Mr. Parantap Singh, Adv.

Ms. Rajeshwari Shankar, Adv.

Ms. Pooja Kumari, Adv.

Mr. Arvind Kumar Sharma, AOR Hon’ble Mr. Justice Augustine George Masih pronounced the
Reportable judgment of the Bench comprising Hon’ble Mr. Justice Abhay S. Oka and His Lordship.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2729585/

10

Leave granted.

Athar Parwez vs Union Of India on 17 December, 2024

The appeal is allowed in terms of the signed Reportable Judgment. The operative portion of the
judgment reads thus:

“In the light of the above, the impugned judgment is set aside. The Appeal is
accordingly allowed with a direction that the Appellant be enlarged on bail on the
appropriate terms and conditions to be fixed by the Special Court.

The Appellant for this purpose shall be produced before the Special Court within a
maximum period of 07 days from today. The Special Court shall enlarge the
Appellant on bail until the conclusion of the trial on appropriate terms and
conditions after hearing the Counsel for the Respondent.

It is clarified here that the observations made hereinabove are tentative in nature,
with reference to the prayer made in the present Appeal confining it to the case of the
Appellant. It shall have no bearing on the trial or on the case of the co-accused.”
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.

  (KAVITA PAHUJA)                                 (AVGV RAMU)
ASTT. REGISTRAR-cum-PS                        COURT MASTER (NSH)

[THE REPORTABLE SIGNED JUDGMENT IS PLACED ON THE FILE]

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2729585/

11

