China Development Bank vs Doha Bank Q.P.S.C on 20 December, 2024

C h i n a   D e v e l o p m e n t   B a n k   v s   D o h a   B a n k   Q . P . S . C   o n   2 0
December, 2024

Author: Abhay S. Oka

Bench: Pankaj Mithal, Abhay S Oka

2024 INSC 1029

                                                                               REPORTABLE

                                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                             CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7298 OF 2022

                            China Development Bank                              … Appellant

                                                         versus

                            Doha Bank Q.P.S.C. & Ors.                        … Respondents

                                                          with

                                            Civil Appeal No.7407 of 2022
                                            Civil Appeal No.7615 of 2022
                                            Civil Appeal No.7328 of 2022
                                                           and
                                            Civil Appeal No.7434 of 2023

                                                    JUDGMENT

ABHAY S. OKA, J.

FACTUAL ASPECTS

1. These appeals take exception to the judgment dated 9th September 2022 of the National
Company Law Appellate Tribunal, Principal Bench, New Delhi (for short, ‘the NCLAT’). The
appellants in this batch of appeals (for short, ‘appellants’), except the appellant in Civil Appeal
No.7434 of 2023, were parties to the appeals preferred by 1st to 4th respondents in Civil Date:
2024.12.20 Appeal No. 7298 of 2022.

17:57:19 IST Reason:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151591199/

1

China Development Bank vs Doha Bank Q.P.S.C on 20 December, 2024

2. The issue involved in these appeals is whether the appellants can be classified as ‘Financial
Creditors’ within the meaning of sub-section (7) of Section 5 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code,
2016 (for short, ‘the IBC’). Another issue may arise in the event it is held that the appellants are not
‘Financial Creditors’. The issue will be whether the appellants can be classified as ‘Secured Creditors’
and paid commensurate to their security interest.

3. 1st respondent-Doha Bank claims to be a direct lender and secured Financial Creditor of Reliance
Infratel Limited (for short, ‘RITL’ or ‘the Corporate Debtor’). A Corporate Insolvency Resolution
Process (CIRP) was initiated by the adjudicating authority (NCLT) in respect of RITL-Corporate
Debtor at the instance of Ericsson India Private Limited, and the Interim Resolution Professional
(IRP) was appointed. We are concerned in this case with Reliance Communications Infrastructure
Ltd. (for short, ‘RCIL’), Reliance Communications Ltd. (for short, ‘RCom’), Reliance Telecom Ltd.
(for short, ‘RTL’) and RITL. These companies are hereinafter collectively referred to as “RCom
entities”.

4. Public announcements were made under Section 15 of the IBC inviting claims from creditors. The
appellants submitted their claims as Financial Creditors of the Corporate Debtor. While admitting
the claim of the appellants, the Resolution Professional classified the appellants as Financial
Creditors. Accordingly, the appellants were included in the Committee of Creditors (for short, ‘the
COC’). The 1st Respondent-Doha Bank, made applications before the NCLT to challenge the
admission of the claims of the appellants (except the appellant in Civil Appeal No.7434 of 2023) as
Financial Creditors. The contention of the 1st respondent-Doha Bank was that the said appellants
were not direct lenders of the Corporate Debtor, and it was impermissible to admit them as
Financial Creditors on the basis of various terms of the Deeds of Hypothecation.

5. During the pendency of 1st respondent-Doha Bank’s Application, a Resolution Applicant
submitted a Resolution Plan for the Corporate Debtor, which the CoC approved in its meeting held
on 2nd March 2020. After that, the 5th respondent-RP filed an application for grant of approval to
the Resolution Plan. By order dated 3rd December 2020, the NCLT approved the Resolution Plan.
The approval was granted without deciding the pending application made by the 1st
respondent-Doha Bank, filed for objecting to the status of the appellants as Financial Creditors. The
6th Respondent preferred an appeal before the NCLAT to challenge the approval of the Resolution
Plan. By the order dated 19th January 2021, the NCLAT directed the NCLT to decide the application
of the 1st Respondent-Doha Bank. The NCLAT disposed of the appeal by observing that depending
on the outcome of the application of the 1st Respondent, the order approving the Resolution Plan
could be reconsidered.

6. The appellants have relied upon the Deeds of Hypothecation dated 4th March 2011, 9th March
2011, 12th February 2012 and 15th September 2018 (collectively referred to as “the DoH”). The DoH
were executed jointly by each of the Rcom entities (described therein as Chargors), including the
Corporate Debtor (RCIL), to create a charge over their property for securing the repayment of the
facilities advanced by the appellants. The RCom entities agreed to provide their assets as security
and further undertook to pay any shortfall of debts owed by each of the RCom entities. All the RCom
entities pooled their resources to provide security for the facilities availed by any of the entities,

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151591199/

2

China Development Bank vs Doha Bank Q.P.S.C on 20 December, 2024

ensuring that each entity was individually liable to pay the debt of all the entities. According to the
case of the appellants, in terms of the DoH, if there is any default by any entity, all the RCom entities
were liable to make good the shortfall in recovery of the amounts after realisation of hypothecated
assets.

7. Thereafter, the NCLT heard the application of the 1st respondent and dismissed it, upholding the
status of the appellants (except the appellant in Civil Appeal No.7434 of 2023) as the Financial
Creditors. An appeal was preferred by 1st to 4th respondents against the said order. By the
impugned judgment and order, the NCLAT held that the DoH is not a deed of guarantee. It was held
that the only parties to the DoH were the Chargors and the Security Trustee. The only object of the
DoH was to create a charge on the property of the Chargors. Therefore, the Chargors cannot be
treated as guarantors. Hence, the NCLAT set aside the order passed by the NCLT and remanded the
case to the NCLT for taking consequential actions resulting from de-recognising the first four
appellants herein as Financial Creditors.

8. At this stage, we may note that as far as Civil Appeal No.7434 of 2023 is concerned, the appeal is
preferred by a Bank that was not a party to the appeal before the NCLAT. However, the NCLT dealt
with the issue of the appellant's qualification as a Financial Creditor.

SUBMISSIONS OF THE APPELLANTS Submissions in Civil Appeal No.7298 of 2022, Civil Appeal
No.7615 of 2022 and Civil Appeal No.7434 of 2023

9. Very detailed submissions have been made by the learned counsel appearing for the parties. The
learned senior counsel appearing for the appellants in some of the appeals firstly referred to the
factual aspects of the case. He pointed out that the RCom entities entered into the Master Security
Trustee Agreement (MSTA) with Axis Trustees Services Limited (security trustee). Pursuant to the
MSTA, the Security Trustees executed the aforementioned four DoH on behalf of the appellants and
other lenders whereunder, the RCom entities, including the Corporate Debtor, agreed to provide
their common pooled assets as security for the loans availed by them. The DoH further provided
that in the event of any default by the RCom entities, each of the RCom entities is liable to make a
good shortfall in recovery of the amounts in default. The learned senior counsel submitted that this
obligation to pay the shortfall is a promise to pay, which is in the nature of a guarantee.

10. He pointed out that the CIRP was initiated by the NCLT for RITL-Corporate Debtor, RTL and
RCom. He pointed out that on 2nd March 2020, in their capacity as Secured Financial Creditors, the
appellants, along with other Financial Creditors, unanimously approved the Resolution Plan
submitted by Reliance Digital Platform and Project Services Ltd. He pointed out that the appellants
by their letter dated 2nd March 2020 addressed to the RP, pointed out that there were voting in
favour of the RP in their capacity as ‘Secured Financial Creditors’.

11. The learned senior counsel pointed out that under the DoH, the Corporate Debtor has
undertaken a three-fold obligation under the DoH. Firstly, under clause 2 of the DoH, the Corporate
Debtor, in its capacity as Chargor and Obligor, has covenanted to pay the appellants the amount due
under the relevant facilities availed by RCom and RTL. Secondly, under clause 3 of the DoH, the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151591199/

3

China Development Bank vs Doha Bank Q.P.S.C on 20 December, 2024

Corporate Debtor created a charge over its entire asset pool on a first-ranking pari passu basis for
the benefit of the secured creditors, including the appellants and others. The learned senior counsel
pointed out that the entire asset pool is the subject matter of the approved Resolution Plan. Thirdly,
under sub-clauses (ii) and (iii) of clause 5 of the DoH, the Corporate Debtor unambiguously,
unequivocally and expressly agreed to make good the shortfall in realisation of the outstanding debt
to the appellants, in the event charged assets were not sufficient to satisfy the outstanding debts
owed to the appellants. He submitted that the Corporate Debtor in its capacity as a Chargor, in
addition to hypothecating its properties, has undertaken to pay the appellants the amounts due and
payable under the relevant facilities granted to RCom and RTL, which amounts to a guarantee in
terms of Section 5(8).

12. The learned senior counsel pointed out the findings recorded in paragraph 8 of the order made
by the NCLT. Relying upon Section 126 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 (for short, ‘the Contract
Act’), he submitted that a contract of guarantee is a contract to perform the promise or discharge the
liability of a third person in case of a default. He submitted that since the Corporate Debtor
undertook to pay the amounts due and payable by other RCom entities, it was a contract to perform
or discharge the liability of a third party in the event of default by the original borrower. Moreover,
clauses 5(iii) and 16(viii) of the DoH provided that upon the occurrence of an event of default, the
Security Trustee was authorised to take steps against the Corporate Debtor without having any
obligation to first proceed against the borrower.

13. The learned senior counsel rebutted the 1st respondent’s contention that clause 5(iii) was a
standard clause included in hypothecation deeds. He submitted that unlike the sample
hypothecation deeds relied upon by the 1st respondent, where the borrower himself provides
security, as per the DoH in the present case, the Corporate Debtor, being a third party, undertook to
pay the shortfall amount. In that sense, the promise to pay is in the nature of a guarantee. Therefore,
the appellants were entitled to file a claim as Financial Creditors. The learned senior counsel
submitted that every word stated in the contract has to be given its due meaning, and no part of the
contract and words used thereunder could be said to be redundant.

14. He submitted that there is a fallacy in the 1st respondent’s submission that the appellants were
not entitled to file a claim in Form-C since there was no default or the shortfall as on 20th May 2019.
The learned senior counsel distinguished between a claim submitted pursuant to the public
announcement under Section 15 of the IBC and the requirement of the existence of debt and default
for the purposes of filing an application under Section 7 of the IBC. He submitted that the claim as
defined under Section 3(6) of the IBC arises without any default taking place at the time of filing the
claim.

15. He also dealt with the contention raised by the respondents that the appellants’ rights as secured
creditors under the MSTA and the DoH cannot survive after moratorium comes into force under
Section 14 of the IBC. He urged that the moratorium only bars any action for recovery or
enforcement outside the resolution process and therefore, there is a provision for filing claims to the
RP. Once the CIRP commences, creditors cannot enforce any rights under the documents and are
required to file their claims for outstanding dues with the RP.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151591199/

4

China Development Bank vs Doha Bank Q.P.S.C on 20 December, 2024

16. He submitted that the definition of ‘financial debt’ under Section 5(8) of the IBC is inclusive and
not exhaustive. He relied upon the decisions of this Court in the cases of Kotak Mahindra Bank
Limited v. A. Balakrishnan1 and Orator Marketing Pvt. Ltd. v. Samtex Desinz Pvt. Ltd2. He
submitted that the debt need not be directly disbursed to the Corporate Debtor. He relied upon
another decision of this Court in the case of Maitreya Doshi v. Anand Rathi Global Finance Ltd. &
Ors3. He submitted that the Security Trustee under the DoH is acting for the benefit of the secured
lenders like the appellants who are the direct and intended beneficiaries under the DoH. He
submitted that the beneficiary to a contract can enforce such a contract even when it is not a party to
the same. He relied upon the decisions of this Court in the cases of M.C. Chacko v. State Bank of
Travancore4 and Essar Steel Ltd. v. Gramercy Emerging Market Fund5.

17. The learned senior counsel submitted that the entire CIRP of the Corporate Debtor has
proceeded on the basis that the appellants are Financial Creditors of the Corporate Debtor. They
have participated and voted as Financial Creditors. Therefore, at this belated stage, when the
proceeds of the approved Resolution Plan have been realised and are pending distribution, the
entire process cannot be overturned, and the (2022) 9 SCC 186 : 2022 INSC 630 (2023) 3 SCC 753 :
2021 INSC 359 AIR 2022 SC 4595 : 2022 INSC 1004 (1969) 2 SCC 343 : 1969 INSC 151 2002 SCC
OnLine Guj 319 appellants cannot be removed from the list of Financial Creditors.

18. In the alternative, the learned counsel contended that appellants are entitled to receive a payout
commensurate to their security interest. The learned counsel submitted that the RP accepted that
the appellants were secured Financial Creditors. Therefore, the security interest of the appellants
cannot be extinguished during the CIRP of the Corporate Debtor, and the appellants ought to be
paid at least the commensurate value as per the security interest held in the event their status as
Financial Creditors is not accepted. He relied upon a decision of this Court in the case of Vistra ITCL
(India) Ltd. & Ors. v. Dinkar Venkatasubramanian6 on the entitlement of the secured creditor.

Submissions in Civil Appeal no. 7407 of 2022

19. The learned senior counsel appearing for the appellants in Civil Appeal No. 7407 of 2022 also
made detailed submissions and pointed out the factual aspects of the case. The learned senior
counsel pointed out that the appellants’ claim as Financial Creditors was admitted by the RP in
August 2019. He referred to the relevant portion of the minutes of the CoC meeting held on 2nd
August 2019. He pointed out that the extracts of the minutes show that in response to the query
made whether there was any deed of guarantee, the learned counsel appearing for the RP made it
clear that while there was (2023) 7 SCC 324 : 2023 INSC 500 no deed of guarantee, there was a legal
obligation in the DoH under which, the Corporate Debtor had undertaken to pay the shortfall. The
learned senior counsel analysed clause 5(iii) of the DoH. He pointed out that the Chargors
(including the Corporate Debtor) have agreed to accept the Security Trustee’s account of the
expenses, sales and realisation and to pay on demand by the Security Trustee any shortfall. He
pointed out that Clause 2.15 of MSTA clarifies that the security created under the DoH is in addition
to and independent of any other rights or remedies available to the appellants in law, equity or
otherwise. More importantly, there is a personal covenant to pay on the part of the Chargors. He
pointed out that clause 5(iii) of the DoH provides protection to the Security Trustee precisely

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151591199/

5

China Development Bank vs Doha Bank Q.P.S.C on 20 December, 2024

because there is an obligation on the Chargors to pay the shortfall/deficiency in payment of debt.
When there are no recoveries from the sale of the charged properties, the entirety of the amount of
default by RCom would be rendered in shortfall or deficiency and form part of the Corporate
Debtor’s liability to pay. He pointed out that in the present case, the Corporate Debtor has not
merely provided security for RCom’s dues but has also expressly undertaken to pay any shortfall or
deficiency that may arise in the recovery of the amounts from RCom following the realisation from
the sale of the security. Therefore, clause 5(iii) of the DoH contains the ingredients of a contract of
guarantee under Section 126 of the Contract Act. Relying upon the definition of financial debt under
Section 5(8) of the IBC, he submitted that the facility availed by RCom undoubtedly falls within the
definition of financial debt and especially, clause (a) of sub-section (8) of Section 5 of the IBC.

Therefore, the guarantee provided by RITL-Corporate Debtor for such a financial facility would be a
financial debt, which would entitle the appellant to be classified as a Financial Creditor.

20. He submitted that a sentence or term in a document is not determinative of the real nature of
the document and obligations thereunder. He relied upon the decision of this Court in the case of
B.K. Muniraju v. State of Karnataka & Ors.7, to state that the nature of the document or transaction
between the parties to the contract is to be read as a whole and is not to be determined by the
nomenclature/title of a contract. He submitted that the rights flow from the contents of the
document. He submitted that as held by this Court in the case of Union of India v. D.N. Revri & Co.
and Ors.8, a contract must be interpreted in such a manner so as to give efficacy to the contract
between the parties rather than to invalidate the same. Moreover, a contract must be read as a whole
and attempts should be made to harmonise the terms. He submitted that as held in the case of
Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution Company Limited v. Maharashtra Electricity Regulatory
Commission & Ors.9, the Court should not rewrite a contract in the guise of interpreting the terms
thereof.

(2008) 4 SCC 451 : 2008 INSC 208 (1976) 4 SCC 147 : 1976 INSC 208 (2022) 4 SCC 657 : 2021
INSC 644

21. In reference to the argument regarding the extinguishment of the claim of the appellant due to
the moratorium under Section 14 of the IBC, he submitted that Section 14 does not extinguish any
right. The learned senior counsel also relied upon a decision of this Court in the case of Committee
of Creditors of Essar Steel India Limited v. Satish Kumar Gupta & Ors10. He submitted that the
provisions of the IBC ensure that successful resolution applicant starts running the business of the
Corporate Debtors on a fresh slate.

22. The learned senior counsel also refuted 1st respondent’s submission that Clause 5(iii) of the DoH
becomes an impossibility since moratorium prohibits enforcement of security interest under the
DoH. He submitted that the guarantee under clause 5(iii) of the DoH is not contingent upon the
enforcement of the security interest.

23. In the alternative, the learned counsel submitted that in any event, the appellant is entitled to
retain the security interest and be classified as a secured creditor. He submitted that in the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151591199/

6

China Development Bank vs Doha Bank Q.P.S.C on 20 December, 2024

Resolution Plan, other creditors include those creditors who have a claim against the Corporate
Debtor but are neither Financial Creditors nor Operational Creditors. He submitted that while
voting in favour of the Resolution Plan, the appellant made it clear that its approval was subject to
the appellants being considered as Financial Creditors. Even while (2020) 8 SCC 531 : 2019 INSC
1256 approving the Resolution Plan, the NCLT permitted the distribution of the payment to the
Financial Creditors including the appellants and stated that the same shall abide by and subject to
the outcome of the application filed by the 1st Respondent.

24. The learned senior counsel also relied upon the decision of this Court in the case of Vistra ITCL
(India) Ltd.6 to contend that IBC recognises the rights of secured creditors. He submitted that the
requirement to relinquish the security interest is only during the liquidation process and not during
the CIRP. Therefore, the question of whether the appellant has relinquished its security interest
does not arise.

Submissions in Civil Appeal no. 7328 of 2022

25. The learned counsel appearing for the appellant in Civil Appeal No. 7328 of 2022 also made
detailed submissions which are similar to the submissions made in Civil Appeal No. 7407 of 2022.

Submissions of 1st to 4th Respondents

26. On behalf of 1st to 4th respondents, it was submitted by the learned senior counsel that the DoH
is only a simple document hypothecating certain properties of the borrowers (RCom entities) in
favour of the appellants/third party lenders represented by the Security Trustee. The learned senior
counsel submitted that in the present case, the DoH has only two parties: the Chargor (including the
Corporate Debtor and three other RCom entities) and the Security Trustee. He submitted that
without the presence of the three parties, namely the Guarantor, Principal Debtor and Creditor, a
guarantee could not come into existence. Therefore, the DoH does not meet the requirement of
Section 126 of the Contract Act. Reliance was placed on the decision of this Court in the case of
Phoenix ARC Pvt. Ltd. v. Ketulbhai Ramubhai Patel11.

27. Our attention was invited to clause 5(iii) of the DoH. The learned senior counsel submitted that
it only contains the process of enforcement of security by the Security Trustee. He submitted that
the relevant part of clause 5(iii) of the DoH means that the Chargors have agreed to accept the
Security Trustee’s accounts of sales, realisation and expenses. The Chargors have agreed that upon
demand of the Security Trustee, they will pay such shortfall or deficiency in the expenses. The
learned senior counsel urged that the effect of a contract means as it reads, and it is not open for a
Court to supplement or add to a contract since a contract is entered into on the basis of commercial
decisions of the parties.

28. The learned counsel submitted that even assuming that a portion of clause 5(iii) of the DoH is a
separate agreement, it is manifestly a contingent contract as per Section 32 of the Contract Act. The
contingency would have arisen only when the hypothecated properties were sold, expenses were
incurred, and there was a shortfall in realisation. He relied upon a (2021) 2 SCC 799 : 2021 INSC 59

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151591199/

7

China Development Bank vs Doha Bank Q.P.S.C on 20 December, 2024

decision of the Bombay High Court in the case of Western Coalfields Limited & Anr. v. Rajesh s/o
Nandlal Biyani12. His submission is that the contingent contract ceased to exist when the
moratorium was declared under Section 14 of the IBC with effect from 15th May 2018, since after
the moratorium, hypothecated property could not be sold either in fact or in law. As the
hypothecated property could not be sold, there was no question of sale or realisation. As there would
not be a shortfall, the question of meeting the shortfall would not arise.

29. The learned counsel further submitted that the enforcement of security is left out of the domain
of CIRP as it focuses on revival of a Corporate Debtor as opposed to the process of liquidation. After
the moratorium applies, the enforcement of security becomes impossible.

30. The learned senior counsel submitted that the DoH does not contain any promise by the
Corporate Debtor to discharge the liability of any of the borrowers to any other lender. As there are
no third parties to the document, it cannot be termed as a guarantee. He submitted that clause 5(iii)
of the DoH is found in every standard draft of a deed of hypothecation.

31. He submitted that there are other clauses in the DoH, such as clauses 2, 3, 5 and 9, which
indicate that the Corporate Debtor has merely created a security in favour of the Security Trustee,
which represents the lenders. The Corporate Debtor has not agreed to discharge the obligations of
any borrower.

2011 SCC OnLine Bom 1217 : (2012) 2 Mah LJ 394 The mere security interest created by
hypothecation or mortgage does not constitute a financial debt as held by this Court in the case of
Anuj Jain, Interim Resolution Professional for Jaypee Infratech Limited v. Axis Bank Limited &
Ors13.

32. The learned counsel submitted that when financial debt is intact, a lender would remain a
Financial Creditor and can make a claim before the RP. However, when the claim made by the
Financial Creditor is based on a contingent event, a lender cannot become a Financial Creditor until
the contingent event has happened and the debt is crystalised/accrued. In the facts of the case, a
contingent event has never happened, and therefore, financial debt has not been crystallised.

33. He submitted that MSTA did not require a guarantee to be executed in favour of the Security
Trustee. In fact, the recitals in the MSTA clearly indicate that the requirement on Obligors was to
hypothecate property as security for due repayment of the secured facilities availed by each Obligor.
It was submitted that the appellants are contract lenders of the three RCom entities and not the
Corporate Debtor since the Corporate Debtor has not availed any loans or facilities from the
appellants.

34. The learned senior counsel submitted that the Corporate Debtor in its financial statement before
and after commencement of the CIRP had not treated the MSTA and the (2020) 8 SCC 401 : 2020
INSC 227 DoH as a guarantee. It is submitted that the Corporate Debtor had not provided any
guarantee under the MSTA or the DoH. The learned senior counsel submitted that a perusal of
Form- C filled in by the appellants shows that no guarantee was provided to the appellants/third

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151591199/

8

China Development Bank vs Doha Bank Q.P.S.C on 20 December, 2024

party lenders. This position was further clarified in the minutes of the CoC meeting dated 2nd
August 2019. Even the RP accepted that there was no deed of guarantee. The learned senior counsel
submitted that the IBC cannot be used for recovery as it is a mechanism to rehabilitate and revive
the Corporate Debtor. He urged that the appellants are attempting to use the CIRP as a mode of
recovery of their loans from the RCom entities. He submitted that if the DoH is treated as a
guarantee, all such hypothecation deeds creating security interest will have to be construed as a
guarantee in order to qualify as financial debt.

35. He submitted that the Resolution Plan has been passed in compliance with Sections 13(2) and
13(4) of the IBC and once a Resolution Plan is approved, it cannot be challenged before the forum.

36. The appellants voted and approved the Resolution Plan which extinguished their security while
their status as Financial Creditors was under challenge in the pending application filed by the 1st
Respondent-Doha Bank. Now, the appellants cannot be permitted to turn back and rewrite the
Resolution Plan. The learned senior counsel urged that allowing any member of the CoC to agree to
the Resolution Plan by unilaterally reserving its right to seek amendment, would run contrary to
fundamental principles of the IBC and set a dangerous precedent.

37. The learned senior counsel submitted that even if the CoC accepts the appellants as Financial
Creditors, the same would have no consequence on the CIRP of the Corporate Debtor or the
Resolution Plan since the plan has been duly approved by 100 per cent majority of the CoC in
conformity with Section 30(2) of the IBC. The learned senior counsel submitted that once the
Resolution Plan has been approved by this Court, the appellants cannot be allowed to challenge the
same. He submitted that while voting in favour of the Resolution Plan, the appellants opted to take
an approach of forgoing the benefit of their security.

38. The learned senior counsel dealt with the submission of the appellant in Civil Appeal No. 7298
of 2022 that the Resolution Plan was approved by the CoC with pay outs to be made to secured
Financial Creditors and there was no separate clause of secured creditors at the stage of approval by
the CoC. He submitted that the said argument is suggestio falsi. He submitted that the appellant in
Civil Appeal No. 7298 of 2022 exercised its commercial wisdom and was conscious of the fact that it
was forgoing its security as the Financial Creditor and this would tantamount to forgoing security
even as a Secured Creditor. It was submitted that if the appellants’ right to revise the agreed
Resolution Plan was recognised, it would lead to another classification of the secured and unsecured
Financial Creditors. The appellants voted and approved the Resolution Plan based on the pari passu
distribution to the Financial Creditors, which extinguished its security. In fact, the CoC, in its
commercial wisdom, made a conscious decision not to distinguish between the secured and the
unsecured Financial Creditors of the Corporate Debtor with the objective of reviving the Corporate
Debtor. The learned counsel for the respondents submitted that the appeals, therefore, are required
to be dismissed.

CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151591199/

9

China Development Bank vs Doha Bank Q.P.S.C on 20 December, 2024

39. The entire controversy revolves around the DoH. Before we deal with DoH, it is necessary to
consider the relevant clauses of MSTA.

MASTER SECURITY TRUSTEE AGREEMENT (MSTA)

40. The DoH has been executed by the Security Trustee acting on behalf of the Appellants, by the
authority vested in it by MSTA. Therefore, before coming to the DoH, we must consider the MSTA
executed on 4th March 2011 by and between the RCom entities described therein as “Original
Obligors”, “Original Lenders” and the Security Trustee. The MSTA defines “Original Lenders” as
collectively the persons listed in Schedule I. The appellants are the Original Lenders. Under the
agreement, an “Acceding Lender” is defined as a person who accedes to the MSTA by way of the
lender’s deed of accession. “Secured Lenders” are defined as collectively the Original Lenders and
each acceding lender or syndicate of the lenders. Therefore, all the Original Lenders are described as
Secured Lenders, and each acceding lender becomes a Secured Lender.

41. Clause 2.1 of the MSTA provides that each Original Obligor appoints the Security Trustee who
acts as a trustee for the benefit of the secured parties and their permitted successors, etc. “Secured
Parties” are defined to include the Security Trustee, Secured Lenders and any other persons named
as Secured Parties. Therefore, the Security Trustee is appointed by each original Obligor, the RCom
entities, to act for the benefit of the Secured Parties, the appellants.

42. Clause 2.2 of the MSTA is relevant. Under the said clause, the Secured Lenders authorised and
directed the Security Trustee to act for the benefit of the secured parties, including the Secured
Lenders. The authority conferred by clause 2.2 includes the authority to execute and take delivery of
the secured documents and to accept the security and all related deeds and documents. It also
authorises the Security Trustee to enforce the security in accordance with the provisions of the
MSTA. To that extent, the Security Trustee acts on behalf of the appellants, who are Original
Lenders.

DEEDS OF HYPOTHECATION (DOH)

43. Then comes the DoH, to which RCom entities are shown as “Chargors”. The Chargors have
executed the DoH in favour of the Security Trustee. The DoH refers to the entities availing the
secured facilities mentioned in Schedule I as “Obligors” for that specific secured facility. The recitals
mention that the Obligors have availed of the security facilities mentioned in Schedule I. There are
sixteen security facilities mentioned therein, out of which eleven have been availed by RCom, one by
RTL and four by RITL-Corporate Debtor. As mentioned in Schedule-I, one of the facilities was
extended to RCom by the appellant in Civil Appeal No. 7298 of 2022.

44. Clause 2 of the DoH provides that each of the Chargors covenanted with Security Trustee that
each Obligor (RCom entities) shall repay the secured facilities availed by it together with the
interest, liquidated damages, premia of prepayment, etc. In pursuance of the aforesaid, Clause 3 of
the agreement provides for hypothecation of the Chargors’ assets for the purpose of securing the
facilities. The relevant part of Clause 3 read thus:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151591199/

10

China Development Bank vs Doha Bank Q.P.S.C on 20 December, 2024

“3. Charge In pursuance of the aforesaid, each of the Chargors does hereby
hypothecate as he by way of a first ranking pari passu charge to the Security Trustee,
acting in trust for and for the benefit of the Secured Parties, for the purpose of
securing the due discharge by the Obligors of all their obligations in connection with
the Secured Facilities, all of its following assets: .. .. .. .. .. .. ..” The properties
hypothecated by Chargors have been described as “charged properties”.

45. Clause 5 contains the Chargor’s covenants, representations and warranties.
Sub-clause (iii) of Clause 5 is material, which reads thus:

“5. Chargor’s Covenants, Representations and Warranties .. .. .. . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . … .. .. ..
.. .. . .. .

.

(iii) In the event that an Event of Default has occurred under a Facility Document the Security
Trustee or its nominees shall, on receiving instructions from the Secured Lender/s, in accordance
with Section 4 of the Security Trustee Agreement and after providing 7 (seven) Business Days notice
to any of the Chargors and without assigning any reasons and at the risk and expense of the
Chargors and if necessary as attorney for and in the name of the Chargors, be entitled to take charge
and/or possession of, seize, recover, receive and remove them and/or sell by public auction or by
private contract, dispatch or consign for realisation or otherwise dispose of or deal with all or any
part of the Hypothecated Property (including by way or through the exercise of its powers and rights
specified in Section 6 hereof) and to enforce, realise, settle, compromise and deal with any rights or
claims relating thereto, without being bound to exercise any of these powers or be liable for any
losses in the exercise or non-exercise thereof and without prejudice to the Security Trustee's rights
and remedies of suit or otherwise. Notwithstanding any pending suit or other proceeding, each of
the Chargors undertakes to give possession to the Security Trustee or its nominees or the Receiver
within 7 (seven) Business Days of a notice of demand from the Security Trustee and/ or the Receiver
the Charged Property and to transfer and to deliver to Security Trustee and/ or the Receiver all
related bills, contracts and securities. Each of the Chargors further agrees to accept the Security
Trustee's account of sales and realisations as sufficient proof of amounts realised and relative
expenses and to pay on demand by the Security Trustee and/ or the Receiver any shortfall or
deficiency thereby shown.

Provided however, the Security Trustee Or the Receiver shall not be in any way liable or responsible
for any loss, damage or depreciation that the Hypothecated Property may suffer or sustain on any
account whatsoever whilst the same are in possession of the Security Trustee or the Receiver or by
reason of exercise or non-exercise of rights and remedies available to the Security Trustee or the
Receiver as aforesaid and that all such loss, damage or depreciation shall be wholly debited to the
account of the relevant Chargor howsoever the same may have been caused, except where such loss,
damage or depreciation is caused by any negligence or wilful default of the Security Trustee or the
Receiver.” (emphasis added) In these appeals, we are called upon to interpret clause 5(iii) of the
DoH and decide whether the clause creates any guarantee in favour of the appellants. Therefore, we

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151591199/

11

China Development Bank vs Doha Bank Q.P.S.C on 20 December, 2024

need to analyse the said clause.

GUARANTEE AS FINANCIAL DEBT

46. The question is whether the Corporate Debtor is a guarantor who has guaranteed the repayment
of the loan amount by the borrowers of the appellant. As far as the appellant -China Development
Bank is concerned, under five different agreements, it has advanced financial facilities to RCom and
RTL. So far as the appellant, Asset Care and Reconstruction Enterprises Limited, is concerned, there
is one agreement under which finance has been extended to RCom. The same is the case with Shubh
Holdings Pte. Ltd. Regarding the Export Import Bank of China, four agreements were executed
under which facilities were granted to RCom. In the case of the Industrial Commercial Bank of
China, there is one agreement under which finance was provided to RCom. The appellants have not
advanced any facilities to the Corporate Debtor.

47. The answer to the question of whether the appellants are the Financial Creditors depends upon
the answer to the question of whether the appellants are the guarantors. Therefore, we are adverting
to the relevant provisions of IBC. Sub-section (6) of Section 3 of the IBC defines “claim” which reads
thus:

“3. Definitions:-

.. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. (6) “claim” means – (a) a right to payment,
whether or not such right is reduced to judgment, fixed, disputed, undisputed, legal,
equitable, secured, or unsecured; (b) right to remedy for breach of contract under any
law for the time being in force, if such breach gives rise to a right to payment,
whether or not such right is reduced to judgment, fixed, matured, unmatured,
disputed, undisputed, secured or unsecured;” Sub-section (11) of Section 3 of the IBC
defines “debt” which reads thus:

“3. Definitions:-

.. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..

(11) “debt” means a liability or obligation in respect of a claim which is due from any
person and includes a financial debt and operational debt;”

48. It is necessary to refer to the definitions of ‘Financial Creditor’ and ‘financial debt’ under
sub-sections (7) and (8) of Section 5 of the IBC respectively, which read thus:

“5.Definitions:-

.. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151591199/

12

China Development Bank vs Doha Bank Q.P.S.C on 20 December, 2024

(7) “Financial Creditor” means any person to whom a financial debt is owed and
includes a person to whom such debt has been legally assigned or transferred to;

(8) “financial debt” means a debt alongwith interest, if any, which is disbursed
against the consideration for the time value of money and includes–

(a) money borrowed against the payment of interest;

(b) any amount raised by acceptance under any acceptance credit facility or its
dematerialised equivalent;

(c) any amount raised pursuant to any note purchase facility or the issue of bonds,
notes, debentures, loan stock or any similar instrument;

(d) the amount of any liability in respect of any lease or hire purchase contract which
is deemed as a finance or capital lease under the Indian Accounting Standards or
such other accounting standards as may be prescribed;

(e) receivables sold or discounted other than any receivables sold on non-recourse
basis;

(f) any amount raised under any other transaction, including any forward sale or
purchase agreement, having the commercial effect of a borrowing;

Explanation. -For the purposes of this sub-clause,-

(i) any amount raised from an allottee under a real estate project shall be deemed to
be an amount having the commercial effect of a borrowing; and

(ii) the expressions, “allottee” and “real estate project” shall have the meanings
respectively assigned to them in clauses (d) and (zn) of section 2 of the Real Estate
(Regulation and Development) Act, 2016 (16 of 2016);

(g) any derivative transaction entered into in connection with protection against or
benefit from fluctuation in any rate or price and for calculating the value of any
derivative transaction, only the market value of such transaction shall be taken into
account;

(h) any counter-indemnity obligation in respect of a guarantee, indemnity, bond,
documentary letter of credit or any other instrument issued by a bank or financial
institution;

(i) the amount of any liability in respect of any of the guarantee or indemnity for any
of the items referred to in sub-clause (a) to (h) of this clause.” (emphasis added) In

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151591199/

13

China Development Bank vs Doha Bank Q.P.S.C on 20 December, 2024

terms of sub-section (11) of Section 3, debt is a liability or obligation in respect of a
claim which is due from any person and includes a financial debt or operational debt.
As noted earlier, a claim is a right to payment whether or not, such right is reduced to
judgment and whether it is disputed or undisputed. The right to payment can be
legal, equitable, secured or unsecured. Therefore, if there is a liability or obligation in
respect of a payment which is disputed, it still becomes a claim. Once there is a
liability or obligation in respect of a claim, it becomes a debt. Once there is a financial
debt, the person to whom a debt is owed, becomes a Financial Creditor.

49. The appellants are claiming that their case is covered by clause (i) of sub-section (8) of Section 5
of the IBC. Under clause (i), the amount of any liability in respect of any guarantee of the items
referred to in clauses (a) to (h) becomes a financial debt. Therefore, when clause (i) of Section 5(8) is
applicable, it is not necessary that the Financial Creditor actually tenders any amount to the
Corporate Debtor. In this case, the appellants are claiming that the amount of liability covered by
clause (i) is in respect of money borrowed by the RCom entities (excluding the Corporate Debtor)
against payment of interest under the facility agreements. There is no dispute that facilities were
granted by the appellants to RCom entities. The amount of any liability in respect of any of the
guarantees for money borrowed against the payment of interest is a financial debt under Section
5(8) of the IBC.

50. “Guarantee” is defined under Section 126 of the Contract Act, which reads thus:

“126. “Contract of guarantee”, “surety”, “principal debtor” and “creditor”.—A
“contract of guarantee” is a contract to perform the promise, or discharge the
liability, of a third person in case of his default. The person who gives the guarantee is
called the “surety”; the person in respect of whose default the guarantee is given is
called the “principal debtor”, and the person to whom the guarantee is given is called
the “creditor”. A guarantee may be either oral or written.” A contract becomes a
guarantee when the contract is to perform the promise or discharge the liability of a
third person in case of default. Thus, when a person enters into a contract to perform
or discharge the liability of a third party, the contract becomes a contract of
guarantee.

51. Section 127 of the Contract Act reads thus:

“127. Consideration for guarantee.- Anything done, or any promise made, for the
benefit of the principal debtor, may be a sufficient consideration to the surety for
giving the guarantee.

Hence, any promise made or anything done for the benefit of principal debtor may be
sufficient consideration to the surety for giving guarantee.

EFFECT OF CLAUSE 5(iii) OF DOH READ WITH MSTA Relevance of nomenclature
of DoH

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151591199/

14

China Development Bank vs Doha Bank Q.P.S.C on 20 December, 2024

52. If we go by the title, DoH is a Document creating hypothecation. In short, hypothecation means
the process of using an asset as collateral for a loan. It acts as a protection to the lender when the
borrower does not repay the loan.

53. Only the title of a document cannot be a decisive factor in deciding the nature of the document
or the transactions affected by the document. In the case of C.C., C.E. and S.T. Bangalore
(Adjudication) & Ors. v. Northern Operating Systems Pvt. Ltd.14, in paragraphs 53 to 55, this Court
held thus:

“53. From the above discussion, it is evident, that prior to July 2012, what had to be
seen was whether a (a) person provided service, (b) directly or indirectly, (c) in any
manner for recruitment or supply of manpower, (d) temporarily or otherwise. After
the amendment, all activities carried out by one person for another, for a
consideration, are deemed services, except certain specified excluded categories. One
of the excluded category is the provision of service by an employee to the employer in
relation to his employment.

54. One of the cardinal principles of interpretation of documents, is that the nomenclature of any
contract, or document, is not decisive of its nature. An overall reading of the document, and its
effect, is to be seen by the courts. Thus, in State of Orissa v. Titaghur Paper Mills Co.

Ltd. [State of Orissa v. Titaghur Paper Mills Co. Ltd., 1985 Supp SCC 280] it was held as follows :
(SCC p. 371, para

120) “120. It is true that the nomenclature and description given to a contract is not determinative of
the real nature of the document or of the transaction thereunder. These, however, have to be
determined from all the terms and clauses AIR 2022 SC 2450 : 2022 INSC 598 of the document and
all the rights and results flowing therefrom and not by picking and choosing certain clauses and the
ultimate effect or result as the Court did in the Orient Paper Mills case [State of M.P. v. Orient Paper
Mills Ltd., (1977) 2 SCC 77].” This principle was reiterated in Prakash Roadlines (P) Ltd. v. Oriental
Fire & General Insurance Co. Ltd. [Prakash Roadlines (P) Ltd. v. Oriental Fire & General Insurance
Co. Ltd., (2000) 10 SCC 64]

55. The task of this Court, therefore is to, upon an overall reading of the materials presented by the
parties, discern the true nature of the relationship between the seconded employees and the
assessee, and the nature of the service provided — in that context — by the overseas group company
to the assessee.” (emphasis added) As held in the case of B.K. Muniraju v. State of Karnataka &
Ors.7, a sentence or a term in a contract does not determine the real nature of the contract. It is true
that the Courts should not rewrite the contract while making an attempt to interpret it. However, in
the case of D.N. Revri & Co.8, in paragraph 7, this Court held thus:

“7. It must be remembered that a contract is a commercial document between the
parties and it must be interpreted in such a manner as to give efficacy to the contract
rather than to invalidate it. It would not be right while interpreting a contract,

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151591199/

15

China Development Bank vs Doha Bank Q.P.S.C on 20 December, 2024

entered into between two lay parties, to apply strict rules of construction which are
ordinarily applicable to a conveyance and other formal documents. The meaning of
such a contract must be gathered by adopting a common sense approach and it must
not be allowed to be thwarted by a narrow, pedantic and legalistic interpretation.

.. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . .. .. .. . .. … . ..” (emphasis added) Therefore, the name of the
document is not a decisive factor. Only because the title of the document contains the
word hypothecation, we cannot conclude that guarantee is not a part of this
document.

Parties to the DoH

54. Before we go to the clauses in the DoH, we must again go back to the MSTA.
Under the said agreement, the Security Trustee has been appointed to act as trustee
for the benefit of secured parties which include Secured Lenders. Under clause 2.2.1
of the MSTA, the Secured Lenders have authorised and directed the Security Trustee
to execute and deliver security documents to which, the Security Trustee is to be a
party and to accept the security, all related deeds and documents as may be required
to be submitted by the Obligors for the benefit of secured parties. Under sub-clause
(c) of clause 2.2.1 of MSTA, it is the duty of the Security Trustee to enforce the
security in accordance with the provisions of the agreement and to receive and apply
all money in accordance with the security documents. Therefore, the Secured Lenders
have authorised the Security Trustee to accept the security on their behalf.

55. In light of this discussion, we turn to the DoH. We have already quoted the
relevant portion of the DoH. The RCom entities, including RITL-Corporate Debtor,
are described as Chargors in the DoH. Clause 2 of the DoH reads thus:

“2. Covenant to Pay:

In pursuance of the Secured Facilities and the Facility Documents and in
consideration of the Secured Lenders having made available the Secured Facilities to
the Obligors for the purposes and subject to the terms and conditions set out in the
Facility Documents and/or the other Security Documents, each of the Chargors does
hereby covenant with the Security Trustee that each Obligor shall repay the Secured
Facilities availed by it together with interest, liquidated damages, premia on
prepayment, financing charges, remuneration payable to the Security Trustee, fees
payable to any Secured Party, costs, charges expenses and all other monies stipulated
in the relevant Facility Documents in the manner set out therein and shall duly
observe and perform all the terms and conditions of the relevant Facility Documents
and/or the other Security Documents.” Clause 2 refers to Secured Lenders and
Obligors. As noted earlier, the appellants are Secured Lenders within the meaning of
the MSTA. The two RCom entities, namely RCom and RTL, are the obligors being the
borrowers of the appellants.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151591199/

16

China Development Bank vs Doha Bank Q.P.S.C on 20 December, 2024

Therefore, as per clause 2, the appellants had made available the secured facilities to
RCom and RTL, who undertook to repay the secured facilities availed by it together
with the interest, liquidated damages, premia of prepayment, financing charges, etc.,
including the remuneration payable to the Security Trustee. As noted earlier, the
appellants are Secured Lenders within the meaning of the MSTA. Therefore, as per
clause 2, Secured Lenders had made available the secured facilities to the Obligors. It
provides that Obligors shall repay the secured facilities availed by it together with the
interest, liquidated damages, premia of prepayment, financing charges, etc.,
including the remuneration payable to the Security Trustee. As stated earlier, two
RCom entities, namely RCom and RTL, are the borrowers of the appellants. Thus,
these two companies are Obligors who covenanted to repay the secured facilities
availed by it together with interest, liquidated damages, etc.

56. We have already quoted the first part of clause 5(iii) of the DoH. The effect of the clause is that
all the four RCom entities, including the Corporate Debtor, hypothecated their assets by way of first
ranking pari passu charge to the Security Trustee, who was acting in trust and for the benefit of the
secured parties for the purpose of securing due discharge of the Obligor’s obligations in connection
with secured facilities. The Security Trustee acted on behalf of the appellants by accepting the
security of hypothecation. Therefore, the DoH is a document executed on behalf of the appellants.
The effect of clause 5(iii) is that for the discharge of liabilities of the RCom entities, all four RCom
entities hypothecated their properties for securing repayment of the facilities extended by the
appellants to RCom and RTL. In short, the parties to the DoH are Security Trustees acting on behalf
of the present appellants, the Corporate Debtor who is not the borrower of the appellants and the
other three RCom entities. Therefore, there are three parties to the DoH.

Promise to discharge the Liability of third party

57. Sub-clause (i) of clause 3 of the DoH is a clause which is normally found in hypothecation
agreements. Then comes sub-clause (iii) of clause 5 of the DoH, which we have already quoted. It
provides that in the event of default committed by the borrowers (in the case of the appellants, the
borrowers are RCom and RTL), the Security Trustee is entitled to take charge and/or possession of,
seize, recover, receive and remove the hypothecated goods and/or sell by public auction or private
contract, dispatch or consign for realisation or otherwise dispose of or deal with any part of the
hypothecated property. It is obvious that this action of realisation is to be done by the Security
Trustee in terms of sub-clause (c) of clause 2.2.1 of the MSTA. Thus, the security of hypothecation
can be enforced by the Security Trustee on behalf of the appellants.

58. Sub-clause (iii) of clause 5 of the DoH further provides that each of the Chargors agree to accept
the Security Trustee’s account of sales and realisation as sufficient proof of the amount realised and
relative expenses and to pay on demand by the Security Trustee and/or receiver any shortfall or
deficiency thereby shown. Under the DoH, even the Corporate Debtor hypothecated its goods. The
last part of sub-clause (iii) of clause 5 means that if after the sale of hypothecated assets, there is any
shortfall in the discharge of the liabilities of RCom or RTL, the Corporate Debtor is under an
obligation to pay the shortfall or deficiency. Therefore, the latter part of clause 5(iii) of the DoH

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151591199/

17

China Development Bank vs Doha Bank Q.P.S.C on 20 December, 2024

indicates that RITL-Corporate Debtor, who is not the borrower of the appellants, agreed to
discharge the liability of the third parties (RCom and RTL) to the appellants in the case of default of
RCom or RTL. Therefore, the second part of clause 5(iii) of the DoH amounts to a guarantee
provided by the Corporate Debtor to the appellants in terms of Section 126 of the Contract Act.

59. In the case of Phoenix ARC Pvt. Ltd.11, in paragraphs 24 and 25, this Court held thus:

“24. Chapter VIII of the Contract Act, 1872 deals with “Of Indemnity and Guarantee”.
Section 124 defines “Contract of indemnity” and Section 126 defines “Contract of
guarantee”.

Section 126 which is relevant for the present case is as follows:

“126. “Contract of guarantee”, “surety”, “principal debtor” and “creditor”.—A
“contract of guarantee” is a contract to perform the promise, or discharge the
liability, of a third person in case of his default. The person who gives the guarantee is
called the “surety”; the person in respect of whose default the guarantee is given is
called the “principal debtor”, and the person to whom the guarantee is given is called
the “creditor”. A guarantee may be either oral or written.”

25. As is clear from the definition a “contract of guarantee” is a contract to perform
the promise, or discharge the liability, of a third person in case of his default. The
present is not a case where the corporate debtor has entered into a contract to
perform the promise, or discharge the liability of borrower in case of his default. The
pledge agreement is limited to pledge 40,160 shares as security. The corporate debtor
has never promised to discharge the liability of the borrower. The facility agreement
under which the borrower was bound by the terms and conditions and containing his
obligation to repay the loan security for performance are all contained in the facility
agreement. A contract of guarantee contains a guarantee “to perform the promise or
discharge the liability of third person in case of his default”. Thus, key words in
Section 126 are contract “to perform the promise”, or “discharge the liability”, of a
third person. Both the expressions “perform the promise” or “discharge the liability”
relate to “a third person”.” In this case, from the last part of clause 5(iii) of the DoH,
it is very clear that the Corporate Debtor has undertaken to discharge the liability of
the RCom and RTL, the borrowers of the appellants. RCom and RTL are third parties
as far as Corporate Debtor is concerned.

60. Reliance was placed on the formats of hypothecation provided in the books authored by
M.Tijoriwala and J.M. Diwekar by contending that clause 3 of the DoH is a regular boilerplate
clause. These formats provided in the books have no relevance as we have to interpret clause 5(iii) of
the DoH as it is.

REQUIREMENT OF OCCURRENCE OF ‘DEFAULT’

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151591199/

18

China Development Bank vs Doha Bank Q.P.S.C on 20 December, 2024

61. There is an argument canvassed before us that default under the DoH has not occurred. We have
already quoted the definition of ‘financial debt’ under Section 5(8) of the IBC. There is no
requirement incorporated therein that a debt becomes financial debt only when default occurs.
Under Section 5(7) of the IBC, any person to whom financial debt is owed becomes a Financial
Creditor even if there is no default in payment of debt. Therefore, this argument deserves to be
rejected.

62. On this aspect, we may also note that under Section 3(12), ‘default’ has been defined. This
definition of ‘default’ becomes relevant only while invoking the provisions of Section 7(1) of the IBC
when the CIRP is sought to be initiated by the Financial Creditor. Section 7(1) provides that a
Financial Creditor can initiate CIRP against the Corporate Debtor when there is a default on the part
of the Corporate Debtor. There is no requirement under Section 5(8) of the IBC that there can be a
debt only when there is a default. The moment it is established that the financial debt is owed to any
person, he/she becomes a Financial Creditor. In this case, we are concerned with the claim made by
the appellants. A public announcement of CIRP under Section 15(1) must contain the last date of
submission of claims as may be specified. Thus, if a person has a claim within the meaning of
Section 3(6), he can submit it on public announcement contemplated by Section 15 being made. A
Financial Creditor has a claim as explained earlier. Therefore, for submitting the claim by a
Financial Creditor, there is no requirement of actual default.

EXTINGUISHMENT OF CONTINGENT CLAIM ON IMPOSITION OF MORATORIUM

63. Arguments have been canvassed that clause 5(iii) of the DoH is a contingent contract wherein
the contingent event is the shortfall between realisation and expenses. The clause applies to the
shortfall in the total liability of the borrower after necessary amount is realised from the
hypothecated assets. It is contended that the contract has become impossible, since owing to the
moratorium imposed, the hypothecated properties could not be sold and the shortfall could not
arise. Reliance is placed on Section 14(1) of the IBC, which reads thus:

“14. Moratorium.— (1) Subject to provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3), on the
insolvency commencement date, the Adjudicating Authority shall by order declare
moratorium for prohibiting all of the following, namely:

(a) the institution of suits or continuation of pending suits or proceedings against the
corporate debtor including execution of any judgment, decree or order in any court of
law, tribunal, arbitration panel or other authority;

(b) transferring, encumbering, alienating or disposing of by the corporate debtor any
of its assets or any legal right or beneficial interest therein;

(c) any action to foreclose, recover or enforce any security interest created by the
corporate debtor in respect of its property including any action under the
Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security
Interest Act, 2002 (54 of 2002);

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151591199/

19

China Development Bank vs Doha Bank Q.P.S.C on 20 December, 2024

(d) the recovery of any property by an owner or lessor where such property is
occupied by or in the possession of the corporate debtor.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, it is hereby clarified that notwithstanding
anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, a license, permit, registration, quota,
concession, clearances or a similar grant or right given by the Central Government, State
Government, local authority, sectoral regulator or any other authority constituted under any other
law for the time being in force, shall not be suspended or terminated on the grounds of insolvency,
subject to the condition that there is no default in payment of current dues arising for the use or
continuation of the license, permit, registration, quota, concession, clearances or a similar grant or
right during the moratorium period;” Section 14(1) imposes an embargo or prohibition on certain
acts. However, it does extinguish the claim. If the argument that the claims of all the creditors of the
Corporate Debtor are extinguished once the moratorium comes into force is accepted, no creditor
would be able to file a claim. For example, if money advanced is secured by a promissory note or a
negotiable instrument, a suit for recovery based on the said documents will not lie once a
moratorium comes into force. But, the liability under the documents will continue to exist. In fact,
after moratorium, no creditor can recover any dues from the Corporate Debtor. But still, there is a
provision for making a claim. Hence, the argument based on moratorium deserves to be rejected.
The DoH will continue to be valid. However, on the basis of the DoH, something which is prohibited
by Section 14, cannot be done. Therefore, Section 14 will be of no assistance to the 1st
respondent-Doha Bank.

64. When we are on the interpretation of DoH, we must refer to sub-clause (vi) of clause 16 of the
DoH, which provides that every provision contained in the deed shall be severable and distinct from
every other such provision. It goes to the extent of stating that if any one or more of the provisions of
the DoH are invalid, illegal and unenforceable, the same will not affect the remaining provisions.
Therefore, the last part of clause 5(iii) of the DoH is severable from the main transaction of the
hypothecation.

65. Another argument was canvassed based on the definition of ‘claim’ under Section 3(6) of the
IBC. If the right to payment exists or if a breach of contract gives rise to a right to payment, the
definition of ‘claim’ is attracted. Even if that right cannot be enforced by reason of the applicability
of the moratorium, the claim will still exist. Therefore, whether the cause of action for invoking the
guarantee has arisen or not is not relevant for considering the definition of ‘claim’.

66. Much capital was made of the fact that the CoC, including the appellants as well as the
third-party lenders, have voted for the Resolution Plan. At this stage, we may note that the NCLAT
has not held against the appellants on the ground that if the case of the appellants is accepted, it will
amount to modification of the Resolution Plan. We may note here that in Company Appeal (AT)
(Insolvency) No.19 of 2021 by the order dated 19th January 2021, the NCLAT, while deciding the
challenge to the Resolution Plan, noted that the application challenging the status of the appeals
made by the 1st respondent-Doha Bank was pending. The NCLAT observed that the Resolution Plan
was rightly approved, subject to the disposal of the pending application. In fact, in paragraph 7, the
NCLAT observed that depending upon the outcome of the applications, if the Resolution Plan

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151591199/

20

China Development Bank vs Doha Bank Q.P.S.C on 20 December, 2024

requires to be reconsidered, the adjudicating authority will do so after hearing the parties. This
order has become final.

67. As we have accepted the main contention of the appellants, the alternative contention of the
appellants becoming secured creditors is not gone into.

CONCLUSION

68. The sum and substance of the above discussion is that the impugned judgment and order dated
9th September 2022 passed by the NCLAT cannot be sustained, and the order dated 2nd March
2021 of the NCLT deserves to be upheld.

Accordingly, the impugned order of the NCLAT is quashed and set aside, and the order dated 2nd
March 2021 passed by the NCLT, Mumbai Bench (adjudicating authority) is restored. The appeals
are, accordingly, allowed.

.....………………….J. (Abhay S Oka) ...…………………...J. (Pankaj Mithal) New Delhi;

December 20, 2024.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151591199/

21

