Devinder Kumar Bansal vs The State Of Punjab on 3 March, 2025

Devinder Kumar Bansal vs The State Of Punjab on 3 March,
2025

                                                            1

                                                                                          REPORTABLE
2025 INSC 320
                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      EXTRAORDINARY APPELLATE JURISDICTION

             PETITION FOR SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (CRL.) NO. 3247 OF 2025

        DEVINDER KUMAR BANSAL                                                       Petitioner(s)

                                                                VERSUS

        THE STATE OF PUNJAB                                                         Respondent(s)

                                                           O R D E R

1. Exemption Applications are allowed.

2. The High Court has denied anticipatory bail to the petitioner in connection with First Information
Report No. l dated 08.01.2025 registered with the Vigilance Bureau, Police Station, Patiala for the
offence punishable under Section 7 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 and Section 61(2) of
the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.

3. It appears from the materials on record that the petitioner – herein is serving as Audit Inspector
with the Government.

4. He is alleged to have demanded illegal gratification in connection with conducting of audit
pertaining to development work undertaken during the tenure of the wife of the complainant as
Sarpanch of the Gram Panchayat. It is further alleged that the co-accused by name Prithvi Singh
actually collected the bribe amount for and on behalf of the petitioner – herein for the complainant.

5. Apprehending his arrest in connection with the offence, referred to above, the petitioner prayed
for anticipatory bail which the High Court declined.

6. In such circumstances, referred to above, the petitioner is here before us with the present
petition.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164074938/

1

Devinder Kumar Bansal vs The State Of Punjab on 3 March, 2025

7. We heard Ms. Sanya Kaushal, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner and also looked
into the materials on record. The learned counsel made a gallant effort to persuade us to exercise
our discretion in favour of the petitioner, however, we had to convey to her with all humility at our
command that she has come before us with a very weak matter.

8. The High Court in its impugned order, more particularly Para 5 has observed thus:-

“On being put to notice on the previous date of hearing, learned State counsel
assisted by learned counsel for the complainant has vehemently opposed the prayer
for grant of anticipatory bail to the petitioner. It is submitted that co-accused Prithvi
Singh was apprehended red handed while accepting the bribe and admitted that the
amount was received on behalf of the petitioner. Furthermore, there was an audio
recording dated 08.01.2025, which further corroborates the demand made by the
petitioner. It has been argued that in the said recording, the petitioner is clearly
audible confirming with co-accused Prithvi Singh whether the bribe was received in
cash and further instructing him to transfer the amount to a third party, namely
Naresh.”

9. Section 7 of the Act, 1988 reads as under:

“7. Public servant taking gratification other than legal remuneration in respect of an
official act Whoever, being, or expecting to be a public servant, accepts or obtains or
agrees to accept or attempts to obtain from any person, for himself or for any other
person, any gratification whatever, other than legal remuneration, as a motive or
reward for doing or forbearing to do any official act or for showing or forbearing to
show, in the exercise of his official functions, favour or disfavour to any person or for
rendering or attempting to render any service or disservice to any person with the
Central Government or any State Government or Parliament or the Legislature of any
State or with any local authority, corporation or Government company referred to in
clause (c) of section 2, or with any public servant, whether named or otherwise, shall
be punishable with imprisonment which shall be not less than six months but which
may extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine.

Explanations. (a) "Expecting to be a public servant." If a person not expecting to be in
office obtains a gratification by deceiving others into a belief that he is about to be in
office, and that he will then serve them, he may be guilty of cheating but he is not
guilty of the offence defined in this section.

(b) "Gratification". The word "gratification"

is not restricted to pecuniary gratifications or to gratifications estimable in money.

(c) "Legal remuneration". The words "legal remuneration" are not restricted to remuneration which
a public servant can lawfully demand, but include all remuneration which he is permitted by the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164074938/

2

Government or the organisation, which he serves, to accept.

Devinder Kumar Bansal vs The State Of Punjab on 3 March, 2025

(d) "A motive or reward for doing." A person who receives a gratification as a motive or reward for
doing what he does not intend or is not in a position to do, or has not done, comes within this
expression.

(e) Where a public servant induces a person erroneously to believe that his influence with the
Government has obtained a title for that person and thus induces that person to give the public
servant, money or any other gratification as a reward for this service, the public servant has
committed an offence under this section.”

10. Section 13(1)(a) of the Act, 1988 reads as under:

“13. Criminal misconduct by a public servant (1) A public servant is said to commit
the offence of criminal misconduct,

(a) if he habitually accepts or obtains or agrees to accept or attempts to obtain from
any person for himself or for any other person any gratification other than legal
remuneration as a motive or reward such as is mentioned in section 7; or”

11. Thus, in an offence under Section 7 of the Act, 1988, the points requiring proof are:

(i) that, the accused at the time of the offence was, or expected to be, a public servant;

(ii) that, he accepted or retained or agreed to accept, or attempted to obtain from
some person a gratification;

(iii) that, such gratification was not a legal remuneration due to him;

(iv) that, he accepted such gratification as a motive or reward, proof of which is
essential for

(a) doing or forbearing to do an official act, or

(b) showing or forbearing to show favour or disfavour to someone in exercise of his
official functions, or

(c) rendering or attempting to render any service, or disservice to someone, with the
legislative or executive government, or with any public servant.

12. Further it is seen that, Section 7 speaks of the "attempt" to obtain a bribe as being in itself an
offence. Mere demand or solicitation, therefore, by a public servant amounts to commission of an
offence under Section 7 of the P.C. Act. The word "attempt" is to imply no more than a mere
solicitation, which, again may be made as effectually in implicit or in explicit terms.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164074938/

3

Devinder Kumar Bansal vs The State Of Punjab on 3 March, 2025

13. Actual exchange of a bribe is not an essential requirement to be prosecuted under this law.
Further, those public servants, who do not take a bribe directly, but, through middlemen or touts,
and those who take valuable things from a person with whom they have or are likely to have official
dealings, are also punishable as per Sections 10 and 11 of the Act 1988 respectively.

14. We may refer to a Division Bench decision of the Calcutta High Court in the case of Ratan Moni
Dey vs. Emperor reported in (1905) I.L.R. 32 Calcutta 292. The entire order is extracted hereunder:

“The petitioner has been convicted of attempting to obtain for himself some
gratification other than legal remuneration as a motive or reward for doing an official
act, and has been sentenced to six months' rigorous imprisonment.

A Rule was issued by this Court to show cause why the conviction and sentence
passed on the petitioner should not be set aside on the ground that the facts found in
the judgment do not constitute an attempt to commit an offence under Section 161 of
the Indian Penal Code, and also to show cause why the sentence should not be
modified.

The petitioner was a Civil Court peon and as such he had to serve summonses on the
witnesses in a suit instituted by the firm in which the complainant was the head
gomastha. He asked the complainant to pay him dusturi, if he wished him to serve
the summonses without an identifier, and this is the act for doing which he has been
convicted.

It is urged on his behalf that the facts found do not constitute an attempt to obtain
the dusturi. With this argument we are unable to agree. It appears to us that the
attempt was complete when the demand was made; there was nothing further for the
petitioner to do to complete his attempt. He made the request, and it lay with the
person from whom he demanded the money to comply with the request or not. We
are in complete agreement with the opinion expressed by Mr. Justice Pearson in
Empress of India v. Baldeo Sahai [(1879) I.L.R. 2 All 253] where that learned Judge
lays down that to ask for a bribe is an attempt to obtain one.

The learned pleader who appeared on behalf of the petitioner quoted several cases to
show what is an attempt what is not. We need not refer to these in detail. We may
take the case of the woman who was convicted of having attempted to commit
suicide, reported in Queen Empress v. Ramakha [(1884) I.L.R. 8 Mad. 5]. In this case
the woman had run towards a well with the intention of jumping down it. Here it was
held that there was no attempt to commit suicide, and the reason is obvious. The
mere running would not put an end to her life; there was some further act to be done,
namely, jumping down the well, before the attempt would be complete.

In the case before us, there was nothing further for the petitioner to do; he made the
request and, as we have said, whether he received the gratification or not did not

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164074938/

4

Devinder Kumar Bansal vs The State Of Punjab on 3 March, 2025

depend on himself but on the person from whom it was demanded.

As regards the sentence, we are of opinion that in the circumstances of the case it is
not too severe. The petitioner not only demanded the reward but refused to serve the
summons if it were not paid, and also used abusive language towards the
complainant. We accordingly see no reason to interfere. The Rule is discharged.

The petitioner must be called on to surrender and to serve the remainder of the
sentence.” (Emphasis supplied)

15. We may also refer to a Division Bench decision of the Bombay High Court in the case Damodar
Krishna Kamli vs. State reported in 1955 Cr.L.J. 181. Justice P.B. Gajendragadkar (as His Lordship
then was), speaking for the Bench, observed as under:

“...If we turn to Section 161, it would be clear that a public servant would be guilty of
the offence of taking gratification under the said section even if he agrees to accept
the prohibited gratification. It is thus not necessary in order to bring home to the
public servant the charge under Section 161 to prove that he has actually accepted or
obtained illegal gratification. It would be enough if it be shown that he had agreed to
accept the said illegal gratification. In other words, if a proposal is made to the public
servant in respect of payment of illegal gratification and the proposal is accepted by
the public servant, he would be guilty under Section 161, Penal Code...” (Emphasis
supplied)

16. Section 161 of the I.P.C. came to be omitted at the time when the Prevention of Corruption Act,
1947 came to be repealed and the Prevention of Corruption of Act, 1988 came into force. Section 161
of the I.P.C. is pari materia to Section 7 of the Act, 1988.

17. Section 7 is with regard to a public servant taking gratification other than the legal remuneration
in respect of an official act. On the other hand, Section 13 of the Act, 1988 is with regard to criminal
misconduct by a public servant. A public servant could be said to have committed an offence of
criminal misconduct, if he habitually accepts or obtains or agrees to accept or attempts to obtain
from any person for himself or for any other person any gratification other than the legal
remuneration as a motive or reward such as mentioned in Section 7 of the Act.

18. In State of M.P. and another v. Ram Kishna Balothia and another reported in AIR 1995 SC 1198,
this Court considered the nature of the right of anticipatory bail and observed as under:

"We find it difficult to accept the contention that Section 438 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure is an integral part of Article 21. In the first place, there was no provision
similar to Section 438 in the old Criminal Procedure Code? Also anticipatory bail
cannot be granted as a matter of right. It is essentially a statutory right conferred long
after the coming into force of the Constitution. It cannot be considered as an essential
ingredient of Article 21 of the Constitution. And its nonapplication to a certain special

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164074938/

5

Devinder Kumar Bansal vs The State Of Punjab on 3 March, 2025

category of offences cannot be considered as violative of Article 21."

(Emphasis supplied)

19. While deciding the aforesaid case, this Court referred to the 41st Report of the Indian Law
Commission dated 24th September, 1969 recommending the introduction of a provision for grant of
anticipatory bail wherein it has been observed that “power to grant anticipatory bail should be
exercised in very exceptional cases”.

20. The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner accused vehemently advanced the argument on
the subject of life and liberty enshrined in Article 21 of the Constitution of India, by placing strong
reliance on the observations made by this Court in Siddharam Satlingappa Mhetre v. State of
Maharashtra reported in AIR 2011 SC 312 and submitted that unless the custodial interrogation is
warranted in the facts and circumstances of the case, declining to grant anticipatory bail amounts to
denial of the rights conferred upon a citizen/person under Article 21 of the Constitution. We do not
find any merit in this contention of the learned counsel.

21. The parameters for grant of anticipatory bail in a serious offence like corruption are required to
be satisfied. Anticipatory bail can be granted only in exceptional circumstances where the Court is
prima facie of the view that the applicant has been falsely enroped in the crime or the allegations are
politically motivated or are frivolous. So far as the case at hand is concerned, it cannot be said that
any exceptional circumstances have been made out by the petitioner accused for grant of
anticipatory bail and there is no frivolity in the prosecution.

22. In the aforesaid context, we may refer to a pronouncement in Central Bureau of Investigation v.
V. Vijay Sai Reddy reported in (2013) 7 Scale 15, wherein this Court expressed thus:

“28. While granting bail, the court has to keep in mind the nature of accusation, the
nature of evidence in support thereof, the severity of the punishment which
conviction will entail, the character of the accused, circumstances which are peculiar
to the accused, reasonable possibility of securing the presence of the accused at the
trial, reasonable apprehension of the witnesses being tampered with, the larger
interests of the public/State and other similar considerations. It has also to be kept in
mind that for the purpose of granting bail, the Legislature has used the words
"reasonable grounds for believing" instead of "the evidence" which means the Court
dealing with the grant of bail can only satisfy it as to whether there is a genuine case
against the accused and that the prosecution will be able to produce prima facie
evidence in support of the charge. It is not expected, at this stage, to have the
evidence establishing the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt.” (Emphasis
supplied)

23. The presumption of innocence, by itself, cannot be the sole consideration for grant of
anticipatory bail. The presumption of innocence is one of the considerations, which the court should
keep in mind while considering the plea for anticipatory bail. The salutary rule is to balance the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164074938/

6

Devinder Kumar Bansal vs The State Of Punjab on 3 March, 2025

cause of the accused and the cause of public justice. Over solicitous homage to the accused’s liberty
can, sometimes, defeat the cause of public justice.

24. If liberty is to be denied to an accused to ensure corruption free society, then the courts should
not hesitate in denying such liberty. Where overwhelming considerations in the nature aforesaid
require denial of anticipatory bail, it has to be denied. It is altogether a different thing to say that
once the investigation is over and charge-sheet is filed, the court may consider to grant regular bail
to a public servant - accused of indulging in corruption.

25. Avarice is a common frailty of mankind and Robert Walpole's famous pronouncement that all
men have their price, notwithstanding the unsavoury cynicism that it suggests, is not very far from
truth. As far back as more than two centuries ago, it was Burke who cautioned: “Among a people
generally corrupt, liberty cannot last long”. In more recent years, Romain Rolland lamented that
France fell because there was corruption without indignation. Corruption has, in it, very dangerous
potentialities. Corruption, a word of wide connotation has, in respect of almost all the spheres of our
day to day life, all the world over, the limited meaning of allowing decisions and actions to be
influenced not by the rights or wrongs of a case but by the prospects of monetary gains or other
selfish considerations.

26. If even a fraction of what was the vox pupuli about the magnitude of corruption to be true, then
it would not be far removed from the truth, that it is the rampant corruption indulged in with
impunity by highly placed persons that has led to economic unrest in this country. If one is asked to
name one sole factor that effectively arrested the progress of our society to prosperity, undeniably it
is corruption. If the society in a developing country faces a menace greater than even the one from
the hired assassins to its law and order, then that is from the corrupt elements at the higher
echelons of the Government and of the political parties.

27. In Manoj Narula v. Union of India, (2014) 9 SCC 1, this Court held that corruption erodes the
fundamental tenets of the rule of law and quoted with approval its judgment in Niranjan
Hemchandra Sashittal v. State of Maharashtra, (2013) 4 SCC 642 & held as under:— “16……‘26. It
can be stated without any fear of contradiction that corruption is not to be judged by degree, for
corruption mothers disorder, destroys societal will to progress, accelerates undeserved ambitions,
kills the conscience, jettisons the glory of the institutions, paralyses the economic health of a
country, corrodes the sense of civility and mars the marrows of governance.” (Emphasis supplied)

28. In Subramanian Swamy v. Manmohan Singh, (2012) 3 SCC 64, this Court held as under:— “68.
Today, corruption in our country not only poses a grave danger to the concept of constitutional
governance, it also threatens the very foundation of Indian democracy and the Rule of Law. The
magnitude of corruption in our public life is incompatible with the concept of a socialist, secular
democratic republic. It cannot be disputed that where corruption begins all rights end. Corruption
devalues human rights, chokes development and undermines justice, liberty, equality, fraternity
which are the core values in our preambular vision. Therefore, the duty of the Court is that any
anti-corruption law has to be interpreted and worked out in such a fashion as to strengthen the fight
against corruption….” (Emphasis supplied)

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164074938/

7

Devinder Kumar Bansal vs The State Of Punjab on 3 March, 2025

29. In K.C. Sareen v. C.B.I., Chandigarh, (2001) 6 SCC 584, this Court observed thus:— “12.
Corruption by public servants has now reached a monstrous dimension in India. Its tentacles have
started grappling even the institutions created for the protection of the republic. Unless those
tentacles are intercepted and impeded from gripping the normal and orderly functioning of the
public offices, through strong legislative, executive as well as judicial exercises the corrupt public
servants could even paralyse the functioning of such institutions and thereby hinder the democratic
polity….” (Emphasis supplied)

30. While approving the judgment of Subramanian Swamy v. Director, Central Bureau of
Investigation, (2014) 8 SCC 682, rendered by another Constitution Bench in Manoj Narula's case, a
Constitution Bench of this Court, dealing with rampant corruption, observed as under:— “17
Recently, in Subramanian Swamy v. CBI (2014) 8 SCC 682, the Constitution Bench, speaking
through R.M. Lodha, C.J., while declaring Section 6-A of the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act,
1946, which was inserted by Act 45 of 2003, as unconstitutional, has opined that : (SCC pp. 725-26,
para 59) “59. It seems to us that classification which is made in Section 6-A on the basis of status in
the government service is not permissible under Article 14 as it defeats the purpose of finding prima
facie truth into the allegations of graft, which amount to an offence under the PC Act, 1988. Can
there be sound differentiation between corrupt public servants based on their status? Surely not,
because irrespective of their status or position, corrupt public servants are corrupters of public
power. The corrupt public servants, whether high or low, are birds of the same feather and must be
confronted with the process of investigation and inquiry equally. Based on the position or status in
service, no distinction can be made between public servants against whom there are allegations
amounting to an offence under the PC Act, 1988.” And thereafter, the larger Bench further said :
(SCC p. 726, para 60) “60. Corruption is an enemy of the nation and tracking down corrupt public
servants and punishing such persons is a necessary mandate of the PC Act, 1988. It is difficult to
justify the classification which has been made in Section 6-A because the goal of law in the PC Act
1988 is to meet corruption cases with a very strong hand and all public servants are warned through
such a legislative measure that corrupt public servants have to face very serious consequences.” And
again : (SCC pp. 730-31, paras 71-72) “71. Office of public power cannot be the workshop of personal
gain. The probity in public life is of great importance. How can two public servants against whom
there are allegations of corruption of graft or bribe- taking or criminal misconduct under the PC Act,
1988 can be made to be treated differently because one happens to be a junior officer and the other,
a senior decision maker.

72. Corruption is an enemy of nation and tracking down corrupt public servant, howsoever high he
may be, and punishing such person is a necessary mandate under the PC Act, 1988. The status or
position of public servant does not qualify such public servant from exemption from equal
treatment. The decision-making power does not segregate corrupt officers into two classes as they
are common crime-doers and have to be tracked down by the same process of inquiry and
investigation.”

18. From the aforesaid authorities, it is clear as noonday that corruption has the potentiality to
destroy many a progressive aspect and it has acted as the formidable enemy of the nation.”
(Emphasis supplied)

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164074938/

8

31. In Neera Yadav v. Central Bureau of Investigation, (2017) 8 SCC 757, this Court observed thus:

Devinder Kumar Bansal vs The State Of Punjab on 3 March, 2025

“59. Every country feels a constant longing for good governance, righteous use of
power and transparency in administration. Corruption is no longer a moral issue as it
is linked with the search of wholesome governance and the society's need for
re-assurance that the system functions fairly, free from corruption and nepotism.
Corruption has spread its tentacles almost on all the key areas of the State and it is an
impediment to the growth of investment and development of the country. If the
conduct of administrative authorities is righteous and duties are performed in good
faith with the vigilance and awareness that they are public trustees of people's rights,
the issue of lack of accountability would themselves fade into insignificance.

60. To state the ubiquity of corruption, we may refer to the oft-quoted words of
Kautilya, which reads as under:— “Just as it is impossible not to taste the honey or
the poison that finds itself at the tip of the tongue, so it is impossible for a
government servant not to eat up, at least, a bit of the king's revenue. Just as fish
moving under water cannot possibly be found out either as drinking or not drinking
water, so government servants employed in the government work cannot be found
out (while) taking money for themselves).

It is possible to mark the movements of birds flying high up in the sky; but not so is it possible to
ascertain the movement of government servants of hidden purpose.” [Ref: Kautilya's Arthasastra by
R. Shamasastry, Second Edition, Page 77] As pointed out by Paul H. Douglas in his book on “Ethics
of Government”, “corruption was rife in British public life till a hundred years ago and in USA till
the beginning of this century. Nor can it be claimed that it has been altogether eliminated
anywhere.” (Ref : Santhanam Committee Report, 1962 : Para 2.3).

61. Tackling corruption is going to be a priority task for the Government. The Government has been
making constant efforts to deal with the problem of corruption. However, the constant legislative
reforms and strict judicial actions have still not been able to completely uproot the deeply rooted
evil of corruption. This is the area where the Government needs to be seen taking unrelenting, stern
and uncompromising steps. Leaders should think of introducing good and effective leadership at the
helm of affairs; only then benefits of liberalization and various programmes, welfare schemes and
programmes would reach the masses. Lack of awareness and supine attitude of the public has all
along been found to be to the advantage of the corrupt. Due to the uncontrolled spread of
consumerism and fall in moral values, corruption has taken deep roots in the society. What is
needed is a reawakening and recommitment to the basic values of tradition rooted in ancient and
external wisdom. Unless people rise against bribery and corruption, society can never be rid of this
disease. The people can collectively put off this evil by resisting corruption by any person, howsoever
high he or she may be.”

32. In the overall view of the matter, we are convinced that the High Court rightly denied
anticipatory bail to the petitioner herein.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164074938/

9

33. The petition is accordingly dismissed.

Devinder Kumar Bansal vs The State Of Punjab on 3 March, 2025

34. However, it is needless to clarify that if the petitioner herein prays for regular bail, the same
shall be considered on its own merits without being influenced in any manner by any of the
observations made by this Court as this Court has only considered whether the petitioner deserves
to be granted anticipatory bail or not.

35. The principles governing grant of anticipatory bail are distinct and different from the principles
as regards the grant of regular bail. The considerations are different. This should be kept in mind if
at all a regular bail application is filed by the petitioner herein.

36. Pending applications, if any, also stand disposed of.

… … … … … … … … … … … … … … … . . J .   ( J . B .   P A R D I W A L A )   … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … . J .   ( R .
MAHADEVAN) NEW DELHI;

3rd MARCH, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164074938/

10

