Mansoorsaheb (Dead) vs Salima (D) By Lrs. on 19 December, 2024

Mansoorsaheb (Dead) vs Salima (D) By Lrs. on 19 December,
2024

Author: Sanjay Karol

Bench: Sanjay Karol, C.T. Ravikumar

 2024 INSC 1006                                                                          REPORTABLE

                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                          CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4211 OF 2009

          MANSOOR SAHEB (DEAD) & ORS.                                           …APPELLANT(S)

                                                        VERSUS

          SALIMA (D) BY LRS. & ORS.                                                 …RESPONDENT(S)

                                                          WITH

                                          CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4213 OF 2009

                                                   JUDGMENT

SANJAY KAROL J.

1. The instant appeals, preferred by the original defendants, arise out of the judgment and order
dated 13.01.2006 passed by the High Court of Karnataka whereby it dismissed the appeals filed by
the original-defendants, confirming the decree passed by the Court of the Principal Civil Judge (Sr.
Dn.)1, Bijapur in O.S. No.140 of 1988 in favour of the original plaintiffs (Respondents herein).
Hereinafter referred to as ‘Trial Court’ 1-CIVIL APPEAL NO.4211 OF 2009

2. Admittedly, the parties are governed by Mohammedan law. The following questions arise for our
consideration:-

(a) Whether an owner of property can, in his lifetime, transfer said property to his
heirs by way of partition?

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/56175783/

1

Mansoorsaheb (Dead) vs Salima (D) By Lrs. on 19 December, 2024

(b) Whether, in the facts of this case, the requisites of a valid gift were met and also
whether nomenclature employed in Mutation Entry can be said to be indicative of
intentions?

FACTUAL MATRIX

3. The brief facts are stated by referring to the parties as per their status in the Trial Court.

4. One Sultan Saheb, the owner of the suit land described in Schedule B and C being agricultural
land and house property respectively, of the plaint, died on 09.01.1978. Through his first marriage,
he had one daughter namely, Ajamunisa (defendant no.11). With his first wife passing away, he
remarried and, from this second marriage, had three children- two sons, namely Mansoorsaheb
(defendant no.1), Sikandar (defendant no.9) and daughter namely, Rabiyabi. Plaintiff nos.1 to 9 are
the children of Rabiyabi, who had died on 08.06.1985. Defendant no.2 is Mansoorsaheb’s wife,
defendant nos. 3 to 7 are his children, defendant no.8 is defendant no.1’s daughter-in-law.
Defendant no.10 is the son of defendant no.9. For ease of understanding, the position of parties is
demonstrated through a family tree:

2-CIVIL APPEAL NO.4211 OF 2009

5. The case of the plaintiffs is that Sultan Saheb was the owner and possessor of the
suit property. On his death, defendant no.1 got his name, as also the names of
defendant no. 9 & 11 mutated in the revenue records to the exclusion of the plaintiffs’
mother, Rabiyabi, also a successor-in-interest. As such, plaintiffs are entitled to 1/6th
share in different scheduled properties and sought partition by way of O.S.
No.140/1988.

6. In their written statements, the defendants contended that Sultan Saheb himself
had divided the property, R.S.No.249/1A/1, into three parts, gifting one part each to
his sons and retaining the third remaining part. Subsequently, in September 1980, he
partitioned the retained third portion among his four children. Reliance is placed on
the Mutation Entry No. 8258 dated 21.01.1973, which is disputed by the plaintiffs.

7. The Trial Court framed thirteen issues and held that an oral gift was not made to
the sons as the essential requisites were not conclusively proven. It rejected the
3-CIVIL APPEAL NO.4211 OF 2009 plea of partition on the ground that under
Mohammedan Law, property partitioned during the owner's lifetime requires a
written registered document. After examining witnesses and evidence placed on its
record, it held the plaintiffs jointly entitled to 1/6 share, defendant nos.1 and 9 each
entitled to 1/3 share and defendant no.11 to th rd 1/6 share in the suit schedule
properties.

th

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/56175783/

2

Mansoorsaheb (Dead) vs Salima (D) By Lrs. on 19 December, 2024

8. While dismissing the appeals, the High Court concurred with the Trial Court's findings on both
issues of gift and partition. It reiterated the position under Mohammedan Law that as long as the
owner is alive, the partition is unknown to the members governed by Muslim Law. Regarding the
gift, it was held that the witnesses' testimonies failed to substantiate the plea for an oral gift.
SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES

9. Mr. V.N. Raghupathy, learned counsel for the Appellants, submitted that writing is not essential
to effectuate the transfer of immovable property by way of gift. Sultan Saheb made a declaration of
gift, which was accepted by the donees, and possession was delivered to them, as evidenced by the
Mutation Entry No.8258 (Ex. P1). He placed reliance on Section 129 of Transfer of Property
Act,1882 and submits that writing is not essential to effectuate transfer of immovable property by
way of gift. Further reliance is placed on Hafeeza Bibi v S.K. Farid2 to describe the three essentials
of a gift under Mohammadan Law. It is submitted that Sultan Saheb made (2011) 5 SCC 654
4-CIVIL APPEAL NO.4211 OF 2009 a declaration of gift, the same was accepted by the donees and
possession was delivered to the donees which is evident from Mutation Entry (Ex.P1).

10. It is submitted that the erroneous description of the transaction as watni/partition instead of an
oral gift made the plaintiffs contend that Sultan Saheb and his sons had no right to divide/partition
the property, but if the nomenclature ‘partition’ in Mutation Entry (Ex.P1) is replaced by ‘oral gift’,
the remaining contents clearly shows that the transaction was an oral gift. Further reliance is placed
on N.Mani v. Sangeetha Theatre & Ors.3 and Mathai Samuel v. Eapen Eapen4. It is further
submitted that the High Court failed to exercise its jurisdiction as a First Appellate Court depriving
appellant his valuable right. In furtherance of the said submission, the learned counsel refers to B.V.
Nagesh v. H.V. Srinivasamurthy5.

11. Mr. SN Bhat, learned senior counsel for the Respondents, submitted that the Mutation Entry
No.8258 dated 21.01.1973 refers only to an alleged partition, and there is no reference to any gift as
alleged by the appellants. It is further submitted that the said Mutation Entry was purported to have
been made on the basis of a report (‘wardi’) submitted to the revenue officials, but the
appellants-defendants never produced such a report. Further, it is submitted that, unlike Hindu
Law, children governed by Mohammedan Law have no pre-existing right; thus, there can be no oral
partition of properties during the lifetime of the owner. To buttress his (2004) 12 SCC 278 (2012)13
SCC 80 (2010) 12 SCC 530 5-CIVIL APPEAL NO.4211 OF 2009 submission the learned senior
counsel relies on Abdul Rahim & Ors. v. Sk. Abdul Zabar6 and K. Mahammad Ghouse Sahib v.
Jamila Bi & Ors.7 APPRECIATION OF LAW & ANALYSIS

12. At the outset we may remind ourselves of the observations made in regard to personal laws by
J.S. Khehar the then CJI in his dissenting judgment in Shayara Bano v. Union of India8:

“240 …Reference was also made to the definition of the term Personal Law in Conflict
of Laws 188 (7th Edn., 1974) by R.H. Graveson, who defined the term as under:

“The idea of the Personal Law is based on the conception of man as a social being, so
that those transactions of his daily life which affect him most closely in a personal

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/56175783/

3

Mansoorsaheb (Dead) vs Salima (D) By Lrs. on 19 December, 2024

sense, such as marriage, divorce, legitimacy, many kinds of capacity, and succession,
may be governed universally by that system of law deemed most suitable and
adequate for the purpose …” (emphasis in original) …

322. “Personal law” has a constitutional protection. This protection is extended to
“Personal Law” through Article 25 of the Constitution. It needs to be kept in mind
that the stature of “Personal Law” is that of a fundamental right. The elevation of
“Personal Law” to this stature came about when the Constitution came into force.
This was because Article 25 was included in Part III of the Constitution. Stated
differently, “Personal Law” of every religious denomination is protected from
invasion and breach, except as provided by and under Article 25.” (Emphasis
supplied)

13. Mohammedan Law, being the personal law, possesses its own legal principles and regulations
which govern family relationships in matters such as marriage, divorce, inheritance, custody and
guardianship. Its distinctive feature sets it apart (2009) 6 SCC 160 1949 SCC OnLine Mad433 (2017)
9 SCC 1 6-CIVIL APPEAL NO.4211 OF 2009 from other personal laws on fundamental issues. It is
pertinent to examine the legal principles, if any, governing partition under Mohammedan law.

14. Tahir Mahmood9, in his book ‘The Muslim Law of India’, 2nd Edition, Chapter 12 (Law of
Inheritance) Para II, has provided for various concepts related to succession in Muslim Law which
distinguish it from other personal laws:

“1. The Muslim law of succession is basically different from the parallel indigenous
systems of India. The doctrine of janmswatvavada (right by birth), which constitutes
the foundation of the Mitakshara law of succession, is wholly unknown to Muslim
law. The law of inheritance in Islam is relatively close to the classical Dayabhaga law,
though it differs also form that on several fundamental points. The modern Hindu
law of succession (as laid down in the Hindu Succession Act, 1956) is, however, much
different from both the aforesaid classical systems; it has a remarkable proximity, in
certain respects, to the Muslim law of inheritance.

2. The division of heritage (daya) into sapratibandh (‘obstructed’) and apratibandh
(‘unobstructed’)-self-acquired and ancestral- is equally foreign to Muslim law. Whatever property
one inherits (whether from his ancestors or from others) is, at Muslim law, one's absolute property-
whether that person is a man or a woman.

3. In Muslim law, so long as a person is alive he or she is the absolute owner of his or her property;
nobody else (including a son) has any right, whatsoever, in it. It is only when the owner dies- and
never before- that the legal rights of the heirs accrue. There is, therefore, no question of a would- be
heir dealing in any way with his future right to inherit.

4. The Indian legal concepts of ‘joint' or 'undivided' family, 'coparcenary', karta, 'survivorship', and
'partition', etc., have no place in the law of Islam. A father and his son living together do not

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/56175783/

4

Mansoorsaheb (Dead) vs Salima (D) By Lrs. on 19 December, 2024

constitute a ‘joint family'; the father is the master of his property; the son (even if a minor) of his, if
he has any. The same is the position of brothers or others living together.

5. Unlike the classical Indian law, female sex is no bar to inherit property. No woman is excluded
from inheritance only on the basis of sex. Women have, like men, right to inherit property
independently, not merely to receive maintenance or hold property ‘in lieu of maintenance'.
Moreover, every woman who inherits some property is, like a man, its absolute owner; there The
author is a recognized expert on Islamic law, having written numerous acclaimed works on the
subject. He was a retired professor of law at Delhi University and the founder of Department of
Islamic Law at the Indian Institute of Islamic Studies, New Delhi.

7-CIVIL APPEAL NO.4211 OF 2009 is no concept of either stridhan or a woman's ‘limited estate'
reverting to others upon her death.

6. The same scheme of succession applies whether the deceased was male or a female. This is one of
those salient features of Muslim law of succession which distinguish it from modern Hindu law of
inheritance.” (Emphasis supplied)

15. The position on devolution of property under Mohammedan Law has been succinctly captured in
Chapter 22- Law of Succession and Inheritance of Mulla on Mohammedan Law 5th Edition in the
following terms: “all properties devolve by succession, so the rights of heirs come into existence only
on the death of the ancestor. The whole property vests in them.” The Mohammedan Law has well-
defined rules of inheritance that come into effect upon the death of the ancestor, and its policy has
been to restrain the owner from interfering in such well-defined rules. Transfer of property if
required to be made during the lifetime of a person, they may do so primarily by way of gift (hiba).
Other methods include the writing of a will but even therein certain restrictions have been
postulated.

16. Prior to looking to the above said sources, a general understanding of partition would also be
instructive. Advanced Law Lexicon10 defined partition as a separation between joint owners or
tenants in common of their respective interests in land, and setting apart such interest, so that they
may enjoy and possess the same in severalty. In Shub Karan Bubna v. Sita Saran Bubna,11 partition
was defined as under:

P Ramanatha Aiyar 3rd Edition Reprint 2009 (2009) 9 SCC 689 8-CIVIL APPEAL
NO.4211 OF 2009 “5. “Partition” is a redistribution or adjustment of pre-existing
rights, among co-owners/coparceners, resulting in a division of lands or other
properties jointly held by them into different lots or portions and delivery thereof to
the respective allottees. The effect of such division is that the joint ownership is
terminated and the respective shares vest in them in severalty.

6. A partition of a property can be only among those having a share or interest in it. A person who
does not have a share in such property cannot obviously be a party to a partition. “Separation of
share” is a species of “partition”. When all co-owners get separated, it is a partition. Separation of

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/56175783/

5

Mansoorsaheb (Dead) vs Salima (D) By Lrs. on 19 December, 2024

share(s) refers to a division where only one or only a few among several co-owners/coparceners get
separated, and others continue to be joint or continue to hold the remaining property jointly without
division by metes and bounds. For example, where four brothers owning a property divide it among
themselves by metes and bounds, it is a partition. But if only one brother wants to get his share
separated and other three brothers continue to remain joint, there is only a separation of the share
of one brother.” (Emphasis supplied)

17. Let us now turn to the position as it is under Mohammedan Law. The right of an heir-apparent
comes into existence for the first time on the death of the ancestor, and he is not entitled until then
to any interest in the property to which he would succeed as an heir if he survived the ancestor [See:
Mulla Principles of Mahomedan Law, 22nd Edition, Chapter 6; Abdul Wahid Khan v. Mussumat
Noran Bibi & Ors.12]. Reference may also be made to the decision of this case in Gulam Abbas v.
Haji Kayyum Ali & Ors.13 wherein a bench of three learned judges observed albeit in connection
with renunciation of inheritance as under:

“7. Sir Roland Wilson, in his “Anglo Mohamadan Law” (p. 260, para 208) states the
position thus:

“For the sake of those readers who are familiar with the joint ownership of father and
son according to the most widely prevelant school of Hindu Law, it is perhaps
desirable to state explicitly that in Mohammedan, as in Roman and English Law,
1885 SCCOnLine PC 4 (1973) 1 SCC 1 9-CIVIL APPEAL NO.4211 OF 2009 nemo est
heres viventis.........a living person has no heir. An heir apparent or presumptive has
no such reversionary interest as would enable him to object to any sale or gift made
by the owner in possession; See Abdul Wdhid, L.P. 12 I.A., 91, and 11 Cal 597 (1885)
which was followed in Hasan Ali, 11 All 456, (1889). The converse is also true: a
renunciation by an exepectant heir in the lifetime of his ancestor is not valid, or
enforceable against him after the vesting of the inheritance.”” (Emphasis supplied) It
is also important to note that the doctrine of partial partition does not apply to
Mohammedan Law as the heirs therein are tenants-in-common. Succession is to a
definite fraction of the estate in question. A.N. Ray, J. as his Lordship then was wrote
in Syed Shah Ghulam Ghouse Mohiuddin v. Syed Shah Ahmed Mohiuddin Kamisul
Quadri14, as follows:

“20. … In Mohammedan law the doctrine of partial partition is not applicable
because the heirs are tenants-in-common and the heirs of the deceased Muslim
succeed to the definite fraction of every part of his estate. The shares of heirs under
Mohammedan law are definite and known before actual partition. Therefore on
partition of properties belonging to a deceased Muslim there is division by metes and
bounds in accordance with the specific share of each heir being already determined
by the law.”

18. It is acknowledged that Islamic Law has four sources — (i) Quran (ii) Hadith

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/56175783/

6

Mansoorsaheb (Dead) vs Salima (D) By Lrs. on 19 December, 2024

(iii) Ijma and (iv) Qiyas. It is commonly accepted that all Islamic personal law has to derive from
these four sources. There is a generally acknowledged division among these four sources as well. The
Quran is pre-eminent and deserving of all primacy followed by the other three in that very order.
The question involved in these appeals also, of inheritance and/or gift must be decided in reference
thereto only. The topic (1971) 1 SCC 597 10-CIVIL APPEAL NO.4211 OF 2009 of inheritance has
been dealt with primarily under Chapter 4 of the Quran15, Al-Nisa. The relevant verses are as under:

“4:11 Allah commands you regarding your children: the share of the male will be
twice that of the female.1 If you leave only two (cid:134)or more(cid:135) females, their share is
two-thirds of the estate. But if there is only one female, her share will be one-half.
Each parent is entitled to one-sixth if you leave offspring.2 But if you are childless
and your parents are the only heirs, then your mother will receive one-third.3 But if
you leave siblings, then your mother will receive one-sixth4—after the fulfilment of
bequests and debts.5 (cid:134)Be fair to(cid:135) your parents and children, as you do not (cid:134)fully(cid:135)
know who is more beneficial to you.6 (cid:134)This is(cid:135) an obligation from Allah. Surely Allah
is All-Knowing, All- Wise.

4:12 You will inherit half of what your wives leave if they are childless. But if they
have children, then (cid:134)your share is(cid:135) one-fourth of the estate—after the fulfilment of
bequests and debts. And your wives will inherit one-fourth of what you leave if you
are childless. But if you have children, then your wives will receive one-eighth of your
estate—after the fulfilment of bequests and debts. And if a man or a woman leaves
neither parents nor children but only a brother or a sister (cid:134)from their mother’s side(cid:135),
they will each inherit one- sixth, but if they are more than one, they (cid:134)all(cid:135) will share
one-third of the estate1—after the fulfilment of bequests and debts without harm (cid:134)to
the heirs(cid:135).2 (cid:134)This is(cid:135) a commandment from Allah. And Allah is All-Knowing, Most
Forbearing.

4:176 They ask you (cid:134)for a ruling, O Prophet(cid:135). Say, “Allah gives you a ruling regarding
those who die without children or parents.” If a man dies childless and leaves behind
a sister, she will inherit one-half of his estate, whereas her brother will inherit all of
her estate if she dies childless. If this person leaves behind two sisters, they together
will inherit two-thirds of the estate. But if the deceased leaves male and female
siblings, a male’s share will be equal to that of two females. Allah makes (cid:134)this(cid:135) clear
to you so you do not go astray. And Allah has (cid:134)perfect(cid:135) knowledge of all things.1”

19. Reading of the above verses reveals clearly with the use of the words ‘leave’, ‘leaves’ or ‘man dies’
that division of property is only possible upon the death of a person, amongst his heirs. There is no
prescription as to how the partition of property may take place when a person is alive.

https://quran.com/4 11-CIVIL APPEAL NO.4211 OF 2009

20. One may reasonably conclude, having referred to the primary texts and commentaries on
Mohammedan Law, that partition while a person is alive between him and his heirs is

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/56175783/

7

Mansoorsaheb (Dead) vs Salima (D) By Lrs. on 19 December, 2024

impermissible. The manner in which partition is to take place after the death of the ancestor is set
out in great detail in the sources of Mohammedan Law however, the same is beyond the scope of the
present lis.

21. Sultan Saheb therefore during his lifetime could not have partitioned his property, giving two
parts thereof to his sons. The same is not in accordance with law. The possibility of Sultan Saheb’s
succeeding their father in interest of the said property, could only have arisen in 1978 when Sultan
Saheb passed away. When the partition of property would have taken place upon his death in 1978,
the appellants as also the respondents herein would have received shares as prescribed under
Mohammedan Law. As already observed supra, the only way permissible to Sultan Saheb to have
given two parts of his property to his two sons would have been through hiba, the requirements of
which have been culled out further ahead in this judgment.

22. Let us now turn our attention to the next question arising for adjudication i.e., the claim of the
appellants herein that their father Sultan Saheb had in fact gifted two parts of his property to them.

23. We now examine the law that deals with oral gifts and their validity under Mohammedan Law. A
hiba literally means “the donation of a thing from which the donee may derive benefit”. Technically,
it is “an unconditional transfer of property, 12-CIVIL APPEAL NO.4211 OF 2009 made immediately
and without any exchange or consideration, by one person to another and accepted by or on behalf
of the latter.”16

24. The position of oral gift is well settled by the Courts of law. In ‘Outlines of Mohammadan Law’17,
A.A. Faizee described ‘gift’ as:

“A man may lawfully make a gift of his property to another during his lifetime; or he
may give it away to someone after his death by will. The first is called a disposition
inter vivos; the second, a testamentary disposition. Muhammadan law permits both
kinds of transfers; but while a disposition inter vivos is unfettered as to quantum, a
testamentary disposition is limited to one-third of the net estate. Muhammadan law
allows a man to give away the whole of his property during his lifetime, but only
one-third of it can be bequeathed by will.” Ameer Ali defines ‘hiba’ in the following
terms:

“A hiba is a voluntary gift without consideration of property or the substance of thing
by one person to another so as to constitute the donee the proprietor of the subject
matter of the gift.” While referring to Mohammedan Law, by Syed Ameer Ali18, the
Privy Council in Mohd. Abdul Ghani v. Fakhr Jahan Begam19 observed:

“For a valid gift inter vivos under the Mahomedan law applicable in this case, three
conditions are necessary, which their Lordships consider have been correctly stated
thus: “(a) manifestation of the wish to give on the part of the donor; (b) the
acceptance of the donee, either impliedly or expressly; and (c) the taking of
possession of the subject-matter of the gift by the donee, either actually or

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/56175783/

8

Mansoorsaheb (Dead) vs Salima (D) By Lrs. on 19 December, 2024

constructively.” (Emphasis supplied) Hedaya, 482 (2009) 6 SCC 160 4th ed., vol. i.,
p. 41.

1922 SCC OnLine PC 18 13-CIVIL APPEAL NO.4211 OF 2009 This Court, in Jamila Begum v. Shami
Mohd.,20 reiterated the essentials of valid and complete gift as laid down in Abdul Rahim
(supra),21:

“23. Under the Mohammedan law, no doubt, making oral gift is permissible. …

13. The conditions to make a valid and complete gift under the Mohammadan law are
as under:

(a) The donor should be sane and major and must be the owner of the property which
he is gifting.

(b) The thing gifted should be in existence at the time of hiba.

(c) If the thing gifted is divisible, it should be separated and made distinct.

(d) The thing gifted should be such property to benefit from which is lawful under the
Shariat.

(e) The thing gifted should not be accompanied by things not gifted i.e. should be free
from things which have not been gifted.

(f) The thing gifted should come in the possession of the donee himself, or of his
representative, guardian or executor.” Mulla on Mohammedan Law22 provides for
the manner in which a gift is to be made which are:

“by a clear and unequivocal declaration of intention of making a gift made orally or in
writing by the donor or his agent, and i. accepted expressly or impliedly by the donee
or his agent except in the case of a gift, a. by a guardian to his ward; or b. of a debt to
the debtor; and ii. Such declaration and acceptance must be followed by the delivery
of possession (actually or, constructively) of the subject-matter of the gift by the
donor or his agent to;

                   a.     the donee or his agent; or
                   b.     To the guardian, if the donee is a minor or lunatic; or
                   c.     To the husband if the donee is a minor wife provided that the
                   marriage has been consummated; or
                   d.     To the trustees, if the gift is made through a trust.

iii. On the delivery of possession, a gift becomes complete, immediately.” (Emphasis
supplied) (2019) 2 SCC 727 (2009) 6 SCC 160 5th Edition 14-CIVIL APPEAL NO.4211
OF 2009

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/56175783/

9

Mansoorsaheb (Dead) vs Salima (D) By Lrs. on 19 December, 2024

25. The upshot of the above discussion is that there are three essential elements which are necessary
for a valid gift deed. They are:

a) The gift has to be necessarily declared by the person giving the gift, i.e., the donor;

b) Such a gift has to be accepted either impliedly or explicitly by or on behalf of the
donee; and

c) Apart from declaration and acceptance, there is also a requirement of delivery of
possession for a gift to be valid.

26. It is a fact that the requirements for the validity of a gift deed are sequential. One must follow the
other. The latter can only hold water if the first one is complied with. In other words, if (a) is not
complied with, (b) and (c) would not be of consequence; similarly, if (a) and (c) are met without (b),
it would still be of no consequence. In the end, all three conditions must be met.

27. Thus, registration of gift is not required under Mohammedan Law and, the unwritten and
unregistered gift executed by the donor in favour of donees is valid. This position has been
reiterated by this Court on various occasions. We may refer to a few of them.

In Rasheeda Khatoon v. Ashiq Ali23, it was observed:

“17. …a gift under the Muhammadan law can be an oral gift and need not be
registered; that a written instrument does not, under all circumstances require
registration; that to be a valid gift under the Muhammadan law three essential
features, namely, (i) declaration of the gift by the donor, (ii) acceptance of the gift by
the donee expressly or impliedly, and (iii) delivery of possession either (2014) 10 SCC
459 15-CIVIL APPEAL NO.4211 OF 2009 actually or constructively to the donee, are
to be satisfied; that solely because the writing is contemporaneous of the making of
the gift deed, it does not warrant registration under Section 17 of the Registration
Act.” (Emphasis supplied) This position was reiterated by this Court in Hafeeza Bibi
v. Sk. Farid24 -

“10. In Mahboob Sahab v. Syed Ismail [(1995) 3 SCC 693] this Court referred to Principles of
Mahomedan Law by Mulla, 19th Edn. and in para 5 noticed the legal position, in relation to a gift by
a Muslim incorporated therein, thus:

(SCC pp. 696-97) “5….It would, thus, be clear that though gift by a Mohammadan is
not required to be in writing and consequently need not be registered under the
Registration Act; for a gift to be complete, there should be a declaration of the gift by
the donor; acceptance of the gift, expressed or implied, by or on behalf of the donee,
and delivery of possession of the property, the subject-matter of the gift by the donor
to the donee. The donee should take delivery of the possession of that property either
actually or constructively. On proof of these essential conditions, the gift becomes

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/56175783/

10

Mansoorsaheb (Dead) vs Salima (D) By Lrs. on 19 December, 2024

complete and valid. In case of immovable property in the possession of the donor, he
should completely divest himself physically of the subject of the gift.” (Emphasis
supplied) This Court in D.N. Joshi v. D.C. Harris25 placed reliance on the following
observation of Hafeeza Bibi (supra):

“31…

27. In our opinion, merely because the gift is reduced to writing by a Mohammadan
instead of it having been made orally, such writing does not become a formal
document or instrument of gift.

When a gift could be made by a Mohammadan orally, its nature and character is not changed
because of it having been made by a written document. What is important for a valid gift under
Mohammadan Law is that three essential requisites must be fulfilled. The form is immaterial. If all
the three essential requisites are satisfied constituting a valid gift, the transaction of gift would not
be rendered invalid because it has been written on a plain piece (2011) 5 SCC 654 (2017) 12 SCC 624
16-CIVIL APPEAL NO.4211 OF 2009 of paper. The distinction that if a written deed of gift recites
the factum of prior gift then such deed is not required to be registered but when the writing is
contemporaneous with the making of the gift, it must be registered, is inappropriate and does not
seem to us to be in conformity with the rule of gifts in Mohammadan Law…” (Emphasis supplied)

28. Under Mohammedan Law, a gift is to be effected in the manner laid down under the law. If the
conditions prescribed by that law are fulfilled, the gift is valid, even though it is not effected by a
registered instrument. But if the conditions are not fulfilled, the gift is not valid even though it may
have been effected by a registered instrument. Therefore, a valid gift could be made by oral
statements as well so long as the three requirements as discussed above are met thereby. This is
because registration is not a requirement which obviates the need for a gift to be reduced in writing.

29. Another aspect which needs to be considered is the Mutation Entry. The appellants claim that
even though the entry uses the word ‘partition’, it should be read as ‘gift’. Both the Trial Court and
High Court have held that the same is not possible and if the entry reads ‘partition’ it has to
necessarily be read as so.

30. In order to appreciate this contention, two aspects are important. One, the importance of
nomenclature and two, the purpose of a mutation entry.

31. Before proceeding further, it should be apposite to reproduce the Mutation Entry:

“The details of the partition of the property done by Sultan Abdul Khader Shek in
favour of his two sons:

17-CIVIL APPEAL NO.4211 OF 2009 Sy. No. Extent Akara Occupants 249/A1/1A 4
acres 3 guntas 1-79 Shek Sultan Saheb Abdul Khader Shek 249/A1/1B 4 acres 15 ¼
1-80 Mansoor Sikandar S/o Sultansah 249/A1/1C 4-15 1-80 From this two pattas

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/56175783/

11

Mansoorsaheb (Dead) vs Salima (D) By Lrs. on 19 December, 2024

taken effect as per the wardi.” Indubitably, it is a settled law that only the substance,
not the form or nomenclature, is pertinent to determine the nature of the transaction.
‘Partition’ and ‘gift’ are two terms that have different requisites, require different
circumstances, and bear different consequences. Partition, as already noted above, is
the division of property among co-owners, whereas gift is a voluntary transfer of
existing property made voluntarily without consideration. The legal necessities of
both these modes of conveyance are quite different and, thus, cannot be liberally
interpreted.

32. What is required to be considered is the intention as shown by the words written in a document
as observed by this Court in Mathai Samuel (supra):

“19. The primary rule of construction of a document is the intention of the
executants, which must be found in the words used in the document. The question is
not what may be supposed to have been intended, but what has been said. We need to
carry on the exercise of construction or interpretation of the document only if the
document is ambiguous, or its meaning is uncertain. If the language used in the
document is unambiguous and the meaning is clear, evidently, that is what is meant
by the executants of the document. Contemporary events and circumstances
surrounding the execution of the document are not relevant in such situations. …

21. Coleridge, J. in Shore v. Wilson [(1842) 9 Cl & Fin 355 : 8 ER 450 (HL)] [Cl & Fin
at pp. 525-26] held as follows : (ER pp. 517-18) “The intention to be sought is the
intention which is expressed in the instrument, not the intention which the maker of
the instrument may have had in his mind. It is unquestionable that the 18-CIVIL
APPEAL NO.4211 OF 2009 object of all exposition of written instruments must be to
ascertain the expressed meaning or intention of the writer; the expressed meaning
being equivalent to the intention … it is not allowable … to adduce any evidence,
however strong, to prove an unexpressed intention varying from that which the
words used import. This may be open no doubt to the remark, that, although we
profess to be explaining the intention of the writer, we may be led in many cases to
decide contrary to what can scarcely be doubted to have been the intention, rejecting
evidence which may be more satisfactory in the particular instance to prove it. The
answer is, that interpreters have to deal with the written expression of the writer's
intention, and courts of law to carry into effect what he has written, not what it may
be surmised, on however probable grounds, that he intended only to have written.” …

25. ...In order to ascertain the intention of the testator, the point for consideration is
not what the testator meant but what that which he has written means. It is often said
that the expressed intentions are assumed to be actual intentions. This Court in A.
Sreenivasa Pai v. Saraswathi Ammal [(1985) 4 SCC 85] held that: (SCC p. 89, para 4)
“4. … In construing a document, whether in English or in any Indian language, the
fundamental rule to be adopted is to ascertain the intention adopted from the words
employed in it.” …” (Emphasis supplied)

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/56175783/

12

Mansoorsaheb (Dead) vs Salima (D) By Lrs. on 19 December, 2024

33. The words used in a document have to be understood in their natural meaning with reference to
the language employed. While interpreting any document, common or usual meaning is ascribed to
the words unless that leads to absurdity. Lord Wensleydale, in an oft-quoted passage, stated the rule
of literal construction:

“In construing will and indeed statutes and all written instruments, the grammatical
and ordinary sense of the word is adhered to, unless that would lead to some
absurdity, or some repugnance or inconsistency with the rest of the instrument in
which case the grammatical and ordinary sense of the words maybe modified, so as to
avoid that absurdity, and inconsistency, but no further.” (Emphasis supplied)
19-CIVIL APPEAL NO.4211 OF 2009

34. A perusal of the Mutation Entry No.8258 (Ex.P1) shows that Sultan Saheb got the ‘partition’
done in favour of his sons. The words “partition of the property done by Sultan Abdul Khader Shek”
clearly indicate his intention to divide the property into three parts without any indication of his
intent to gift the property to his sons. Had Sultan Saheb intended to gift the property, it ought to
have been recorded as a gift in the Mutation Entry.

35. Additionally, the purpose of mutation entry, as is well settled is only limited to revenue records.
They do not, in any way, translate to or confer any title in regard to the subject matter property.
Some decisions reflecting this position of law are as follows:

In Sawarni v. Inder Kaur26 -

“7. … Mutation of a property in the revenue record does not create or extinguish title
nor has it any presumptive value on title. It only enables the person in whose favour
mutation is ordered to pay the land revenue in question. ...” In Jitendra Singh v. State
of M.P. & Ors.27 – “7. Right from 1997, the law is very clear. In the case of Balwant
Singh v. Daulat Singh (D) By Lrs., reported in (1997) 7 SCC 137, this Court had an
occasion to consider the effect of mutation and it is observed and held that mutation
of property in revenue records neither creates nor extinguishes title to the property
nor has it any presumptive value on title. Such entries are relevant only for the
purpose of collecting land revenue. Similar view has been expressed in the series of
decisions thereafter.” (1996) 6 SCC 223 2021 SCC OnLine SC 802 20-CIVIL APPEAL
NO.4211 OF 2009 This position was recently reiterated by this Court in P. Kishore
Kumar v. Vittal K. Patkar28.

36. Proceeding to the factual circumstances of the case, the primary requirement of ‘declaration of
clear and unequivocal intention’ is not proved. The testimonies of the witnesses, DW2 (Rasoolsab)
and DW3 (Gulabsingh), examined by the original defendants/appellants, do not offer any relevant
details which can show that the donor, Sultan Saheb, possessed the requisite intent and with that
intent, he made a declaration in favour of his sons. Having considered the material on record, we do
not find any reason to take a view differing from the Trial Court and High Court in disbelieving the
testimonies of these witnesses. A perusal of the Trial Court judgment lends credence to this

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/56175783/

13

Mansoorsaheb (Dead) vs Salima (D) By Lrs. on 19 December, 2024

conclusion for the testimonies as extracted therein are nothing but vague, it seems that the
witnesses were trying desperately to make relevant testimony grasping at strands of fading memory.
That apart, there is no mention of these witnesses in the Mutation Entry. Even though the other two
requisites, i.e. acceptance and possession, may have been proved, the essential requirement of the
declaration made with clear and unequivocal intention remains unfulfilled, which is of significance.
When neither the words of the Mutation Entry nor the Entry itself support the claim of the
original-defendants/appellants in any manner, for neither can it be a gift nor does the Mutation
Entry mean that any title rests with them, the 2023 SCC OnLine SC 1483 21-CIVIL APPEAL
NO.4211 OF 2009 case of the original-defendants/appellants necessarily has to fail. The oral gift
made by Sultan Saheb in favour of his sons cannot be held to be a valid gift.

37. The questions of law are answered accordingly.

38. As a result of our discussions in the foregoing paragraphs, we do not find any fault with the
reasoning given by the Trial Court and the High Court qua the questions of gift and partition. The
correct position of law in so far as registration is concerned has been stated in the preceding
paragraphs as not applying to gifts and wholly inapplicable to partition as the concept itself is
foreign to this branch of personal law in the lifetime of the ancestor. The order passed by the Trial
Court in O.S. No.140/88 and confirmed by the High Court in RFA No.469 of 1998, clubbed with
RFA No.493 of 1998, is confirmed in the above terms. Both the appeals stand dismissed.

39. Before parting with this matter, we record our appreciation for the invaluable assistance
provided by Mr. Huzefa Ahmadi, Senior Counsel. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand
disposed of.

……………….………, J.

[ C.T. RAVIKUMAR ] ………………………..J. [ SANJAY KAROL ] New Delhi;

December 19, 2024.

22-CIVIL APPEAL NO.4211 OF 2009

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/56175783/

14

