P. Manikandan vs Central Bureau Of Investigation on 19 December, 2024

P. Manikandan vs Central Bureau Of Investigation on 19
December, 2024

Author: Sanjay Karol

Bench: Sanjay Karol, C.T. Ravikumar

2024 INSC 1007                                                                         REPORTABLE

                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. _______ OF 2024
                                       (Arising out of SLP(Crl.) No. 8700 of 2023)

             P. MANIKANDAN                                                          …APPELLANT(S)

                                                             Versus

             CENTRAL BUREAU OF
             INVESTIGATION AND ORS                                                  …RESPONDENT(S)

                                                     JUDGMENT

SANJAY KAROL J.

Leave Granted.

2. The present appeal arises from the judgment and order dated 4th July, 2023 passed by the High
Court of Judicature at Madras in CRL.O. P. No.5826 of 2023 and CRL.M.P.Nos.3640 and 3642 of
2023, whereby the High Court dismissed the petition for quashing filed by the appellant under
Section 482 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 19731 against the chargesheet/final report and
proceedings pending before the Special Court for the trial of cases under the Protection of Children
from Sexual Offences Act, 20122, Tiruvannamalai, Tamil Nadu in Special S.C.No.42 of 2021.

3. The crux of the present appeal is that on 19th June, 2013, a case was registered bearing Crime
No.139 of 2013 under Section 364A and 302 of the Indian Penal Code, 18603 against the accused
namely, P. Manikandan4, wherein it was alleged that the appellant kidnapped the 4-year-old child
from Gandhi International Matriculation School, Mangalam by using his motorcycle and after
murdering her, threw away the dead body in Well.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18072626/

1

4. The background facts in which the present appeal has arisen are:

P. Manikandan vs Central Bureau Of Investigation on 19 December, 2024

4.1 The father of the deceased, namely Paramasivam5, and the appellant were known
to each other. The appellant borrowed a sum of Rs. 5,00,000/-

from the complainant due to losses incurred in his brick making business and he failed to return the
money despite repeated demands from the complainant for repayment. The Complainant and his
wife, Usha, had a daughter6, who was 4 years old and studied at Gandhi International Matriculation
School, Mangalam7. The deceased child was regularly taken hereinafter referred to as “Cr.P.C.”
hereinafter referred to as the “POCSO Act”, hereinafter referred to as ‘IPC’ hereinafter referred to as
the “Appellant” hereinafter referred to as “Complainant” hereinafter referred to as the “Deceased
child” hereinafter referred to as the “School” to school by one Chandrasekar, the van driver and in
his absence, the appellant sometimes would take the deceased child to and from the school. On 13th
June 2013, at about 01.30PM the deceased child was found to be missing from school. Allegedly, the
father of the deceased informed the appellant about the same and requested his assistance in
confirming her whereabouts. It was alleged that the appellant arrived at the location after a delay of
two hours, pretending to be involved in the search for the deceased child, but being unable to locate
her, subsequently, a complaint was filed at the Mangalam Police Station.

4.2 About a week later, the villagers informed the complainant about a body floating in a well at
Aarpakkam and the same was later identified as that of his daughter. On 19th June 2013, the
Complainant filed a complaint, which was registered as Crime No.139 of 2013, initially recorded
under the head of ‘Child Missing’; the case was later reclassified to include charges of kidnapping for
ransom and murder. It was alleged that on 13th June 2013, the appellant kidnapped the deceased
child from School, using his Hero Honda Splendor Motorcycle Plus bearing registration no.
TN25-L-2391 and after murdering her, he disposed of her body in the well. 4.3 Thereafter, after
completion of the investigation, the Mangalam Police Station, filed chargesheet on 28th November
2013 before the Learned Judicial Magistrate Court–II, Thiruvannamalai, who took cognizance
thereof and assigned PRC No.51 of 2013, and committed the case to the Learned Fast Track Mahila
Court, Thiruvannamalai8, where SC No. 102 of 2015 was assigned.

4.4 In order to prove the guilt of the accused, the prosecution examined witnesses PWs 1 to 20 and
exhibited P-1 to P-16 and M.O. 1 to M.O. 8. Upon consideration of evidence, the Trial Court, vide
judgment dated 31st January 2018, on the basis of the last seen theory held that the appellant was
guilty for the offence punishable under Section 364A and 302 of the IPC. Sentence awarded to the
appellant was life imprisonment and fine of Rs. 5,000/- for the offence under Section 304A IPC and
death penalty for the offence under Section 302 IPC subject to the confirmation by the High Court of
Madras. As required by the statute, the judgment was referred to a Division Bench of the High Court
for confirmation of death sentence in Referred Trial No.2 of 2018. Being aggrieved by the conviction
and sentence imposed upon him, the appellant preferred Criminal Appeal No.102 of 2018 before the
High Court.

4.5 On 24th July 2018, the High Court, after considering the evidence on record, set aside the order
of the Trial Court and came to the conclusion that the prosecution had failed to establish the guilt of

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18072626/

2

P. Manikandan vs Central Bureau Of Investigation on 19 December, 2024

the appellant beyond all reasonable doubts; therefore, held that the appellant is entitled to the
hereinafter referred to as the “Trial Court” acquittal of all charges. The High Court further directed
the transfer of all relevant documents to the Central Bureau of Investigation9, Chennai, with the
direction to conduct a de-novo investigation and submit a final report within three months. The
High Court further directed that if the investigation reveals or confirms the involvement of the
appellant, the prosecution may proceed against the appellant in accordance with law.

5. Subsequently, CBI re-registered the case on 18th January 2019, bearing FIR No.R.C.1/(S) of 2019
and after completion of the investigation, CBI filed chargesheet dated 25th August 2020 bearing
Chargesheet No.2 of 2020 under Section 173 of Cr.P.C. against the appellant for the commission of
offence under Sections 364 and 302 of IPC in Special S.C No.42 of 2021 before Special Court for the
trial of cases under POCSO Act, Tiruvannamalai, Tamil Nadu, by confirming the role of the
appellant with regard to the commission of offence of kidnapping of the deceased child.

6. In the year 2023, appellant preferred Crl.O.P.No.5826 before the High Court of Judicature at
Madras under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C seeking quashing of the chargesheet/final report No.2 of
2020 and the pending proceeding of Special SC No.42 of 2021 on the ground that once the appellant
was tried by the Trial Court for an offence and the appellate court acquitted the appellant of all
hereinafter referred to as “CBI”.

charges, the Court cannot order such acquitted person to be tried again for the same offence on the
same set of facts, after re-investigation.

7. Resultantly, the High Court vide judgment and order dated 4th July, 2023 while dismissing the
CRL.O.P.No.5826 of 2023, directed the Trial Court to complete the trial and pass judgment, within a
period of 30 days from the date of this order, without being influenced by any of the observations
either made in the order under Section 482 Cr.P.C or in the order passed by the Division Bench in
the Criminal Appeal

8. The High Court vide the impugned order, after considering the contentions of the parties, gave
the following findings while dismissing the Criminal Petition:

(i) While considering the issue “whether the facts of the case attracts Section 300(i)
of Cr.P.C?”, the High Court concluded that the Division Bench rightly directed the
CBI to conduct a de novo investigation. The said order was not challenged by the
accused; he submitted himself to the trial.

Having realized that the trial is proceeding against him, the petitioner (appellant herein) has filed
the present petition on the baseless claim that Section 300 Cr.P.C. offers him protection, which, in
fact, it does not.

(ii) While relying on the decision of this Court in Satyajit Banerjee and Ors v. State of West of Bengal
and Ors.10, Ajay Kumar Ghoshal and Ors v. State of Bihar and Anr.11, following Zahira Habibulla H.
Sheikh v. (2015) 1 SCC 115 (2017) 12 SCC 699 State of Gujarat12(well known as the ‘Best Bakery’

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18072626/

3

P. Manikandan vs Central Bureau Of Investigation on 19 December, 2024

case), on the point that the Appellate court has power under Section 386(b)(i) of Cr.P.C. to order
retrial/de novo trial if, it is satisfied that the omission or irregularities has caused miscarriage of
justice.

(iii) Section 300 (i) of Cr.P.C., qualified the protection only in case the order of conviction or
acquittal remains in force. Bare perusal of the Sub Sections (2) to (5) of Section 300 of Cr.P.C.,
makes it clear that explanation of “autrefois acquit”, is not absolute but subject to conditions and
held that the acquittal in previous trial with a direction for re-investigation is not an acquittal in
force.

9. This order rejecting the appellant’s quashing petition is assailed before this Court. Although
questioned here is this order, challenge has also been laid to the direction to conduct de novo
investigation to CBI. Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant submitted that:

(i) Article 20 (2) of the Constitution of India explicitly stipulates that no person shall
be prosecuted or punished for the same offence more than once, as the appellant has
previously been acquitted on the same facts and for the same offence and, therefore,
subsequent prosecution in impermissible;

(2004) 4 SCC 158

(ii) This protection against double jeopardy is further reinforced by the statutory
provisions, including Section 300 of Cr.P.C., Section 40 of the Evidence Act, 1872,
Section 71 of IPC and Section 26 of the General Clauses Act, 1897.

(iii) Power under Section 386(b) of the Cr.P.C. does not include the power to direct
de novo investigation in case of an appeal against conviction.

(iv) It was further submitted that an acquittal may be characterized as ‘honorable’
when, after a thorough examination of the prosecution’s evidence, the court
determines that the prosecution has entirely failed to substantiate the charges
brought against the accused. In such circumstances, it may be inferred that the
accused has been acquitted in a manner that implies full exoneration from blame.

(v) In furtherance of the submissions, the learned counsel for appellant relied upon
various decisions of this court viz. T.P. Gopalkrishnan v. State of Kerala13, Subrata
Choudhury alias Santosh Choudhury and Ors. v.

State of Assam & Anr.14, Amandeep Singh Saran v. State of Chhattisgarh15, Deputy Inspector
General of Police V. S. Samuthiram16, Union Territory, Chandigarh Administration & Ors. v.
Pradeep Kumar & Anr., Ajay Kumar Ghoshal & Ors. v. State of Bihar & Anr.17. (2022)14 SCC 323
2024 SCC Online SC 3126 (2024) 6 SCC 541 (2013) 1 SCC 598 (2017) 12 SCC 699

10. The stand of the respondent/CBI as reflected from record is as under:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18072626/

4

P. Manikandan vs Central Bureau Of Investigation on 19 December, 2024

(i) It was stated that the acquittal or discharge of the appellant was not based on the
merits of the case. The acquittal order passed by the High Court does not have the
effect of the final acquittal, as the appellate proceedings did not result in a
determination by affirming the conviction or an acquittal on merits. The proceedings
constitute a continuation of the trial against the appellant. Accordingly, the principle
of double jeopardy under Article 20 (2) of the Constitution of India and Section 300
of Cr.P.C. does not apply.

(ii) The circumstances of this case do not meet the condition provided under Section
300 of Cr.P.C., in order to comply with the provision under Section 300 of Cr.P.C, the
previous trial must pertain to the same offence and the same charges, and the
resulting order of conviction or acquittal must be final and in force. The protection
against double jeopardy, known as “autrefois acquit,” provided under Section 300, is
not absolute and is subject to the conditions specified in Sub-sections (2) to (5) of
Section 300 CrPC.

(iii) Given the specific circumstances of the case, the accused can be retried for the same offence, as
the previous trial has been annulled. Consequently, there is no subsisting acquittal or conviction in
effect.

(iv) Further it was stated that the High Court has the power under Section 368 of Cr.P.C to order a
new trial on the same offence or amend the charges and the Appellate Court has the power under
Section 386 of Cr.P.C, in pursuance of the decisions laid down in Ajay Kumar Ghoshal & Ors. v.
State of Bihar & Anr.18, Ukha Kolhe v. State of Maharashtra19, Mohd. Hussain v. State (Govt. of
NCT of Delhi)20. Additionally, it was stated that the High Court has the power to order re-
investigation while relying on the judgment of this court in Devendra Nath Singh v. State of Bihar21.

(v) That the appellant did not avail the remedy of approaching the High Court or this Court upon
receiving summons from the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Chengalpattu, or during the initial stages of
the trial proceedings. It was further stated that the appellant approached the High Court only
subsequent to the examination of 34 prosecution witnesses and after the completion of the chief
examination of the concerned Investigating Officer, at that stage the appellant was fully aware that
sufficient evidence had been adduced to sustain a conviction against him.

11. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties. The issues which arise for the consideration
before this court are:

(2017) 12 SCC 699 (1964) 1 SCR 926 (2012) 9 SCC 408 (2023) 1 SCC 48

(i) Whether the High Court was justified in directing re-investigation and retrial of
the same offence on the same set of facts, after acquitting the accused by giving him
the benefit of doubt? In other words, when considering an appeal against conviction
under Section 386(b)(i) of Cr.P.C., is the High Court empowered to direct
re-investigation, if yes, then could such a direction be given while acquitting the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18072626/

5

P. Manikandan vs Central Bureau Of Investigation on 19 December, 2024

accused, in the very same order;

(ii) Whether, in the attending fact and circumstances, the de novo investigation
violated the principle of double jeopardy and the appellant’s right under Article 20(ii)
of the Constitution of India and Section 300 of the Cr.P.C.

12. In the present case, the High Court acquitted the appellant and directed to transfer the
documents and relevant material to conduct the de novo investigation before CBI on the same facts
for the same offences and to proceed against the appellant in accordance with law, by exercising the
power under Section 386 of Cr.P.C.

13. The power of the Appellate Court as described under Section 386 of Cr.P.C is extracted below:

“386. Power of the Appellate Court- After perusing such record and hearing the
appellant or his pleader, if he appears, and the Public Prosecutor, if he appears, and
in case of an appeal under section 377 or section 378, the accused, if he appears, the
Appellate Court may, if it considers that there is no sufficient ground for interfering,
dismiss the appeal, or may – a. in an appeal from an order of acquittal, reverse such
order and direct that further inquiry be made, or that the accused be re-tried or
committed for trial, as the case may be, or find him guilty and pass sentence on him
according to law;

b. in an appeal from a conviction

(i) reverse the finding and sentence and acquit or discharge the accused, or order him
to be re-tried by a Court of competent jurisdiction subordinate to such Appellate
Court or committed for trial, or

(ii) alter the finding, maintaining the sentence, or

(iii)with or without altering the finding, alter the nature or the extent, or the nature
and extent, of the sentence, but not so as to enhance the same;

c. in an appeal for enhancement of sentence

(i) reverse the finding and sentence and acquit or discharge the accused or order him
to be re-tried by a Court competent to try the offence, or

(ii) alter the finding maintaining the sentence, or

(iii)with or without altering the finding, alter the nature or the extent, or the nature
and extent, of the sentence, so as to enhance or reduce the same;

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18072626/

6

P. Manikandan vs Central Bureau Of Investigation on 19 December, 2024

d. in an appeal from any other order, alter or reverse such order; e. make any amendment or any
consequential or incidental order that may be just or proper;

Provided that the sentence shall not be enhanced unless the accused has had an opportunity of
showing cause against such enhancement;

Provided further that the Appellate Court shall not inflict greater punishment for the offence which
in its opinion the accused has committed, than might have been inflicted for that offence by the
Court passing the order or sentence under appeal.” (Emphasis supplied)

14. Section 386 (b) of Cr.P.C. enumerates power of the Appellate Court which inter alia includes the
power to order the appellant to be retried by the competent authority or committed for trial in case
of appeal from a conviction. This court in several decisions deals with the power of Appellate Court
to direct a re-trial.

15. The Constitution Bench, while dealing with such an issue, that when such power should be
exercised by the Appellate Court in Ukha Kolhe v. State of Maharashtra22, observed that:

“11. An order for retrial of a criminal case is made in exceptional cases, and not unless
the appellate court is satisfied that the Court trying the proceeding had no
jurisdiction to try it or that the trial was vitiated by serious illegalities or irregularities
or on account of misconception of the nature of the proceedings and on that account
in substance there had been no real trial or that the Prosecutor or an accused was, for
reasons over which he had no control, prevented from leading or tendering evidence
material to the charge, and in the interests of justice the appellate court deems it
appropriate, having regard to the circumstances of the case, that the accused should
be put on his trial again. An order of re-trial wipes out from the record the earlier
proceeding, and exposes the person accused to another trial which affords the
prosecutor an opportunity to rectify the infirmities disclosed in the earlier trial, and
will not ordinarily be countenanced when it is made merely to enable the prosecutor
to lead evidence which he could but has not cared to lead either on account of
insufficient appreciation of the nature of the case or for other reasons. ” (Emphasis
supplied)

16. In the “Best Bakery Case”, wherein the Trial Court directed the acquittal of the accused person in
a case of mass killings, the same was upheld by the High Court of Gujarat while dismissing the
criminal appeal, this Court, after considering the facts and circumstances of the case, directed the de
novo trial of the accused person by observing that:

“73. … We are satisfied that it is a fit and proper case, in the background of the nature
of additional evidence sought to be adduced and the perfunctory manner of trial
conducted on the basis of tainted investigation a retrial is a must and essentially
called for in order to save and preserve the justice-delivery system unsullied and
unscathed by vested interests. We should not be understood to have held that

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18072626/

7

P. Manikandan vs Central Bureau Of Investigation on 19 December, 2024

whenever additional evidence is accepted, retrial is a necessary corollary. The case on
hand is without parallel and comparison to any of the cases where even such
grievances were sought to be made. It AIR 1963 SC 1531 stands on its own as an
exemplary one, special of its kind, necessary to prevent its recurrence. It is normally
for the appellate court to decide whether the adjudication itself by taking into account
the additional evidence would be proper or it would be appropriate to direct a fresh
trial, though, on the facts of this case, the direction for retrial becomes inevitable.”

17. A Three Judge Bench of this Court in Mohd. Hussain v. State (Govt. of NCT of Delhi)23, held
that:

41. The appellate court hearing a criminal appeal from a judgment of conviction has
power to order the retrial of the accused under Section 386 of the Code. That is clear
from the bare language of Section 386(b).

Though such power exists, it should not be exercised in a routine manner. A de novo trial or retrial
of the accused should be ordered by the appellate court in exceptional and rare cases and only when
in the opinion of the appellate court such course becomes indispensable to avert failure of justice.
Surely this power cannot be used to allow the prosecution to improve upon its case or fill up the
lacuna. A retrial is not the second trial; it is continuation of the same trial and same prosecution.
The guiding factor for retrial must always be demand of justice. Obviously, the exercise of power of
retrial under Section 386(b) of the Code, will depend on the facts and circumstances of each case for
which no straitjacket formula can be formulated but the appeal court must closely keep in view that
while protecting the right of an accused to fair trial and due process, the people who seek protection
of law do not lose hope in legal system and the interests of the society are not altogether overlooked.

(Emphasis supplied)

18. While relying upon the decision of the Constitution Bench in Ukha Kolhe (supra), this court
discussed the scope of Section 386 of Cr.P.C in Ajay Kumar Ghoshal v. State of Bihar,24 to the effect
that:

“10. Section 386 CrPC deals with the powers of the appellate court. As per Section
386(b) CrPC in an appeal from a conviction, the appellate court may : (i) reverse the
finding and sentence and acquit or discharge the accused, or order him to be retried
by a court of competent jurisdiction subordinate to such appellate court or
committed for trial, or (ii) alter the finding, maintaining the sentence, or (iii) with or
without altering the finding, alter the nature or the extent, or the nature and extent,
of the sentence, but not so as to enhance the same.

(2012) 9 SCC 408 (2017) 12 SCC 699

11. Though the word “retrial” is used under Section 386(b)(i) CrPC, the powers
conferred by this clause is to be exercised only in exceptional cases, where the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18072626/

8

P. Manikandan vs Central Bureau Of Investigation on 19 December, 2024

appellate court is satisfied that the omission or irregularity has occasioned in failure
of justice. The circumstances that should exist for warranting a retrial must be such
that where the trial was undertaken by the court having no jurisdiction, or trial was
vitiated by serious illegality or irregularity on account of the misconception of nature
of proceedings. An order for retrial may be passed in cases where the original trial
has not been satisfactory for some particular reasons such as wrong admission or
wrong rejection of evidences or the court refused to hear certain witnesses who were
supposed to be heard.

12. “De novo” trial means a “new trial” ordered by an appellate court in exceptional
cases when the original trial failed to make a determination in a manner dictated by
law. The trial is conducted afresh by the court as if there had not been a trial in first
instance.

Undoubtedly, the appellate court has power to direct the lower court to hold “de novo” trial. But the
question is when such power should be exercised…” (Emphasis supplied)

19. This court in Nasib Singh v. State of Punjab,25 formulated the principles emerging from several
decisions on retrial given by this Court:

33. The principles that emerge from the decisions of this Court on retrial can be
formulated as under:

33.1. The appellate court may direct a retrial only in “exceptional” circumstances to
avert a miscarriage of justice. 33.2. Mere lapses in the investigation are not sufficient
to warrant a direction for retrial. Only if the lapses are so grave so as to prejudice the
rights of the parties, can a retrial be directed. 33.3. A determination of whether a
“shoddy” investigation/trial has prejudiced the party, must be based on the facts of
each case pursuant to a thorough reading of the evidence.

33.4. It is not sufficient if the accused/prosecution makes a facial argument that there
has been a miscarriage of justice warranting a retrial. It is incumbent on the appellate
court directing a retrial to provide a reasoned order on the nature of the miscarriage
of justice caused with reference to the evidence and investigatory process. 33.5. If a
matter is directed for retrial, the evidence and record of the previous trial is
completely wiped out.

33.6. The following are some instances, not intended to be exhaustive, of when the
Court could order a retrial on the ground of miscarriage of justice:

(2022) 2 SCC 89

(a) The trial court has proceeded with the trial in the absence of jurisdiction;

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18072626/

9

P. Manikandan vs Central Bureau Of Investigation on 19 December, 2024

(b) The trial has been vitiated by an illegality or irregularity based on a misconception
of the nature of the proceedings; and

(c) The prosecutor has been disabled or prevented from adducing evidence as regards
the nature of the charge, resulting in the trial being rendered a farce, sham or
charade.

(Emphasis supplied)

20. In the present case, the High Court, after acquitting the appellant, directed the CBI to
re-investigate after considering the relevant material and documents on record. A perusal of the
judgment reveals that the learned division bench discussed the material on record in depth in
arriving at the conclusion that “this is a case where there is no evidence at all.” Considering that this
was an appeal from a sentence of capital punishment, it was observed:

“15. It is not known on what basis, particularly there is an acute dearth of evidence,
the trial court has gone to the extent of awarding death sentence…” It would be
worthwhile to refer to the two succeeding paragraphs as well.

“16. The learned Additional Public Prosecutor would point out the observation made
by the trial court, while giving conviction, stating that the sexual abuses against
children are increasing; that the child marriage is also on the increase; that there is
no protection for the children; that the child who innocently followed the accused,
while not knowing fatefully unaware of, had been done to death; that the act of the
accused is beastly, the accused is liable to be punished by hanging him to death, is
totally illegal, unjust and unwarranted.

16.1 Whether these observations alone, without there being basic evidence connecting
the crime and the accused, are sufficient to award a capital punishment?. Only if the
evidence establishes the crime as against the accused, while considering the quantum
of punishment, they may be relevant considerations. In any event, these factors
cannot be consideration to record a finding of guilt as against the accused.”

21. This Court has observed in Kailash Gour v. State of Assam26 that any benefit accruing from
faulty investigation ought to be given to the accused. The necessary corollary thereof being that
simply because the investigation was less than satisfactory, the accused should not be subjected to
the same once more.

43. ... That an accused is presumed to be innocent till he is proved guilty beyond a reasonable doubt
is a principle that cannot be sacrificed on the altar of inefficiency, inadequacy or inept handling of
the investigation by the police. The benefit arising from any such faulty investigation ought to go to
the accused and not to the prosecution. So also, the quality and creditability of the evidence required
to bring home the guilt of the accused cannot be different in cases where the investigation is
satisfactory vis-à-vis cases in which it is not. The rules of evidence and the standards by which the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18072626/

10

P. Manikandan vs Central Bureau Of Investigation on 19 December, 2024

same has to be evaluated also cannot be different in cases depending upon whether the case has any
communal overtones or in an ordinary crime for passion, gain or avarice.

(Emphasis supplied)

22. Having observed as extracted supra, the High Court held that the appellant deserved acquittal.
Keeping in view the aforesaid authorities, the question then is, could the High Court have ordered
the crime to be re-investigated?

23. Firstly, what must be acknowledged is that there exists a clear difference between retrial and
reinvestigation. Retrial implies that the judicial process that starts after the investigation of the
crime is complete shall be redone from the start, whereas the latter implies that the police and other
investigating authorities are once again required to collect and examine evidence in order to present
charges before a Court, so that the trial can commence on such freshly collected evidence.

(2012) 2 SCC 34

24. Section 386(b) of Cr.P.C, extracted supra, as also the judgments referred to in the earlier portion
of this judgment, unanimously speak of retrial and not reinvestigation. Section 173(8) of the Cr.P.C
provides for further investigation with the permission of the magistrate, but not reinvestigation.
Such a concept, as it appears, is only invoked in extraneous circumstances. The mere observation
that the investigating authorities may have taken a lackadaisical ethical approach does not warrant
the accused being put through the wringer once more for the same offence.

25. Learned counsel for the respondent while supporting the contention that the High Court had the
requisite power to order reinvestigation cited the judgment of this Court in Devendra Nath Singh
(supra), wherein, relying on Vinay Tyagi v. Irshad Ali27 it has been observed that fresh, de novo and
reinvestigation are synonymous expressions and the law applicable thereon would be the same. This
observation, we find, was made in the context of Section 482 Cr.PC or Article 226 of the
Constitution of India. In the present case, however, the direction for reinvestigation was given under
Section 386 Cr.PC. Since the applicable power is different in the present case, Devendra Nath
(supra) is distinguished on facts.

26. In that view of the matter, the direction of the High Court, transferring the investigation to CBI
and directing them to reinvestigate the offence allegedly committed, was without the authority of
law and, therefore, has to be set aside.

(2013) 5 SCC 762 We may notice certain authorities of this Court where observations have been
made qua transfer of investigation to C.B.I., as follows:-

(a) State of W.B. v. Committee for Protection of Democratic Rights28:

“70. Before parting with the case, we deem it necessary to emphasise that despite
wide powers conferred by Articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution, while passing any

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18072626/

11

P. Manikandan vs Central Bureau Of Investigation on 19 December, 2024

order, the Courts must bear in mind certain self-imposed limitations on the exercise
of these constitutional powers. The very plenitude of the power under the said
articles requires great caution in its exercise. Insofar as the question of issuing a
direction to CBI to conduct investigation in a case is concerned, although no
inflexible guidelines can be laid down to decide whether or not such power should be
exercised but time and again it has been reiterated that such an order is not to be
passed as a matter of routine or merely because a party has levelled some allegations
against the local police. This extraordinary power must be exercised sparingly,
cautiously and in exceptional situations where it becomes necessary to provide
credibility and instil confidence in investigations or where the incident may have
national and international ramifications or where such an order may be necessary for
doing complete justice and enforcing the fundamental rights. Otherwise CBI would
be flooded with a large number of cases and with limited resources, may find it
difficult to properly investigate even serious cases and in the process lose its
credibility and purpose with unsatisfactory investigations.” (Emphasis Supplied)

(b) Mandakini Diwan and Anr. v. High Court of Chhattisgarh and Ors29:

“14. It is true that power to direct CBI to conduct investigation is to be exercised
sparingly and such orders should not be passed in routine manner. In the present
case, the aggrieved party has raised allegations of bias and undue influence on the
police machinery of the State of Chhattisgarh. Coupled with the fact that the
thorough, fair and independent investigation needs to be carried out to find out the
truth about the whole incident and in particular about the ante mortem injuries. We
are of the view that such a direction needs to be issued in the present case.” (2010) 3
SCC 571 2024 SCC Online SC 2448

27. A perusal of the judgments above shows that the transfer to CBI, as already observed must take
place in special circumstances, or else the agency, being with limited resources shall be
overburdened and rendered ineffective. In directing as such, the High Court has not referred to any
such special circumstance arising in the present case. On such further count, the transfer of the case
to CBI is rendered questionable and therefore set aside.

28. Let us now move to the next issue. Apart from the fact that reinvestigation of the same offence or
the same set of facts is impermissible, the appellant has also canvassed the point that the High
Court’s order goes against the well- established principle of criminal jurisprudence that a person
cannot be punished for the same offence twice or the principle of double jeopardy. Before
proceeding to the merits of such a claim in the present case, it would be aposite to examine the
judicial pronouncements on this count.

29. The appellant submits that the principle of double jeopardy is not only recognized by the
Constitution but also reiterated in several statutory enactments. They are: – The Constitution
recognizes this principle in Article 20 which reads as under:-

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18072626/

12

P. Manikandan vs Central Bureau Of Investigation on 19 December, 2024

“20. Protection in respect of conviction for offences.—(1) No person shall be
convicted of any offence except for violation of a law in force at the time of the
commission of the act charged as an offence, nor be subjected to a penalty greater
than that which might have been inflicted under the law in force at the time of the
commission of the offence.

(2) No person shall be prosecuted and punished for the same offence more than once.

(3) No person accused of any offence shall be compelled to be a witness against
himself.” Section 300 of Cr.P.C.:

“300. Person once convicted or acquitted not to be tried for same offence.—(1) A
person who has once been tried by a Court of competent jurisdiction for an offence
and convicted or acquitted of such offence shall, while such conviction or acquittal
remains in force, not be liable to be tried again for the same offence, nor on the same
facts for any other offence for which a different charge from the one made against
him might have been made under sub-section (1) of Section 221, or for which he
might have been convicted under sub-section (2) thereof.

(2) A person acquitted or convicted of any offence may be afterwards tried, with the
consent of the State Government, for any distinct offence for which a separate charge
might have been made against him at the former trial under sub-section (1) of Section
220. (3) A person convicted of any offence constituted by any act causing
consequences which, together with such act, constituted a different offence from that
of which he was convicted, may be afterwards tried for such last-mentioned offence,
if the consequences had not happened, or were not known to the Court to have
happened, at the time when he was convicted.

(4) A person acquitted or convicted of any offence constituted by any acts may,
notwithstanding such acquittal or conviction, be subsequently charged with, and
tried for, any other offence constituted by the same acts which he may have
committed if the Court by which he was first tried was not competent to try the
offence with which he is subsequently charged.

(5) A person discharged under Section 258 shall not be tried again for the same
offence except with the consent of the Court by which he was discharged or of any
other Court to which the first-mentioned Court is subordinate.

(6) Nothing in this section shall affect the provisions of Section 26 of the General
Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897) or of Section 188 of this Code.

Explanation. —The dismissal of a complaint, or the discharge of the accused, is not an acquittal for
the purposes of this section.” Section 40 of the Evidence Act, 1872:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18072626/

13

P. Manikandan vs Central Bureau Of Investigation on 19 December, 2024

“40. Previous judgments relevant to bar a second suit or trial.—The existence of any
judgment, order or decree which by law prevents any Court from taking cognizance of
a suit or holding a trial, is a relevant fact when the question is whether such Court
ought to take cognizance of such suit or to hold such trial.” Section 71 of IPC:

“71. Limit of punishment of offence made up of several offences.—Where anything
which is an offence is made up of parts, any of which parts is itself an offence, the
offender shall not be punished with the punishment of more than one of such of his
offences, unless it be so expressly provided.

[Where anything is an offence falling within two or more separate definitions of any
law in force for the time being by which offences are defined or punished, or where
several acts, of which one or more than one would by itself or themselves constitute
an offence, constitute, when combined, a different offence, the offender shall not be
punished with a more severe punishment than the Court which tries him could award
for any one of such offences.]” Section 26 of the General Clauses Act, 1897:

“26. Provision as to offences punishable under two or more enactments.—Where an
act or omission constitutes an offence under two or more enactments, then the
offender shall be liable to be prosecuted and punished under either or any of those
enactments, but shall not be liable to be punished twice for the same offence.”

30. Now, turning to the judicial pronouncements, Article 20 of the Constitution of India:-

(a) Maqbool Hussain v. State of Bombay30:

“12. The Fifth Amendment of the American Constitution enunciated this principle in
the manner following:

“… nor shall any person be subject for the same offence to be twice put in jeopardy of
life or limb; nor shall be compelled, in any criminal case, to be witness against
himself….” * * *

14. These were the materials which formed the background of the guarantee of
fundamental right given in Article 20(2). It incorporated within its scope the plea of
“autrefois convict” as known to the British jurisprudence or the plea of double
jeopardy as known to the American (1953) 1 SCC 736 Constitution but circumscribed
it by providing that there should be not only a prosecution but also a punishment in
the first instance in order to operate as a bar to a second prosecution and punishment
for the same offence.

15. The words “before a court of law or judicial tribunal” are not to be found in Article
20(2). But if regard be had to the whole background indicated above it is clear that in
order that the protection of Article 20(2) be invoked by a citizen there must have

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18072626/

14

P. Manikandan vs Central Bureau Of Investigation on 19 December, 2024

been a prosecution and punishment in respect of the same offence before a court of
law or a tribunal, required by law to decide the matters in controversy judicially on
evidence on oath which it must be authorised by law to administer and not before a
tribunal which entertains a departmental or an administrative enquiry even though
set up by a statute but not required to proceed on legal evidence given on oath. The
very wording of Article 20 and the words used therein:“convicted”, “commission of
the act charged as an offence”, “be subjected to a penalty”, “commission of the
offence”, “prosecuted and punished”, “accused of any offence”, would indicate that
the proceedings therein contemplated are of the nature of criminal proceedings
before a court of law or a judicial tribunal and the prosecution in this context would
mean an initiation or starting of proceedings of a criminal nature before a court of
law or a judicial tribunal in accordance with the procedure prescribed in the statute
which creates the offence and regulates the procedure.”

(b) S.A. Venkataraman v. Union of India31:

“6. The scope and meaning of the guarantee implied in Article 20(2) of the
Constitution has been indicated with sufficient fullness in the pronouncement of this
Court in Maqbool Hussain v. State of Bombay [Maqbool Hussain v. State of Bombay,
(1953) 1 SCC 736 :

1953 SCR 730] . The roots of the principle, which this clause enacts, are to be found
in the well-established rule of English Law which finds expression in the maxim
“nemo debet bis vexari” — a man must not be put twice in peril for the same offence.
If a man is indicted again for the same offence in an English court, he can plead, as a
complete defence, his former acquittal or conviction, or as it is technically expressed,
take the plea of “autrefois acquit” or “autrefois convict”. The corresponding provision
in the Federal Constitution of the USA is contained in the Fifth Amendment, which
provides inter alia:

“… nor shall any person be subjected for the same offence to be twice put in jeopardy
of life and limb.…” This principle has been recognised and adopted by the Indian
Legislature and is embodied in the provisions of Section 26 of the General Clauses
Act and Section 403 of the Criminal Procedure Code.

7. Although these were the materials which formed the background of the guarantee
of the fundamental right given in Article 20(2) of the Constitution, the ambit and
contents of the guarantee, as this Court (1954) 1 SCC 586 pointed out in the case
referred to above, are much narrower than those of the common law rule in England
or the doctrine of “double jeopardy” in the American Constitution. Article 20(2) of
our Constitution, it is to be noted, does not contain the principle of “autrefois acquit”
at all. It seems that our Constitution-makers did not think it necessary to raise one
part of the common law rule to the level of a fundamental right and thus make it
immune from legislative interference. This has been left to be regulated by the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18072626/

15

P. Manikandan vs Central Bureau Of Investigation on 19 December, 2024

general law of the land. In order to enable a citizen to invoke the protection of clause
(2) of Article 20 of the Constitution, there must have been both prosecution and
punishment in respect of the same offence. The words “prosecuted and punished” are
to be taken not distributively so as to mean prosecuted or punished. Both the factors
must co-exist in order that the operation of the clause may be attracted.

The position is also different under the American Constitution. There the prohibition is not against a
second punishment but against the peril in which a person may be placed by reason of a valid
indictment being presented against him, before a competent court, followed by proper arraignment
and plea and a lawful impanelling of the jury. It is not necessary to have a verdict at all [ Willis on
Constitutional Law, p.

528.].” Both the above cited judgments were recently followed in T.P. Gopalakrishnan v. State of
Kerala32.

(c) State v. Nalini33:

“236. The well-known maxim “nemo debet bis vexari pro eadem causa” (no person
should be twice vexed for the same offence) embodies the well-established common
law rule that no one should be put to peril twice for the same offence. The principle
which is sought to be incorporated into Section 300 of the Criminal Procedure Code
is that no man should be vexed with more than one trial for offences arising out of
identical acts committed by him. When an offence has already been the subject of
judicial adjudication, whether it ended in acquittal or conviction, it is negation of
criminal justice to allow repetition of the adjudication in a separate trial on the same
set of facts.

237. Though Article 20(2) of the Constitution of India embodies a protection against
a second trial after a conviction of the same offence, the ambit of the clause is
narrower than the protection afforded by Section 300 of the Criminal Procedure
Code. It was held by this Court in Manipur Admn.v. Thokchom Bira Singh [AIR 1965
SC 87 : (1965) 1 Cri LJ 120] that “if there is no punishment for the offence as a result
of the prosecution, Article 20(2) has no application”. While the clause embodies the
principle of autrefois convict Section 300 of the Criminal (2022) 14 SCC 323 (1999) 5
SCC 253 Procedure Code combines both autrefois convict and autrefois acquit.

…”

(d) Monica Bedi v. State of A.P.34:

“22. Article 20(2) embodies a protection against a second trial and conviction for the
same offence. The fundamental right guaranteed is the manifestation of a long
struggle by the mankind for human rights. A similar guarantee is to be found in
almost all civilised societies governed by rule of law. The well-known maxim nemo

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18072626/

16

P. Manikandan vs Central Bureau Of Investigation on 19 December, 2024

debet bis vexari pro una et eadem causa embodies the well-established common law
rule that no one should be put on peril twice for the same offence. Blackstone
referred to this universal maxim of the common law of England that no man is to be
brought into jeopardy of his life more than once for the same offence.

23. The fundamental right guaranteed under Article 20(2) has its roots in common
law maxim nemo debet bis vexari — a man shall not be brought into danger for one
and the same offence more than once. If a person is charged again for the same
offence, he can plead, as a complete defence, his former conviction, or as it is
technically expressed, take the plea of autrefois convict. This in essence is the
common law principle. The corresponding provision in the American Constitution is
enshrined in that part of the Fifth Amendment which declares that no person shall be
subject for the same offence to be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb. The principle
has been recognised in the existing law in India and is enacted in Section 26 of the
General Clauses Act, 1897 and Section 300 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973.
This was the inspiration and background for incorporating sub-

clause (2) into Article 20 of the Constitution. But the ambit and content of the guaranteed
fundamental right are much narrower than those of the common law in England or the doctrine of
“double jeopardy” in the American Constitution.” See also Sangeetaben Mahendrabhai Patel v. State
of Gujarat.35

31. In our considered view, the position of law that the principle applies is unquestionable. The three
conditions laid down in T.P. Gopalakrishnan (supra) are: Firstly, there must have been previous
proceedings before a court of law or a judicial tribunal of competent jurisdiction in which the person
must have been (2011) 1 SCC 284 (2012) 7 SCC 621 prosecuted. The said prosecution must be valid
and not null and void or abortive. Secondly, the conviction or acquittal in the previous proceeding
must be in force at the time of the second proceeding in relation to the same offence and same set of
facts, for which he was prosecuted and punished in the first proceeding. Thirdly, the subsequent
proceeding must be a fresh proceeding, where he is, for the second time, sought to be prosecuted
and punished for the same offence and same set of facts.

32. In the present facts, a previous proceeding did take place wherein the Trial Court convicted the
appellant and sentenced him to death. There is no question as to the Court's competence or
jurisdiction. The first condition is, therefore, met. The acquittal awarded by the High Court has to
remain in force for the cardinal principle of criminal jurisprudence of innocent until proven guilty
applies and cannot be displaced in except in circumstances otherwise provided by law. The second
principle is also met. Regarding the third condition, had the order been for retrial, the court could
have held that the condition remained unmet; however, since the direction was for reinvestigation
and that too by a different investigation agency, it necessarily has to begin from zero. Hence, the
second investigation, chargesheet and examination of witnesses would classify as meeting the third
condition.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18072626/

17

P. Manikandan vs Central Bureau Of Investigation on 19 December, 2024

33. In view of the discussion as aforesaid, this Court is of the view that the right enshrined in Article
20(2) of the appellant stands violated.

34. Since this Court has come to the conclusion as above, there survives no need to examine the
applicability of Section 300 of Cr.P.C and other provisions of law where the principle of double
jeopardy stands enshrined.

35. Vision of the High Court, in our considered view was bad in law, and is therefore quashed and
set aside. All proceedings subsequent to such direction, necessarily have to be held as such and
therefore quashed and set aside as well. The appellant stands acquitted of all charges.

36. The question of law raised in this appeal, is answered in the above terms. The appeal is allowed
as aforesaid. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.

…………………………J. (C.T. RAVIKUMAR) …………………………J. (SANJAY KAROL) New Delhi;

19th December, 2024.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18072626/

18

