Parswanath Saha vs Bandhana Modak (Das) on 20 December, 2024

Parswanath Saha vs Bandhana Modak (Das) on 20 December,
2024

2024 INSC 1022

                                                                                      REPORTABLE
                                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                             CIVIL APPELLATE JURSIDICTION

                                             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 14804 OF 2024
                                         (arising out of SLP (C) No. 18743 of 2022)

                            PARSWANATH SAHA                                        …APPELLANT

                                                          Versus

                            BANDHANA MODAK (DAS) AND ANR.                      …RESPONDENT(S)

                                                       JUDGMENT

J.B. PARDIWALA, J.

1. Leave granted.

2. This appeal arises from the judgment and order passed by the High Court of Tripura in Regular
First Appeal No. 28 of 2019 dated 29.07.2022 by which the High Court allowed the appeal filed by
the CHANDRESH Date: 2024.12.20 16:54:00 IST respondents herein (Original Defendants) and
thereby quashed and Reason:

set aside the judgment and decree passed by the Civil Judge West Tripura, Agartala
granting Specific Performance of Agreement of Sale in Title Suit No.135 of 2016
instituted by the appellant herein (Original Plaintiff).

3. Facts giving rise to this appeal may be summarised as under:

(a) The appellant herein (Original Plaintiff) instituted Case No. T.S. 135 of 2016 in the
Court of Civil Judge Senior Div. (Court No. 1) West Tripura, Agartala and prayed for
the following reliefs:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181848494/

1

Parswanath Saha vs Bandhana Modak (Das) on 20 December, 2024

(i) A decree for declaration of the entitlement of the Plaintiff to get the execution,
registration and possession of the suit land from the Defendants as part performance
of the contract following the registered deed of Agreement for Sale dated 27.05.2016.

(ii) A decree for mandatory injunction directing the Defendants to execute and
register the sale deed in respect of the suit land in favour of the plaintiff and to
handover the possession of the suit land to the plaintiff as part performance of the
contract in pursuance of the deed of Agreement for Sale within a specified period
failing which to execute and register the sale deed in respect of the suit land in favour
of plaintiff and to hand over possession of the suit land to the plaintiff through the
Ld. Court by enforcing the decree as may be passed.

(iii) A decree for permanent injunction restraining the defendants and their agents
from making any kind of transfer of the suit land to others or to give any mortgage,
lease, etc of the suit land till disposal of the present suit.

(b) It appears from the materials on record that the husband of the respondent no. 1
herein and father of the respondent no. 2 herein namely Late Prabha Ranjan Das was
the lawful owner of the suit property.

(c) The appellant herein entered into a registered Agreement of Sale dated
27.05.2016 with respect to the suit property. The total sale consideration fixed was of
Rs. 17,50,000.00 (Rupees Seventeen Lakh Fifty Thousand only). An amount of Rs.
4,00,000.00 (Rupees Four Lakh only) was paid to Late Prabha Ranjan Das by the
appellant herein towards earnest money.

(d) Prabha Ranjan Das passed away on 05.07.2016 leaving behind the respondents
(Original Defendants) as his lawful heirs.

(e) The appellant herein called upon the respondents herein to execute the Sale Deed
in accordance with the terms of the Agreement of Sale dated 27.05.2016 duly
executed by Prabha Ranjan Das.

(f) The respondents herein declined to execute the Sale Deed. In such circumstances,
the appellant herein was left with no other option but to institute the suit, seeking
specific performance of the contract.

(g) In the suit, the Trial Court framed the following issues:

(i) Is the suit maintainable in its present form and nature?

(ii) Has the plaintiff any cause of action to institute the instant suit?

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181848494/

2

Parswanath Saha vs Bandhana Modak (Das) on 20 December, 2024

(iii) Has the plaintiff entered into a registered agreement for sale dated 27.05.2016
with Prabha Ranjan Das (predecessor of the defendants) to purchase the suit land?

(iv) Are the averments available in the plaint in respect of readiness and willingness
to perform the part of the contract in its true construction sufficient to enforce
specific performance as prayed for?

(v) Is the plaintiff entitled to get a registered sale deed in terms of agreement for sale?

(vi) Is the plaintiff entitled to get a decree as prayed for?

(vii) What other relief / reliefs the plaintiff is entitled to?

(h) The suit ultimately came to be allowed in favour of the appellant herein vide
judgment and decree dated 20.11.2018.

The operative part of the order passed by the Trial Court reads thus:

“In the result, the suit is decreed with cost in favour of the plaintiff with following
directions:

(a) the defendant No. 1 Smt. Bandana Modak (Das) shall execute a Registered Deed
of Sale on behalf of herself and also being the guardian on behalf of her minor son i.e.
defendant No. 2 Master Diptanu Das in favour of the plaintiff Shri Parswanath Saha
for the suit land measuring 1 ganda 1 kara of land alongwith building thereon
measuring 529 sq.ft appertaining to Khatian No.347 having R.S. Plot No.151 within a
period of forty five days from the date of drawing up of decree failing which the
plaintiff will be entitled to get the Sale Deed be executed through this Court as per
law subject to payment of rest consideration amount of Rs.13,50,000/- (thirteen lac
fifty thousand) only by the plaintiff to the defendants;

(b) the defendants shall hand over the possession of the suit land to the plaintiff
immediately after execution of the above mentioned Sale Deed along with all the
documents of title relating to the suit property which are in the defendants'
possession or power.

Prepare decree accordingly.

Sheristadar of my Court is hereby directed to prepare the decree in the light of my above judgment
and to place it before me for my signatures within 15 (fifteen) days from the date of passing of this
judgment.

Make necessary entry in the Trial Register.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181848494/

3

Thus this case is disposed of without contest.”

Parswanath Saha vs Bandhana Modak (Das) on 20 December, 2024

(i) The respondents herein (Original Defendants) went in appeal before the High Court. The High
Court allowed the appeal essentially on the ground that Late Prabha Ranjan Das was unable to
foresee the hardship that would be caused to him and the family at the time when he executed the
Agreement of Sale with respect to the suit property. The High Court accepted that Late Prabha
Ranjan Das executed the registered Agreement of Sale with respect to the suit property and had also
accepted Rs. 4,00,000.00 (Rupees Four Lakh only) by way of earnest money. However, as stated
above, the High Court took the view that the defendants have been able to establish that except the
suit land they do not have any other property and if they had to part with the suit property that
would cause lot of hardship to them.

(j) The High Court while allowing the First Appeal filed by the defendants observed as under:

“17. Apart from the aforesaid facts, we find that the submission of learned senior
counsel appearing on behalf of the plaintiff that the defendants have not pleaded the
fact of hardship in their written statement is not correct. The defendants have
specifically stated in their written statement that except the suit land they have no
other piece of land and they require the suit land for their own residential purpose
and they cannot expect to dispose of their only piece of land and building standing
thereon which would render them homeless, shelterless and roofless. This pleading is
also supported by their evidence. Even from the evidence of the witnesses of the
plaintiff, it is established that the defendant no. 1 used to reside in the house of her
father at Beltali. The plaintiff deposing as PW-1 specifically stated that he along with
his staff met with the defendant No.1 personally in the house of her father at Beltali,
Agartala on 21.08.2016 and told her as to whether she could obtain the said Survivor
Certificate and the Guardianship Certificate.

18. From such evidence of the plaintiff, there cannot be any doubt that the defendants
had no shelter other than the father of the defendant no.1 and according to us, this
admitted fact is enough to prove the hardship of the defendants that the defendant
no.1, who along with her minor son would be rendered homeless and shelterless, if
the suit for specific performance of the agreement of sale (Exbt.1) is decreed in favour
of the plaintiff.”

19. Applying the well settled principle that it is not always necessary to grant specific
performance simply for the reason that it is legal to do so, we are of the opinion, that
the case in hand is a fit case to exercise our discretion rejecting the plaintiffs claim to
ask the defendants to execute the deed of sale in terms of Exbt.1 as decreed by
learned court below.

20. As a sequel, we hold that the plaintiff is not entitled to get a decree for specific
performance of the agreement of sale (Exbt.-1) and the defendants are not under any
obligation to execute the sale deed in favour of the plaintiff in the light of the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181848494/

4

Parswanath Saha vs Bandhana Modak (Das) on 20 December, 2024

agreement of sale (Exbt.-1). However, the plaintiff is definitely entitled to get refund
of the earnest money, which he paid to late Prabha Ranjan Das, the predecessor of
the defendants along with interest at the rate of 8% per annum. The defendants shall
refund the said earnest money of Rs.4,00,000 (Rupees four lakhs) along with simple
interest at the rate of 8% per annum to the plaintiff from the date of the institution of
the suit within a period of 3(three) months from today.”

4. The appellant herein being dissatisfied with the impugned judgment and order
passed by the High Court is here before this Court with the present appeal.

RELEVANT PROVISIONS OF LAW

5. Section 20 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 as it then stood i.e., prior to the 2018 amendment reads
as under:

“20. Discretion as to decreeing specific performance.-(1) The jurisdiction to decree
specific performance is discretionary, and the Court is not bound to grant such relief
merely because it is lawful to do so; but the discretion of the Court is not arbitrary but
sound and reasonable, guided by judicial principles and capable of correction by a
Court of Appeal.

(2) The following are cases in which the Court may properly exercise discretion not to
decree specific performance.-

(a) where the terms of the contract or the conduct of the parties at the time of
entering into the contract or the other circumstances under which the contract was
entered into are such that the contract, though not voidable, gives the plaintiff an
unfair advantage over the defendant; or

(b) where the performance of the contract would involve some hardship on the
defendant which he did not foresee, whereas its non-performance would involve no
such hardship on the plaintiff; or

(c) where the defendant entered into the contract under circumstances which though
not rendering the contract voidable, makes it inequitable to enforce specific
performance.

Explanation 1. — Mere inadequacy of consideration, or the mere fact that the contract is onerous to
the defendant or improvident in its nature, shall not be deemed to constitute an unfair advantage
within the meaning of Clause (a) or hardship within the meaning of clause (b).

Explanation 2.— The question whether the performance of a contract would involve hardship on the
defendant within the meaning of clause (b) shall, except in cases where the hardship has resulted
from any act of the plaintiff subsequent to the contract, be determined with reference to the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181848494/

5

circumstances existing at the time of the contract.

Parswanath Saha vs Bandhana Modak (Das) on 20 December, 2024

(3) The Court may properly exercise discretion to decree specific performance in any case where the
plaintiff has done substantial acts or suffered losses in consequence of a contract capable of specific
performance. (4) The Court shall not refuse to any party specific performance of a contract merely
on the ground that the contract is not enforceable at the instance of the other party.”

6. The relief of specific performance having its roots in equity, the Specific Relief Act, 1963, prior to
its amendment has preserved the discretion of the Court not to grant the relief even though the
agreement is specifically performable in law. The only fetters imposed by the statute on the exercise
of the discretion are that the discretion must not be exercised arbitrarily but soundly and reasonably
and guided by judicial principles. The phrase “capable of correction by a Court of appeals” has been
inserted possibly to indicate the necessity for the Trial Court to state the reasons for exercising its
discretion in a particular way. The circumstances when specific performance mentioned in the
Clauses (a), (b) and (c) of Sub-section (2) of Section 20 cannot be granted are not expressly
exhaustive. They indicate the situations in which the Court may properly exercise discretion not to
decree specific performance. However, certain considerations have been excluded as relevant
factors. These are contained in Explanations 1 and 2 to the Section as well as in Section 20(4). It is
to be noticed that each of these exclusions are preceded by the word “mere”. The word “mere” in the
context means “sole”. In other words, any one of those factors by itself would not justify the exercise
of discretion against granting specific performance. The factors cumulatively or with other factors
may form the basis of a decision not to grant specific performance.

7. Hardship of the defendant may be one of the grounds which may be taken into consideration for
exercising its discretion by the Court in refusing to grant a decree for specific performance of
contract. POSITION OF LAW

8. In K. Narendra v. Riviera Apartments (P) Ltd., reported in (1999) 5 SCC 77 this Court held as
under:

“29. Section 20 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 provides that the jurisdiction to decree
specific performance is discretionary and the court is not bound to grant such relief
merely because it is lawful to do so; the discretion of the court is not arbitrary but
sound and reasonable guided by judicial principles and capable of correction by a
court of appeal. Performance of the contract involving some hardship on the
defendant which he did not foresee while non-performance involving no such
hardship on the plaintiff, is one of the circumstances in which the court may properly
exercise discretion not to decree specific performance. The doctrine of comparative
hardship has been thus statutorily recognized in India. However, mere inadequacy of
consideration or the mere fact that the contract is onerous to the defendant or
improvident in its nature, shall not constitute an unfair advantage to the plaintiff
over the defendant or unforeseeable hardship on the defendant. The principle
underlying Section 20 has been summed up by this Court in Lourdu Mari David and
others v. Louis Chinnaya Arogiaswamy and others (1996) 5 SCC 589 by stating that

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181848494/

6

Parswanath Saha vs Bandhana Modak (Das) on 20 December, 2024

the decree for specific performance is in the discretion of the Court but the discretion
should not be used arbitrarily; the discretion should be exercised on sound principles
of law capable of correction by an appellate court.

xxx xxx xxx

35. … Possession over a meagre part of the property was delivered by the appellant to
the respondents, not simultaneously with the agreement but subsequently at some
point of time. To that extent, the recital in the agreement and the averments made in
the plaint filed by the respondents are false. On a major part of the property, the
appellant has continued to remain in possession. As opposed to this, the respondents
have neither pleaded nor brought material on record to hold that they have acted in
such a way as to render inequitable the denial of specific performance and to hold
that theirs would be a case of greater hardship over the hardship of the appellant.
Upon an evaluation of the totality of the circumstances, we are of the opinion that the
performance of the contract would involve such hardship on the appellant as he did
not foresee while the non-performance would not involve such hardship on the
respondents. The contract though valid at the time when it was entered, is engrossed
into such circumstances that the performance thereof cannot be secured with
precision. The present one is a case where the discretionary jurisdiction to decree the
specific performance ought not to be exercised in favour of the respondents. …”
(Emphasis supplied)

9. In Nirmala Anand v. Advent Corpn. (P) Ltd. & Ors., reported in (2002) 8 SCC 146 this Court held
as under:

“6. (cid:132)It is true that grant of decree of specific performance lies in the discretion of the
court and it is also well settled that it is not always necessary to grant specific
performance simply for the reason that it is legal to do so. It is further well settled
that the court in its discretion can impose any reasonable condition including
payment of an additional amount by one party to the other while granting or refusing
decree of specific performance. Whether the purchaser shall be directed to pay an
additional amount to the seller or converse would depend upon the facts and
circumstances of a case. Ordinarily, the plaintiff is not to be denied the relief of
specific performance only on account of the phenomenal increase of price during the
pendency of litigation. That may be, in a given case, one of the considerations besides
many others to be taken into consideration for refusing the decree of specific
performance. As a general rule, it cannot be held that ordinarily the plaintiff cannot
be allowed to have, for her alone, the entire benefit of phenomenal increase of the
value of the property during the pendency of the litigation. While balancing the
equities, one of the considerations to be kept in view is as to who is the defaulting
party. It is also to be borne in mind whether a party is trying to take undue advantage
over the other as also the hardship that may be caused to the defendant by directing
specific performance. There may be other circumstances on which parties may not

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181848494/

7

Parswanath Saha vs Bandhana Modak (Das) on 20 December, 2024

have any control. The totality of the circumstances is required to be seen.” (Emphasis
supplied)

10. In K. Prakash v. B.R. Sampath Kumar, reported in (2015) 1 SCC 597 this Court held as under:

“18. Subsequent rise in price will not be treated as a hardship entailing refusal of the
decree for specific performance. Rise in price is a normal change of circumstances
and, therefore, on that ground a decree for specific performance cannot be reversed.

19. However, the court may take notice of the fact that there has been an increase in
the price of the property and considering the other facts and circumstances of the
case, this Court while granting decree for specific performance can impose such
condition which may to some extent compensate the defendant-owner of the
property …” (Emphasis supplied)

11. In Nanjappan v. Ramasamy & Anr., reported in (2015) 14 SCC 341, this Court held
as under:

“11. Under Section 20 of the Specific Relief Act, grant of specific performance of
contract is discretionary. Though the decree for specific performance is discretionary,
yet the court is not bound to grant such a relief merely because it is lawful to do so.
But the discretion of the court is not arbitrary, but sound and reasonable, guided by
judicial principles of law and capable of correction by a court of appeal and should be
properly exercised keeping in view the settled principles of law as envisaged in
Section 20 of the Act. The jurisdiction of decreeing specific performance is a
discretion of the court and it depends upon facts and circumstances of each case. The
court would take into consideration circumstances of each case, conduct of the
parties, recitals in the sale agreement and the circumstances outside the contract
have to be seen.

12. In Sardar Singh v. Krishna Devi [(1994) 4 SCC 18], this Court observed that as the
court has to see the totality of the circumstances, conduct of the parties and
respective interests under the contract while granting/refusing such relief.

13. First sale agreement was executed on 30.9.1987 about twenty seven years ago.
The property is situated in Coimbatore City and over these years, value of property in
Coimbatore City would have considerably increased. In Saradamani Kandaplan vs.
Rajalakshmi & Ors., (2011) 12 SCC 18, this Court has held that the value of the
property escalate in the urban areas very fast and it would not be equitable to grant
specific performance after a lapse of long period of time. In the instant case, first
agreement was executed on 30.9.1987 i.e. twenty seven years ago. In view of passage
of time and escalation of value of the property, grant of specific relief of performance
would give an unfair advantage to the respondents-plaintiffs whereas the
performance of the contract would involve great hardship to the appellant-defendant

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181848494/

8

Parswanath Saha vs Bandhana Modak (Das) on 20 December, 2024

and his family members.” (Emphasis supplied)

12. In Ferrodous Estates (Pvt.) Ltd. v. P. Gopirathnam (Dead) & Ors., reported in
2020 INSC 586, this Court held as under:

“28. … Section 20, as it then stood, makes it clear that the jurisdiction to decree
specific performance is discretionary; but that this discretion is not arbitrary but has
to be exercised soundly and reasonably, guided by judicial principles, and capable of
correction by a court of appeal - see section 20(1). Section 20(2) speaks of cases in
which the court may properly exercise discretion not to decree specific performance.
Significantly, under clause (a) of sub-section (2), what is to be seen is the terms of the
contract or the conduct of the parties at the time of entering into the contract. Even
“other circumstances under which the contract was entered into” refers only to
circumstances that prevailed at the time of entering into the contract. It is only then
that this exception kicks in - and this is when the plaintiff gets an unfair advantage
over the defendant. Equally, under clause (b) of subsection (2), the hardship involved
is again at the time of entering into the contract which is clear from the expression
“which he did not foresee”. This is made clear beyond doubt by Explanation II of
section 20 which states that the only exception to the hardship principle contained in
clause (b) of sub-section (2) is where hardship results from an act of the plaintiff
subsequent to the contract. In this case also, the act cannot be an act of a third party
or of the court - the act must only be the act of the plaintiff. Clause (c) of sub-section
(2) again refers to the defendant entering into the contract under circumstances
which makes it inequitable to enforce specific performance. Here again, the point of
time at which this is to be judged is the time of entering into the contract.” (Emphasis
supplied)

13. In Sanghi Bros (Indore) Pvt. Ltd. v. Kamlendra Singh, reported in 2023 SCC
OnLine Del 5528, Delhi High Court held as under:

“101. In view of the above-mentioned judgments, it is apparent that the view taken by
the Court is applicable to the instant Suit. The MOU in the instant Suit was executed
in the year 1998. Since then, almost 25 years have elapsed. The performance of the
contract would involve considerable hardship on the parties. The same is being said
considering that a third-party interest has been created to such an extent that the
revocation of that contract would lead to an increase in hardships warranting
unjustified litigations.

xxx xxx xxx

112. In view of the material which has been placed on record, it is indicated that a
third-party interest has been created in the property against which the plaintiff is
seeking specific performance. Such a circumstance makes it inequitable to grant and
enforce the specific performance decree. The said observation is made to balance the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181848494/

9

Parswanath Saha vs Bandhana Modak (Das) on 20 December, 2024

interests of justice and equity for the parties involved. Hence, the decree for specific
performance is not to be granted.

113. This Court is further of the view, that there will be undue hardship caused to the
defendant as well as to the third party who purchased the property in dispute, in case
the plaintiff is granted specific performance.

Taking into consideration the facts of the case, this Court is of the view that the plaintiff may have
been entitled to the relief as claimed for specific performance in the year 2004. However, presently,
the plaintiff cannot be granted the relief of specific performance by this Court due to the defendant's
conduct of not adhering to the terms of the MOU entered into between him and the plaintiffs,
creation of third-party interests and the other factors involved, as discussed hereinabove.”
(Emphasis supplied) SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT (ORIGINAL PLAINTIFF)

14. PW-4 Smt. Pratima Debnath who used to look after Prabha Ranjan Das, has in no uncertain
terms deposed that the Defendants did not stay with Mr. Prabha Ranjan Das. The Defendants used
to stay at Beltali, A.D Nagar, which was her parental house. According to PW- 4, the Defendants
used to come and visit Mr. Prabha Ranjan Das and stayed in the suit property for a day or two. PW-4
has also deposed that even when Prabha Ranjan Das was ill, the Defendant No. 1 i.e. his wife did not
bother to come and see her husband and the PW-4 would help him for his medical treatment. The
PW-4 has further deposed that she was aware of the agreement of sale and receiving of earnest
amount from the Plaintiff and was aware of the fact that the balance amount would be paid within 3
months and the sale deed would be executed and registered.

15. The Trial Court vide Judgment and Order dt. 20.11.2018 has held that the Plaintiff is entitled to
get a decree for specific performance of contract and accordingly decreed the suit in favour of the
Plaintiff on 23.11.2018. The Trial Court held that:

i. The Defendants failed to establish that the suit property was mortgaged to the
Agartala Co-operative Urban Bank Ltd. and they were not necessary parties to the
suit;

ii. The suit in question was filed within limitation;

iii. The Registered Agreement of Sale dated 27.05.2016 was signed by Mr. Prabha
Ranjan Das himself and the same was identified by PW- 2 and PW-3 respectively
(Attesting witnesses) iv. Prabha Ranjan Das was mentally fit at the time of signing
and registration of the Agreement of Sale. The Defendants lead no evidence or
produced any document to their claim that Prabha Ranjan Das was mentally unfit to
give effect to the transaction.

v. Plaintiff was always ready & willing to perform his part of the contract.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181848494/

10

Parswanath Saha vs Bandhana Modak (Das) on 20 December, 2024

vi. Defendants failed to prove that the performance of a contract would involve hardship on them
which Prabha Ranjan Das had not foreseen at the time of execution of the Agreement of Sale.
subsequent to the contract from any act of the plaintiff.

16. The Trial Court after dealing with all the issues so framed, came to the conclusion that since the
Defendants were not residing with deceased Prabha Ranjan Das during his lifetime, therefore, no
hardship would be caused to the Defendants if they are asked to execute the sale deed in favour of
the Plaintiff.

17. The Trial Court was right in holding that no hardship had resulted from any of the acts of the
Plaintiff post execution of the contract. In the instant case the Defendants have failed to show any
circumstance existing at the time of the contract that if the suit land was sold, it would cause
hardship to them and they would become homeless. The Trial Court rightly decreed the suit &
directed the Defendants to execute the registered sale deed in favor of the Plaintiff upon receipt of
balance consideration amount of Rs. 13.50 lakhs and also to hand over the vacant & peaceful
possession of the suit land after execution of the sale deed.

18. The High Court while setting aside the judgment and decree passed by the Trial Court, failed to
consider Sec. 20(2)(b) of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 and wrongly concluded that it will cause
hardship to the Defendants because such performance of contract would render the Defendants
homeless being conscious of the fact that the defendants were residing in the parental house of
Defendant No.1 at Beltali, A.D. Nagar, which she has mentioned and admitted in her examination in
chief filed by way of Affidavit.

19. In such circumstances referred to above, the learned counsel appearing for the appellant prayed
that there being merit in his appeal the same may be allowed and the impugned judgment of the
High Court may be set aside.

SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENTS (ORIGINAL DEFENDANTS)

20. It is not in dispute that Prabha Ranjan Das, the husband of Defendant no. 1 and the father of
Defendant no. 2, signed the Bainapatra on 27- 05-2016 which was registered on 28-05-2016 for the
sale of suit property (residential house), while he was ailing and he died on 05-07- 2016 and he had
no other property to offer to the defendants to reside.

21. The defendants are the legal heirs of Late Prabha Ranjan Das (Wife and minor Son). An amount
of Rs 4,00,000/- was received by cheque by Late Prabha Ranjan Das as advance towards the total
sale consideration of Rs 17,50,000/-,

22. In the written statement filed by the defendants, it was specifically pleaded that if the suit
premises were to be handed over to the plaintiff pursuant to the subject agreement for sale, the
defendants would be rendered shelter-less and therefore, it was prayed that it was a fit case to deny
the relief of specific performance.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181848494/

11

Parswanath Saha vs Bandhana Modak (Das) on 20 December, 2024

23. The Trial Court failed to frame the issue regarding the readiness and willingness on the part of
plaintiff to perform his part of the contract.

24. In support of the aforesaid submissions, the learned counsel placed reliance on the following
decisions:

(i) Jayajantham & Ors. v. Abaykumar reported in (2017) 5 SCC 178;

(ii) Kamal Kumar v. Prem Lata Joshi and Ors. reported in (2019) 3 SCC 704;

(iii) Shenbagam and Ors. v. K. K. Rathinavel reported in (1969) 2 SCC 539;

(iv) Ouseph Varghese v. Josph Aley reported in (1969) 2 SCC 539.

25. In such circumstances referred to above, the learned counsel prayed that there being no merit in
this appeal the same may dismissed. ANALYSIS

26. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having gone through the
materials on record the only question that falls for our consideration is whether the High Court
committed any error in passing the impugned judgment.

27. While evaluating whether specific performance ought to have been decreed in the present case, it
would be necessary to bear in mind the fundamental principles of law. The court is not bound to
grant the relief of specific performance merely because it is lawful to do so. Section 20(1) of the
Specific Relief Act, 1963 indicates that the jurisdiction to decree specific performance is
discretionary. Yet, the discretion of the court is not arbitrary but is “sound and reasonable”, to be
“guided by judicial principles”. The exercise of discretion is capable of being corrected by a court of
appeal in the hierarchy of appellate courts. Sub-section (2) of Section 20 contains a stipulation of
those cases where the court may exercise its discretion not to grant specific performance. (See:
Jayakantham & Ors. v. Abaykumar reported in (2017) 5 SCC 178.)

28. A perusal of Section 20 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 as it then stood would go to show as to
under what circumstances ‘hardship’ can be taken into consideration in refusing specific
performance. It is not possible to enumerate the different circumstances which constitute a
hardship. It will suffice if it is noted that the question of hardship will have to be adjudged in the
facts and circumstances of the case. In this connection, the observations of the Privy Council in the
decision in G.W. Davis v. Maung Shwe Go reported in 1911 SCC OnLine PC 25 throw light on an
important aspect of the matter. Among other things, it is observed in the said case as under:

“In the absence of any evidence of fraud or misrepresentation on the part of the
plaintiff which induced the defendant to enter into the contract, their Lordships see
no reason to accede to the argument. The bargain is onerous, but there is nothing to
show that it is unconscionable. The defendant knew all along that a lakh was the
plaintiff's limit; it is in evidence that he had frequently urged the defendant's

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181848494/

12

Parswanath Saha vs Bandhana Modak (Das) on 20 December, 2024

daughter to advise him to sell the land if he was getting a higher offer. It is difficult to
say under the circumstances that he took an improper advantage of his position or
the difficulties of the defendant.” (Emphasis supplied)

29. Then again, it is necessary to remember that mere rise in price subsequent to the date of the
contract or inadequacy of price is not to be treated as a hardship entailing refusal of specific
performance of the contract. Further, the hardship involved should be one not foreseen by the party
and should be collateral to the contract. In sum, it is not just one factor or two, that is relevant for
consideration. But it is the some total on various factors which is required to enter into the judicial
verdict.

30. The High Court seems to have been carried away by the fact that in the written statement the
defendants did plead that hardship would be caused if they would be asked to execute the Sale Deed
of the suit property.

31. The Trial Court had not framed any issue as regards hardship that may be caused to the
defendants. It is also pertinent to note that the High Court concurred with the Trial Court on all
other issues but thought fit to reverse the decree only on the ground that if the defendants are asked
to execute the Sale Deed of the suit property, i.e., the residential house they would be rendered
shelterless.

32. In the aforesaid context, we may refer to a decision of this Court in Prakash Chandra v. Narayan
reported in (2012) 5 SCC 403 wherein para 17 of the report, it has been held:

“17. The question as to whether the grant of relief for specific performance will cause
hardship to the defendant within the meaning of clause (b) of sub-section (2) of
Section 20 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963, being a question of fact, the first appellate
court without framing such an issue ought not to have reversed the finding of the trial
court while concurring with it on all other issues with regard to the appellant's
entitlement to relief for specific performance of contract.”

33. Thus, in view of the aforesaid the High Court committed an error in taking the view that the
plaintiff is not entitled to the decree for specific performance as the same would cause hardship to
the defendants.

34. The High Court seems to have overlooked the fact that the question of hardship in terms of
Section 20(2)(b) of the Act, 1963 read with explanation (2) bears reference to hardship, which the
defendant did not foresee at the time of entering into the contract. In other words, the issue of
hardship would come into play only if it is established by cogent evidence that Late Prabha Ranjan
Das who executed the Agreement of Sale was unable to foresee the hardship at the time of entering
into the contract.

35. The explanation elucidates the point of time at which the hardship has to be determined with
reference to the circumstances existing at the time of the contract, except where the hardship has

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181848494/

13

been caused from an act of the plaintiff subsequent to the contract.

Parswanath Saha vs Bandhana Modak (Das) on 20 December, 2024

36. There is nothing to indicate in the pleadings or evidence that there was a hardship of the kind
which Late Prabha Ranjan Das did not foresee at the time he executed the Agreement of Sale or that
the hardship which the defendants herein would face is the result of an act of the plaintiff based on
his supervening acts.

37. This Court in K. Narendra (supra) in paras 29 and 30 held as under:

“29. Section 20 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 provides that the jurisdiction to decree
specific performance is discretionary and the court is not bound to grant such relief
merely because it is lawful to do so; the discretion of the court is not arbitrary but
sound and reasonable, guided by judicial principles and capable of correction by a
court of appeal. Performance of the contract involving some hardship on the
defendant which he did not foresee while non-performance involving no such
hardship on the plaintiff, is one of the circumstances in which the court may properly
exercise discretion not to decree specific performance. The doctrine of comparative
hardship has been thus statutorily recognized in India. However, mere inadequacy of
consideration or the mere fact that the contract is onerous to the defendant or
improvident in its nature, shall not constitute an unfair advantage to the plaintiff
over the defendant or unforeseeable hardship on the defendant. The principle
underlying Section 20 has been summed up by this Court in Lourdu Mari David v.
Louis Chinnaya Arogiaswamy [(1996) 5 SCC 589 :

AIR 1996 SC 2814] by stating that the decree for specific performance is in the
discretion of the Court but the discretion should not be used arbitrarily; the
discretion should be exercised on sound principles of law capable of correction by an
appellate court.

30.Chitty on Contracts (27th Edn., 1994, Vol. 1., at p.

1296) states:

“Severe hardship may be a ground for refusing specific performance even though it
results from circumstances which arise after the conclusion of the contract, which
affect the person of the defendant rather than the subject- matter of the contract, and
for which the plaintiff is in no way responsible.”

38. It may not be out of place to state at this stage that in K. Narendra (supra) there is a reference
with approval to Chitty on Contracts (27th Edn., 1994, Vol.1 at p.1296), where the passage quoted
clearly indicates that one of the grounds for refusing specific performance, though they arise from
circumstances post-contract, are factors which affect the person of the defendant rather than the
subject-matter of the contract, and to which the plaintiff is in no way a contributory. It is these
personal circumstances of the defendant, which this Court has alluded to in the earlier part of this

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181848494/

14

Parswanath Saha vs Bandhana Modak (Das) on 20 December, 2024

judgment while dwelling upon the issue of hardship under Section 20(2)(b) of the Specific Relief
Act, 1963. The discretion there being wide, it is certainly not limited to what is illustratively
mentioned in the statute. At the cost of some repetition, it, therefore, deserves emphasis that
circumstances of the plaintiff also are very relevant in the exercise of discretion to grant specific
performance, based on the parameters of hardship to the defendant.

39. Even if we go by what Chitty as said in his Book Chitty on Contracts, 27th Ed. 1994 referred to
above, there is nothing which the defendants have been able to bring on record that the suit
property is the only shelter available to them.

40. It appears from the evidence on record that Late Prabha Ranjan Das was not getting along well
with his wife and son. His wife and son, i.e., the defendants were residing separately. It appears that
they were residing at the parental home of the defendant No. 1. It is only when Prabha Ranjan Das
passed away that the defendants tried to take over the suit property.

41. The learned counsel appearing for the respondents (Original defendants) vehemently submitted
that the Trial Court failed to frame any issue whether the plaintiff was always ready and willing to
perform his part of the contract. It seems that the learned counsel is under some misconception of
fact that the Trial Court did not frame the issue as regards whether the plaintiff was ready and
willing to perform his part of the contract. The Trial Court did frame the issue as regards readiness
& willingness & answered in the affirmative, i.e., in favour of the plaintiff. The High Court does not
seem to have touched this issue at all. The High Court has not disturbed the findings recorded by the
Trial Court on the issue of readiness & willingness. The plaintiff was always ready and willing to
perform his part of the contract.

42. In the overall view of the matter, we are convinced that the High Court committed an error in
setting aside the decree passed by the Trial Court of specific performance.

43. In the result, this appeal succeeds and is hereby allowed.

44. The impugned order passed by the High Court is hereby set aside.

However, we would like to restore the original decree passed by the Trial Court with a little
modification.

45. The Trial Court directed that the appellant herein (Original plaintiff) shall pay the balance
consideration of Rs. 13,50,000/- to the defendants and upon receipt of the said amount, the
defendants shall execute the Sale Deed in favour of the appellant herein (Original plaintiff).

46. In the facts and circumstances of this case, more particularly, keeping in mind that the
defendant No. 1 is a widow and defendant No. 2 is her minor son, we deem fit to enhance the
amount to be paid towards the balance consideration to Rs. 20,00,000/-.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181848494/

15

Parswanath Saha vs Bandhana Modak (Das) on 20 December, 2024

47. The decree of the Trial Court stands modified to the aforesaid extent. In short, the appellant
herein (Original plaintiff) shall pay an amount of Rs. 20,00,000/- to the defendants and upon
receipt of the same the defendants shall execute the Sale Deed in favour of the appellant (Original
plaintiff).

48. The appeal stands disposed of in the aforesaid terms.

……………………………J. (J.B. Pardiwala) ……………………………J. (R. Mahadevan) New Delhi.

20th December, 2024.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181848494/

16

