Dr. Poornima Advani vs Government Of Nct on 18 February, 2025

Dr. Poornima Advani vs Government Of Nct on 18 February,
2025

2025 INSC 262                                                                         REPORTABLE

                                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2643 OF 2025
                                  (arising out of S.L.P. (Civil) No. 594 OF 2020)

        DR. POORNIMA ADVANI & ANR.                                                APPELLANT(s)

                                                              VERSUS

        GOVERNMENT OF NCT & ANR.                                                  RESPONDENT(s)

                                                         O R D E R

1. IA No. 4291/2024 for substitution is allowed. Cause title be amended accordingly.

2. Leave granted.

3. This appeal arises from the judgment and order passed by the High Court of Delhi dated 27th
September, 2019 in Letters Patent Appeal No. 288 of 2019 by which the appeal filed by the
appellants herein against the judgment and order passed by the learned Single Judge of the High
Court partly allowing the Writ Petition No. 9014 of 2017 filed by the appellants herein came to be
dismissed.

4. The facts giving rise to this appeal may be summarized as under:-

The appellants herein were desirous of purchasing an immovable property in New
Delhi.

For that purpose, they RAJNI MUKHI Date: 2025.02.25 14:16:04 IST Reason:

purchased the e-stamp paper dated 06.07.2016 valued at Rs.28,10,000/- (Rupees
Twenty Eight Lakh Ten Thousand Only).

The money for that purpose was paid from the joint bank account of the appellants
being husband and wife respectively. The e-stamp paper which came to be purchased
was dated 06.07.2016.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170299800/

1

Dr. Poornima Advani vs Government Of Nct on 18 February, 2025

5. We borrow the other relevant facts from the judgment and order passed by the learned Single
Judge dated 20th August, 2018 more particularly, from paragraph 4.3 therein:-

“4.3 Pertinently, the e-stamp paper dated 06.07.2016 purchased by the petitioners,
sets down the following details:

(i)Particulars of the property, which was proposed to be purchased;(ii) the names of
the parties, who intended to execute the sale deed;(iii) the consideration to be paid
for consummating the sale transaction; and (iv) the value of e-stamp paper.

4.4 According to the petitioners, though initially, the intention was to execute the sale deed
concerning subject property in July,2016, since, there was some delay in closing the loan transaction
via which the transaction was to be funded, the execution of the sale deed was delayed.

4.5 This delay proved to be fatal, inasmuch as, on 4.8.2016, the petitioners were told by the broker,
who had the custody of the e-stamp paper, that the e-stamp paper dated 6.7.2016 had been
misplaced.

4.6 The petitioners realizing the enormity of the loss, filed a complaint with the Crime Branch, Delhi
Police, on that very day i.e. 4.8.2016. As a follow up action, on 06.08.2016, the petitioners got public
notices issued in two newspapers, namely, Asian Age (English edition) and Rashtriya Sahara (Hindi
edition).

4.7 Since, the petitioners were desirous of taking the sale transaction in respect of subject property
forward, they were left with no choice but to purchase a fresh e-stamp paper, which they did, on
6.8.2016.

4.8 This stamp paper bore the No.IN-

DL80452882772240. The money for this was also paid out from the joint account of the petitioners,
maintained with the State Bank of India.

4.9 Consequent thereto, on 8.8.2016, the petitioners and the vendor i.e., M/s. Scud Finlease Limited
executed a sale deed.

5. On 11.8.2016, the petitioners filed an application with the Sub-Divisional Magistrate, Collector of
Stamps, for refund of stamp duty amounting to Rs.28,10,000/- on account of loss of the e-stamp
paper dated 6.7.2016.

5.1 The prayer made in the application was that the amount be refunded to the petitioners after
deducting the usual cancellation charges, if any. The application was accompanied by an affidavit of
petitioner No.2 that the e-stamp paper dated 6.7.2016 has been lost and was not traceable despite
best efforts.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170299800/

2

Dr. Poornima Advani vs Government Of Nct on 18 February, 2025

5.2 Furthermore, an indemnity bond was also executed by petitioner No.2, whereby he undertook to
indemnify the respondents, if the stand taken by him that the e- stamp paper dated 6.7.2016 had
been lost, proved to be incorrect and, as a result thereof, any loss/damage, etc. was suffered by
them.

5.3 Since no action was taken on the petitioners’ application dated 11.8.2016, the petitioners
addressed a letter dated 8.9.2016 to respondent No.2. In this letter, apart from anything else what
was sought to be highlighted by the petitioners were two aspects:

first, given the fact that every transaction is made in electronic form, it could be
verified almost instantaneously; and second, the misplaced or lost e- stamp paper
dated 6.7.2016 could not be used for any other purpose except that, which stood
specified in the e-stamp paper. It was emphasized that given that fact that via a fresh
e-stamp paper dated 6.8.2016, transaction qua the stamp paper dated 6.7.2016 had
been consummated, the lost e-stamp paper had lost its legal efficacy and thus, could
not be misused by anyone else.

5.4 As is evidence that both these assertions were made by the petitioners to allay the
apprehensions of respondent No.2.

5.5 However, the petitioners’ plea for refund of stamp duty did not cut much ice with
the respondents and, consequently, vide order dated 21.10.2018, the Collector of
Stamps (HQ) rejected the petitioners’ application dated 11.8.2016 maintained for
refund of stamp duty.

6. Aggrieved by the impugned order dated 21.10.2016, the petitioners have preferred
by the instant writ petition.”

6. The learned Single Judge adjudicated the writ petition and ultimately thought fit to partly allow
the same. The learned Single Judge issued a writ of mandamus to the respondents herein to refund
a sum of Rs. 28,10,000/- within a period of two weeks from the date of pronouncement of the
judgment.

7. It appears that the petition was partly allowed as only the principal amount was ordered to be
refunded whereas the interest on the same was declined. We take notice of few relevant observations
made by the learned Single Judge while ordering refund of the principal amount referred to above:-

“19. Therefore, the question before me is: should the Court, in such circumstances,
fold its hands and deny a person, who has lost the stamp paper, relief only because
the draftsman has omitted the use of such expression explicitly in the Statute. As
noticed above, it is not unknown to law that when Courts have encountered such
creases in the Statute they have proceeded to iron them out without destroying the
fabric which forms the core of the Statute. The expression obliterate appearing in
Section 49(a) of the Act should, in my opinion, include cases where the Stamp paper

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170299800/

3

Dr. Poornima Advani vs Government Of Nct on 18 February, 2025

is lost by an applicant seeking refund of stamp duty. This would be a reasonable ‘and
practical’ interpretation of Section 49(a) of the Act, as any other interpretation could
lead to a situation where it may fall foul of Article 14 of the Constitution.

20. There is another way of looking at the matter, which is, the scheme of Chapter V
of the Act. If the scheme, as discussed above, is kept in mind, respondents ought to
refund stamp duty even in cases where an applicant claims refund of stamp duty on
account of loss of e-stamp paper; subject to an enquiry establishing factum of loss
and adequate safeguards being put in. To my mind, if the contrary view was
sustained, it would result in the State retaining money without the authority of law,
as admittedly, the taxing event had not occurred in the facts and circumstances of
this case.

21. In the instant case, the petitioners have provided a photocopy of e-stamp paper
dated 6.7.2016, which at the moment, is the best secondary evidence available with it,
which, shows that the e-stamp paper was not engrossed.

21.1 Given the foregoing discussion, clearly, the amount retained by the respondents
cannot be in the nature of tax as the taxing event has not occurred in the instant case.
It cannot be also in the nature of fee as there was no quid pro quo.

21.2 In any event, the stand of the respondents is that the stamp duty is in the nature
of tax. If that be the position, could the respondents retain money in anticipation of
the taxing event occurring? Article 265 of the Constitution provides that no tax shall
be levied or collected except by authority of law.

Therefore, emphasis is not only on no tax being levied without the authority of law, but is also on
collection of tax without authority of law.

22. Therefore, in my view, the continued retention of amount paid towards anticipated stamp duty
in the hands of the respondents is illegal. The apprehension expressed by the respondents that there
was a possibility of the lost e-stamp paper being mis- utilized seems to be tenuous for the following
reasons:

(i) First, the particulars of the transaction, parties and the consideration have already
been incorporated in the lost e-stamp paper.

(ii) Second, with the technological innovation in place, the said information would be
available and anyone trying to use the lost e-stamp paper can easily be found out. In
any event, the fact the lost e-stamp paper dated 06.07.2016 adverts to the same
property qua which sale transaction stands effected via the new stamp paper dated
06.08.2016, the possibility of misuse of the old e-stamp paper dated 06.07.2016, to
my mind, does not arise.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170299800/

4

Dr. Poornima Advani vs Government Of Nct on 18 February, 2025

(iii) The lost e-stamp paper dated 06.07.2016 having been locked and cancelled, there is, to my
mind, given the technology in place, no possibility of the lost e-stamp paper being mis-utilized. The
Collector of Stamps invariably checks the website of Stock Holding Corporation Ltd. to ascertain
whether or not the stamp paper is genuine. The order dated 11.03.2015, passed by the Divisional
Commissioner, clearly casts such an obligation on the Collector of Stamps.

(iv) Lastly, in any case, the petitioners have furnished an indemnity bond, and therefore, loss or
damages, if any, suffered by the respondents can always be recovered.

23. Before I proceed further, I need to touch upon the argument raised by Mr. Ramesh Singh that
the view held by a Single Judge of this Court in Piyush Aggarwal’s case requires reconsideration.
This was a case where the petitioners had sought refund of stamp duty on account of the fact that
before the instrument on which the stamp duty was leviable, was executed, by virtue of a notification
issued by the State, the stamp duty and transfer duty on conveyance had been substantially reduced.
Since, the petitioners had paid excess stamp duty and transfer duty, they sought refund of the same.

23.1 The facts, as gleaned from the judgment, would show that the conveyance i.e. the instrument, in
that case, was executed on 30.06.2003, whereas the notification, reducing the stamp duty and
transfer duty, was issued on 19.05.2003.

23.2 The Court was, thus, called upon to adjudicate two aspects: First, as to when, did the
chargeable event occur? Second, whether in the given circumstances, the petitioners claim for
refund of excess stamp duty and transfer duty was sustainable?

23.3 Insofar as the first aspect was concerned, the Court ruled that the chargeable event, for levy of
stamp duty, would occur on the date of execution of the instrument and not on the date of
adjudication or the date of presentation, which, in that case were events which occurred prior to the
date of the notification, whereby the stamp duty and transfer duty charges were reduced by the
State.

23.4 Insofar as the second issue was concerned, the Court held that Section 52 which allows, inter
alia, for refund of stamp duty in cases where a person, inadvertently, uses on an instrument
chargeable with duty, a stamp of a description other than that prescribed for such an instrument —
was available to the petitioners for refund of stamp duty. According to the Court, if the date of
execution of the instrument is taken as the date which would determine as to what would be the
admissible stamp duty that had to be levied on the instrument (i.e. the conveyance) then, the
petitioner‘s case would fall within the ambit of the provisions of Section 52 of the Act, as excess duty
had been, inadvertently, paid by the petitioners since the notification reducing the rate of stamp
duty and transfer duly stood published prior to the execution of the instrument in that case.

23.5 This apart, the Court observed that even if it is assumed that Section 52 of the Act was not
applicable, the petitioners would be entitled to refund of stamp duty as the State could not retain the
stamp duty in view of the provision of Article 265 of the Constitution. The relevant observations
made by the Court are as follow:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170299800/

5

Dr. Poornima Advani vs Government Of Nct on 18 February, 2025

“….11. Even as regards applicability of Section 52 of the Act, the matter can be looked
at in another perspective. The “chargeable event” being the date of execution of the
document and if on that date higher than the admissible stamp duty is levied or
collected, it would fall within the ambit of excess payment being “inadvertently”
collected on the said date from the petitioner. Thus, it could even be urged that
Section 52 of the Act was applicable. Further as noticed earlier dehors the
applicability of Section 52 of the Act, stamp duty collected without authority of law
cannot be retained in terms of Article 265 of the Constitution of India in the absence
of any statutory provision requiring refund application to be submitted within a
specified period or prohibiting the refund unless made within the specified period. In
the instant case, it may be noted, that application for refund had been made within
the stipulated period of six months under Section 52 of the Act…..” (Emphasis is
mine) 23.6 Having regard to the facts which obtained in Piyush Aggarwal’s case and
enunciation of law by the Court, I am not persuaded to hold that the judgment
requires reconsideration, as was contended by Mr. Ramesh Singh. To my mind, the
ambit and scope of Article 265 of the Constitution is not restricted only to cases
where the Court finds that the levy imposed by the State is illegal or unconstitutional.
As adverted to above, Article 265 of the Constitution, not only imposes a bar on
imposition of tax without the authority of law, it also imposes a prohibition on
collection of tax without the authority of law.

23.7 In my opinion, the other contention of Mr. Ramesh Singh that the Court in
Piyush Aggarwal’s case failed to notice the legal regime of the Act, is also not correct
in view of the fact that the Court did notice the relevant provisions, which were
necessary for adjudication of the matter at hand.

23.8 The other submission of Mr. Ramesh Singh, that the Act is a complete code by
itself and that refund could only be ordered in respect of instances provided in the
Act, has been answered by me hereinabove. The rationale employed by me is that the
scheme of Chapter V of Act which adverts to allowances and refunds is required to be
interpreted in a manner that the Statute does not fall foul of the Constitution.

23.9 Therefore, in that sense, the other argument of Mr. Ramesh Singh that the
Collector of Stamps is a creature of the Statute and can, therefore, only operate
within its periphery, has to be answered, in my opinion, in the same vein. While one
cannot quibble with the proposition that the statutory authority has to necessarily act
within the ambit of the statute which forms the basis of its nativity, the extent and
amplitude of its power will, however, be governed by the provision of the
Constitution. There being no prohibition in the Act for grant of refund for lost stamp
paper, surely the Collector of Stamps cannot collect or retain what lawfully does not
belong to the State.

24. Interestingly, our neighbouring country i.e. Pakistan, which has a somewhat
similar Statute, dealing with the levy collection and refund of stamp duty, is beset

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170299800/

6

Dr. Poornima Advani vs Government Of Nct on 18 February, 2025

with difficulties which are akin those faced by applicant(s), in our country, seeking
refund of stamp duty on account of loss of stamp paper. This aspect, I came across
upon a judgment dated 23.02.2016, delivered by the Lahore High Court, in Writ
Petition No.27935 of 2012, titled: Aziz Ullah Khan Vs. Government of the Punjab etc.,
being brought to my notice.

24.1 The Court in that case was faced with a question as to whether refund of stamp duty ought to be
ordered in a case where the petitioners had misplaced i.e. lost the stamp papers.

24.2 The Additional Advocate General resisted the writ petition, broadly, on the ground that there
was no provision for grant of refund of stamp paper, in cases where it was lost and that if such a
relief was granted, it would result in loss to the national exchequer.

24.3 I must confess that, though, in that case, the Court noticed the existence of Rule 5 of the Punjab
Non Judicial Stamp Refund, Renewal and Disposal Rules, 1954 which provided for refund of stamp
duty in case of its loss, albeit, in specified circumstances i.e., where stamp paper was stolen or lost in
transit by Government officials. The Court, after noting that there was a discrimination, inasmuch
as, Rule 5 permitted write off where stamp papers were lost by public functionaries, whereas, a
similar facility was not given to private person, went on to deal with the other arguments, that is,
whether it could order refund in exercise of its constitutional powers in the absence of specific
provision for refund, the possibility of loss to the national exchequer, as also misuse of stamp paper,
in the following manner:

“…..It is very strange to note that the public functionaries, in the event of loss of
Stamp Papers in transit, have been bestowed with a remedy to seek write off whereas
the private persons have not been provided with such facility. This fact alone renders
it crystal clear that a discriminatory treatment is being given by the public
functionaries to their own brethren in the event of loss of stamp papers whereas the
request of a member of society is not being entertained merely for the reason that the
original are not available. Such approach, being in conflict with the clear cut mandate
given under Article 25 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973,
cannot be encouraged rather deserves to be discouraged.

10. Learned Additional Advocate General has adopted the plea that when the statute
has not allowed any refund in case of loss of Stamp Papers the same cannot be
permitted by this Court in exercise of Constitutional jurisdiction vested under Article
199 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973. In this respect I am of
the view that according to the golden principle of interpretation of a statute, a
beneficial approach should be followed. As far as the case in hand is concerned, when
a via media has been provided in the event of loss of Stamp Papers during transit by
the public functionaries, how the petitioner can be deprived of such facility. It is not
the case of the respondents that the case of the petitioner is not covered under Rule
32 of the Rules, 1954. The apex Court of the country, in H.R.C. No.40927-S of 2012
Application by Abdul Rehman Farooq Pirzada (PLD 2013 SC 829) while highlighting

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170299800/

7

Dr. Poornima Advani vs Government Of Nct on 18 February, 2025

the principles of interpretation of statutes by the superior Courts has inter-alia held
as under:-

“The interpretation cannot be narrow and pedantic but the Courts' efforts should be
to construe the same broadly, so that it may be able to meet the requirements of an
ever changing society. The general words cannot be construed in isolation but the
same are to be construed in the context in which they are employed. In other words,
their colour and contents are derived from the context.” Further, a Full Bench of this
Court in the case of Rub Nawaz Dhadwana Advocate etc. v. Rana Muhammad Akram
Advocate etc. (W.P. No.16793 of 2014) while dealing with the powers of the superior
Courts to abridge the distance between the legislator and the public-at-large has
inter-alia observed as under:

“The judge must reflect these fundamental values in the interpretation of legislation.
The judge should not narrow interpretation to the exclusive search for subjective
legislative intent. He must also consider the “intention” of the legal system, for the
statute is always wiser than the legislature. By doing so the judge gives the statute a
dynamic meaning and thus bridges the gap between law and society.” If refusal on
the part of the respondents to issue refund in favour of the petitioner is adjudged on
the touchstone of aforequoted cases, I am of the humble opinion that the same is not
tenable for the reason that when the legislator has framed rules for refund of
spoiled/unused/lost Stamp Papers, how the respondents can interpret said rules
according to their own whims just to damage the case of the claimants.

xxx xxx xxx In this scenario, the objection raised by the learned Additional Advocate
General that the refund is not permissible without production of original Stamp
Papers is of no worth at all. The bonafide of the petitioner is apparent from the fact
that after loss of original Misplaced Stamp Papers he not only reported matter to the
Police with promptitude but also got published proclamation in daily “Smaj” and
having done so he, with a view to avoid further delay towards execution of sale deed,
got issued fresh Stamp Papers to complete the sale transaction. A copy of the sale
deed provided by the above named deed writer shows that the Misplaced Stamp
Papers were used for the said purpose but due to their loss during journey sale deed
could not be registered. The logic behind issuance of refund against the spoiled,
destroyed or unused Stamp Papers is to accommodate a person who has not used
those Stamp Papers for the purpose for which the same were issued. In the case in
hand after admission by the respondents that neither the Misplaced Stamp Papers
were used for any other purpose nor anybody else has claimed refund in that regard,
the request of the petitioner cannot be turned down merely on the ground that he
could not produce the original Misplaced Stamp Papers before the competent
authority. If the original Stamp Papers were available with the petitioner there was
no necessity for him to incur another sum of more than one million rupees for the
same purpose.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170299800/

8

Dr. Poornima Advani vs Government Of Nct on 18 February, 2025

12. Learned Additional Advocate General has forcefully argued that worth of the
Stamp Papers is equal to those of currency notes and no refund against the currency
notes is permissible in case where the original are not produced. To the extent of
worth of Stamp Papers equal to currency notes, I agree with the learned law officer,
however, to the extent of criteria explained by him regarding refund of currency notes
I have contrary view for the reason that in case of currency notes its custodian is
always considered its lawful owner and it cannot be proved as to which specific
currency note was in possession of a particular person whereas in the case of Stamp
Papers entitlement of a person can be certified firstly from the National Exchequer
where price of the Stamp Papers has been deposited, secondly from the register of
Stamp Vendor and thirdly from the authorities before whom the same was presented.
Insofar as the case in hand is concerned, all the authorities have admitted that the
Misplaced Stamp Papers were issued to the petitioner after payment of consideration
and those were never utilized for any other purpose. In this view of the matter, the
objection posed by the learned Law Officer is hereby spurned.

13. Now taking up plea of learned Additional Advocate General that in case refund is
allowed in absence of original Stamp Papers not only scrupulous persons would be
able to use them for any other purpose but they would also succeed to get refund
while causing colossal loss to the National Exchequer. In this regard, I am of the view
that strict criteria can be laid to avoid such apprehension but in no way same can be
made a ground to deprive a person from refund of the amount whose claim has been
admitted by the relevant forums. In case the respondents have the apprehension that
the Misplaced Stamp Papers were or would be used for any other purpose they can
proceed against the culprit under the relevant law in addition to getting registered a
criminal case against the petitioner.

14. Admittedly, the Misplaced Stamp Papers were used for preparation of sale deed as
is evident from the recitals of copy of sale deed (Annexure-C of this petition), thus,
the possibility of using the Misplaced Stamp Papers for any other purpose is totally
ruled out. Moreover, execution of sale deed by the petitioner on subsequently
purchased Stamp Papers also eliminates said apprehension as the land once sold
cannot be resold on the strength of Stamp Papers got issued in that regard.

xxx xxx xxx

16. The learned Additional Advocate General has mainly opposed prayer of the
petitioner on the premise that there is no provision either in the Act, 1899 or in the
Rules, 1954, regarding a private person, in case of loss of original Stamp Papers. In
this regard, I am of the view that in view of principle ubi jus ibi remedium (where
there is a right there is a remedy) nobody can be left remediless. The said principle
has also been elucidated by the apex Court of the country in the case of Sarfraz
Saleem v. Federation of Pakistan and others (2014 PLC C.S. 884) in the following
words:-

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170299800/

9

Dr. Poornima Advani vs Government Of Nct on 18 February, 2025

“In these circumstances, lack of exercise of jurisdiction by the High Court in the
present case seems to be contrary to the well accepted principle "ubi jus ibi
remedium" (where there is a right there is a remedy) and the spirit of Articles 4 and
10-A of the Constitution, meant to safeguard the rights of every individual/person to
be dealt with in accordance with law” The afore-quoted portion of the judgment of
apex Court of the country renders it more than clear that nobody can be left
remediless. Moreover, while dealing with the matters of masses they cannot be
penalized due to stagnant attitude of the legislator about new Issues. Insofar as case
in hand is concerned, request of the petitioner deserves sympathetic consideration
for the reason that after completion of codal formalities his request has been turned
down mainly on the ground that original Stamp Papers have not been produced. At
the cost of repetition it is observed that when the legislator itself has held that
Collector can refer matter of refund against unused stamp papers even without
producing the original one the stubbornness on the part of competent authority in
this regard is not understandable. Public functionaries are supposed to eliminate
difficulties of public-at-large but when they themselves try to impede their way to
have their legitimate right the entire threadbare of our society would be devastated.

17. Now taking up plea of learned Additional Advocate General that if refund is
allowed even in cases where the original Stamp Papers are not produced the National
Exchequer would suffer badly, I am of the view that the respondents are not going to
pay anything either from their own pockets or from the National Exchequer either
they have to repay the amount twice deposited by the petitioner. Had the petitioner
claimed anything in addition to that he deposited at the time of issuance of Stamp
Papers then the said contention would have some substance. Considering from
another angle in the cases where spoiled or unused Stamp Papers are returned by the
persons concerned they are issued refund without taking into consideration that the
said amount is being repaid from the National Exchequer. This fact alone amounts to
discrimination on the part of competent authority…...” (Emphasis is mine) xxx xxx
xxx

25. As would be noticed, the Aziz Ullah Khan‘s case, on facts, was pari materia with the facts
obtaining in the instant case. In that case, the stamp paper was lost, which was required for
consummation of the sale transaction concerning the subject immovable property. The petitioner, as
in the instant case, had bought a new stamp paper and had gone on to consummate the sale
transaction qua the very same property.

26. I may also indicate that insofar as other cases cited by Mr. Ramesh Singh are concerned, they
are, in fact, not applicable to the facts and circumstances arising in the instant case. One cannot but
state that the proposition of law as enunciated in Mafatlal Industries Ltd. & Ors. vs. Union of India
& Ors.; State of Maharashtra & Ors. vs. Swanstone Multiplex Cinema Pvt. Ltd. and Cooch-Behar
Contractors’ Association and Ors. vs. State of West Bengal & Ors. still hold the field.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170299800/

10

Dr. Poornima Advani vs Government Of Nct on 18 February, 2025

26.1 However, dealing with the last case first i.e. Cooch-Behar Contractors’ Association case, that
was a case where the appellants before the Supreme Court sought exclusion of certain components,
which had been included in the expression "contractual transfer price", which in turn, determined
the tax that an assessee had to pay under works contract. In this context, the Court was called upon
to interpret, inter alia, the provisions of Section 6D of the Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) Act, 1941 as
amended by West Bengal Act 4 of 1984. The Court ruled that nothing could be excluded from
contractual transfer price over and above that was indicated in Clauses (a) to (e) of sub-section 2 of
Section 6D of the aforementioned Act. It is in this context that the Court observed that Section 6D
was a self contained provision. In my view, there is nothing in the judgment, which would help the
cause of the respondents.

26.2 Likewise, the judgment of the Supreme Court rendered in State of Maharashtra & Ors. case,
does not support the respondent's case. This was a case where the respondent company, which was
the owner of multiplex cinema theatre had collected entertainment tax at rate of 45% during the
period when it was either not liable to pay such tax or was required to pay tax at a concessional rate
i.e., 25%. The State attempted to reclaim the benefit, which had accrued to the respondent company
as they had recovered excess entertainment tax from the cinema goers. Consequently, demand
notices were issued by the State in that behalf. The demand notices issued were challenged. The
High Court allowed the writ petition. The Supreme Court reversed the decision of the High Court.

26.3 While doing so, the Supreme Court made an interesting distinction between the doctrine of
unjust enrichment as opposed to doctrine of retention. While drawing a distinction between the two
concepts, the Supreme Court noticed several judgments, including the judgment rendered by the
Court in Mafatlal Industries Ltd. case. Pertinently, the Court, while allowing the appeal of the State,
directed the State to remit undue benefit obtained by the respondent company to a voluntary or
charitable organization, since, the State during that period, could not have levied or collected the tax
from the respondent company. This aspect of the matter is reflected in Paragraphs 32, 33, 36 & 37.
For the sake of convenience, the same are extracted hereafter:

"…32. In a given case, this Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 142 of the
Constitution of India may also issue other directions, as has been done in Indian
Banks' Assn. v. Devkala Consultancy Service [(2004) 11 SCC 1] in a similar situation
where it was difficult for the Court to direct refund of a huge amount to a large
number of depositors from whom the bank had illegally collected, this Court directed
that the amount be spent for the benefit of the disabled in terms of the provisions of
the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full
Participation) Act, 1995. This Court may take recourse to such a procedure as the
State also having granted exemption was not entitled to collect the duty. In other
words, it having granted an exemption, was not legally entitled thereto. We think that
it would be a better course, as stricto sensu, Article 296 of the Constitution is not
applicable.

33. We are passing this order keeping in view the peculiar situation as in either event
it was cinema-goers who had lost a huge amount. It would be travesty of justice if the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170299800/

11

Dr. Poornima Advani vs Government Of Nct on 18 February, 2025

owners of the cinema theatre become eligible to appropriate such a huge amount for
their own benefit. To the aforementioned extent, doctrine of unjust enrichment may
be held to be applicable. A person who unjustly enriches himself cannot be permitted
to retain the same for its benefit except enrichment. Where it becomes entitled
thereto the doctrine of unjust enrichment can be invoked irrespective of any statutory
provisions.

xxx xxx xxx

36. It may be true that hereat we are not concerned with refund of tax but then for
enforcement of legal principles, this Court may direct a party to divest itself of the
money or benefits, which in justice, equity and good conscience belongs to someone
else. It must be directed to restitute that part of the benefit to which it was not
entitled to.

37. We, therefore, direct that the State shall realise the amount to the extent the
respondent had unjustly enriched itself and pay the same to a voluntary or a
charitable organisation, which according to it is a reputed civil society organisation
and had been rendering good services to any section of the disadvantaged people and
in particular women and children. We would request the Hon'ble the Chief Minister
of the State to take up the responsibility in this behalf so that full, proper and
effective utilisation of the amount in question is ensured…"

(Emphasis is mine) 26.4 Insofar as Mafatlal Industries Ltd. case is concerned, the Supreme Court
was considering the scope, ambit and extent to which doctrine of unjust enrichment would apply,
the Court laid down various propositions of law, which I need not advert to as none of them, in my
opinion, would help the cause of the respondent.

26.5 I may, however, indicate that the Court, inter alia, ruled that where the provisions of a statute
provided for refund, the refund, if any, would be granted in accordance with the statute. The Court
was, amongst others, considering the provisions of Section 11B of Central Excises Act and Section 27
of the Customs Act.

26.6 Likewise, Sri Maganti Suryanarayana case cited for the proposition, that there is no inherent
jurisdiction vested in the Collector of Stamps to grant refund as he is a creature of the statute or the
judgment rendered in Govt. of A.P. & Ors. vs. P. Laxmi Devi (Smt.) case, cited for the proposition
that there is no equity in tax are propositions, which have held the field for so long that they appear
to be cast in stone. Having said so, the foregoing discussion would show that these propositions
would not impede the cause of the petitioners, given the situation obtaining in the instant case.”

8. Thus, in paragraph 19, the learned Single Judge posed a question for his consideration whether
the circumstances in which the refund was prayed for by the appellants herein, would be a relevant
consideration for ordering refund of the said amount. In other words, the learned Single Judge
asked a question to himself whether the court, in such circumstances, should fold its hands and

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170299800/

12

Dr. Poornima Advani vs Government Of Nct on 18 February, 2025

deny relief to a person, who has lost the e-stamp paper, only because the draftsman has omitted the
use of such expression explicitly in the Statute.

9. After an exhaustive discussion on various aspects of the matter, the learned Single Judge
thereafter proceeded to draw a fine distinction between the ‘doctrine of unjust enrichment’ as
opposed to ‘doctrine of retention’. Ultimately, the learned Single Judge allowed the writ petition in
part.

10. The appellants herein being dissatisfied with non-grant of interest on the sum of Rs. 28,10,000/-
preferred Letters Patent Appeal. The appeal Court dismissed the Letters Patent Appeal holding as
under:-

“7. As no arguments were canvassed by the appellant (original petitioner) before the
learned Single Judge for payment of interest, the said issue has not been decided. For
the first time, this issue of payment of interest upon Rs.28,10,000/- has been raised.
Hence, we see no reason to entertain this Letters Patent Appeal. The principal
amount has already been ordered to be refunded. Petitioner can file a review
application if he has argued and the point is not decided about interest upon the
principal amount before the learned Single Judge.

8. Counsel for the respondent has pointed out that the issue of interest was never
raised by the appellant(original petitioner) when the writ petition was argued by the
original petitioner.”

11. The appeal Court seems to have taken the view that the issue as regards payment of interest was
sought to be raised for the first time in appeal and had not been seriously raised before the learned
Single Judge.

12. In such circumstances, referred to above, the appellants are here before this Court with the
present appeal.

13. We heard Mr. Abhishek Puri, the learned counsel appearing for the appellants and Ms. Jyoti
Mehandiratta, the learned counsel appearing for the respondents.

14. The short point that falls for our consideration is whether in the facts and circumstances of the
case, the appellants herein are entitled to claim interest on the refunded amount of Rs.28,10,000/-
referred to above.

15. The submission of the learned counsel appearing for the respondents that there is no provision
in the statute for the payment of interest on refund of the amount of the e-stamp paper that was lost
by the appellants herein, is without any merit. The subject General Mandamus is a salutary
advancement of the law, calculated to insulate and protect a citizen from unfair treatment by the
State.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170299800/

13

Dr. Poornima Advani vs Government Of Nct on 18 February, 2025

16. The concept of awarding interest on delayed payment has been explained by this Court in the
case of Authorised Officer Karnataka Bank v. M/s R.M.S. Granites Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. in Civil Appeal
No. 12294 of 2024, we quote the following observations:-

“It may be mentioned that there is misconception about interest. Interest is not a
penalty or punishment at all, but it is the normal accretion on capital. For example if
A had to pay B a certain amount, say ten years ago, but he offers that amount to him
today, then he has pocketed the interest on the principal amount. Had A paid that
amount to B ten years ago, B would have invested that amount somewhere and
earned interest thereon, but instead of that A has kept that amount with himself and
earned interest on it for this period. Hence equity demands that A should not only
pay back the principal amount but also the interest thereon to B. [See: Alok Shanker
Pandey v. Union of India : AIR 2007 SC 1198.]”

17. Thus, when a person is deprived of the use of his money to which he is legitimately entitled, he
has a right to be compensated for the deprivation which may be called interest or compensation.
Interest is paid for the deprivation of the use of money in general terms which has returned or
compensation for the use or retention by a person of a sum of money belonging to other.

18. As per Black's Law Dictionary (7th Edn.): “interest” is the compensation fixed by agreement or
allowed by law for use or detention of money or for the loss of money of one who is entitled to its
use, especially, the amount owned to a lender in return for the use of the borrowed money.

19. As per Stroud's Judicial Dictionary of Words and Phrases (5th edn.): interest means, inter alia,
compensation paid by the borrower to the lender for deprivation of the use of his money.

20. In the case of Secretary, Irrigation Department, Government of Orissa v. G.C. Roy, (1992) 1 SCC
508, a Constitution Bench of this Court opined that a person deprived of use of money to which he is
legitimately entitled has a right to be compensated for the deprivation, call it by any name. It may be
called interest, compensation or damages. This is also the principle of Section 34 of the Civil
Procedure Code.

21. The essence of interest as held in the case of Lord Wright in Riches v. Westminister Bank Ltd.,
1947 (1) ALL ER 469, at page 472, is that it is a payment, which becomes due because the creditor
has not had his money at the due date. It may be recorded either as representing the profit he might
have made if he had had the use of the money, or, conversely, the loss he suffered because he had
not that use.

22. In the case of Commissioner of Income Tax v. Dr. Sham Lal Narula, AIR 1963 Punjab 411, a
Division Bench of the High Court of Punjab articulated the concept of interest as under:-

“The words ‘interest’ and ‘compensation’ are sometimes used interchangeably and on
other occasions they have distinct connotation. “Interest” in general terms is the
return or compensation for the use or retention by one person of a sum of money

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170299800/

14

Dr. Poornima Advani vs Government Of Nct on 18 February, 2025

belonging to or owed to another. In its narrow sense, ‘interest’ is understood to mean
the amount which one has contracted to pay for use of borrowed money. ……… In
whatever category “interest” in a particular case may be put, it is a consideration paid
either for the use of money or for forbearance in demanding it, after it has fallen due,
and thus, it is a charge for the use or forbearance of money. In this sense, it is a
compensation allowed by law or fixed by parties, or permitted by custom or usage, for
use of money belonging to another, or for the delay in paying money after it has
become payable.” (Emphasis supplied)

23. The appeal filed against aforesaid decision was dismissed by this Court in Sham Lal Narula Dr.
v. CIT, AIR 1964 SC 1878.

24. In the case of Hello Minerals Water (P) Ltd. v. Union of India, (2004) 174 ELT 422, (paras 15
and 16), a Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court explained the concept of interest as under:-

“15. We may mention that we are passing the direction for interest since interest is
the normal accretion on capital. Often there is misconception about interest. Interest
is not a penalty or punishment at all.

16. For instance, if A had to pay a certain sum of money to B at a particular time, but
he pays it after a delay of several years, the result will be that the money remained
with A and he would have earned interest thereon by investing it somewhere. Had he
paid that amount at the time when it was payable then B would have invested it
somewhere, and earned interest thereon. Hence, if a person has illegally retained
some amount of money then he should ordinarily be directed to pay not only the
principal amount but also the interest earned thereon.

Money doubles every six years (because of compound interest). Rs. hundred in the year 1990 would
become Rs. two hundred in the year 1996 and it will become Rs. 400 in the year 2002. Hence, if A
had to pay B a sum of rupees 100 in the year 1990 and he pays that amount only in the year 2002,
the result will be that A has pocketed Rs. 300 with himself. This clearly cannot be justified because
had he paid that amount to B in the year 1990, B would be having Rs. 400 in the year 2002 instead
of having only Rs. 100/-. Hence, ordinarily interest should always be awarded whenever any amount
is detained or realized by someone, otherwise the person receiving the amount after considerable
delay would be losing the entire interest thereon which will be pocketed by the person who managed
the delay, it is for this reason that we have ordered for payment of interest alongwith the amount
realized as export pass fee.” INTEREST IS NORMAL ACCRETION ON CAPITAL

25. If on facts of a case, the doctrine of restitution is attracted, interest should follow. Restitution in
its etymological sense means restoring to a party on the modification, variation or reversal of a
decree or order what has been lost to him in execution of decree or order of the Court or in direct
consequence of a decree or order. The term “restitution” is used in three senses, firstly, return or
restoration of some specific thing to its rightful owner or status, secondly, the compensation for
benefits derived from wrong done to another and, thirdly, compensation or reparation for the loss

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170299800/

15

caused to another.

Dr. Poornima Advani vs Government Of Nct on 18 February, 2025

26. In Hari Chand v. State of U.P., 2012 (1) AWC 316, the Allahabad High Court dealing with similar
controversy in a stamp matter held that the payment of interest is a necessary corollary to the
retention of the money to be returned under order of the appellate or revisional authority. The High
Court directed the State to pay interest @ 8% for the period, the money was so retained i.e. from the
date of deposit till the date of actual repayment/refund.

27. In the case of O.N.G.C. Ltd. v. Commissioner of Customs Mumbai, JT 2007 (10) SC 76, (para 6),
the facts were that the assessment orders passed in the Customs Act creating huge demands were
ultimately set aside by this Court. However, during pendency of appeals, a sum of Rs. 54,72,87,536/-
was realized by way of custom duties and interest thereon. In such circumstances, an application
was filed before this Court to direct the respondent to pay interest on the aforesaid amount w.e.f. the
date of recovery till the date of payment. The appellants relied upon the judgment in the case of
South Eastern Coal Field Ltd. v. State of M.P., (2003) 8 SCC 648.

This Court explained the principles of restitution in the case of O.N.G.C. Ltd. (supra) as under:-

“Appellant is a public sector undertaking. Respondent is the Central Government. We
agree that in principle as also in equity the appellant is entitled to interest on the
amount deposited on application of principle of restitution. In the facts and
circumstances of this case and particularly having regard to the fact that the amount
paid by the appellant has already been refunded, we direct that the amount deposited
by the appellant shall carry interest at the rate of 6% per annum. Reference in this
connection may be made to Pure Helium Indian (P) Ltd. v. Oil & Natural Gas
Commission, JT 2003 (Suppl. 2) SC 596 and Mcdermott International Inc. v. Burn
Standard Co. Ltd. JT 2006 (11) SC 376.” (Emphasis supplied) COMPENSATION:

28. The word ‘Compensation’ has been defined in P. Ramanatha Aiyar's Advanced Law Lexicon, 3rd
Edition 2005, page 918 as follows:-

“An act which a Court orders to be done, or money which a Court orders to be paid,
by a person whose acts or omissions have caused loss or injury to another in order
that thereby the person damnified may receive equal value for his loss, or be made
whole in respect of his injury; the consideration or price of a privilege purchased
some thing given or obtained as an equivalent the rendering of an equivalent in value
or amount; an equivalent given for property taken or for an injury done to another;
the giving back an equivalent in either money which is but the measure of value, or in
actual value otherwise conferred; a recompense in value a recompense given for a
thing received recompense for the whole injury suffered remuneration or satisfaction
for injury or damage of every description remuneration for loss of time, necessary
expenditures, and for permanent disability if such be the result; remuneration for the
injury directly, and proximately caused by at breach of contract or duty;
remuneration or wages given to an employee or officer.”

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170299800/

16

Dr. Poornima Advani vs Government Of Nct on 18 February, 2025

29. In the case of Union of India through Director of Income Tax v. Tata Chemicals Ltd., (2014) 6
SCC 335, this Court held that when the collection is illegal, the Revenue is obliged to refund such
amount with interest as money so deposited was retained and enjoyed by it. No discrimination can
be shown between the assessee and Revenue in paying interest on the refund of tax. Money received
and retained without right, carries with it the right to interest. There being no express statutory
provision for payment of interest on the refund of excess amount/tax collected by the Revenue, the
Government cannot shrug off its apparent obligation to reimburse the deductors lawful monies with
accrued interest for the period of undue retention of such monies. Obligation to refund money
received and retained without right implies and carries with in the right to interest. The relevant
observations are as under:-

“Providing for payment of interest in case of refund of amounts paid as tax or deemed
tax or advance tax is a method now statutorily adopted by fiscal legislation to ensure
that the aforesaid amount of tax which has been duly paid in prescribed time and
provisions in that behalf form part of the recovery machinery provided in a taxing
Statute. Refund due and payable to the assessee is debt-owed and payable by the
Revenue. The Government, there being no express statutory provision for payment of
interest on the refund of excess amount/tax collected by the Revenue, cannot shrug
off its apparent obligation to reimburse the deductors lawful monies with the accrued
interest for the period of undue retention of such monies. The State having received
the money without right and having retained and used it, is bound to make the party
good, just as an individual would be under like circumstances. The obligation to
refund money received and retained without right implies and carries with it the right
to interest. Whenever money has been received by a party which ex ae quo et bono
ought to be refunded, the right to interest follows, as a matter of course.” (Emphasis
supplied)

30. Considering the reasons assigned by the learned Single Judge while taking the view that the
respondents could not have declined to refund the amount and the fact that the retention of the said
amount was for a long time and further the appellants were left with no other option but to
approach the High Court, we are of the view that the appellants are entitled to have interest on
Rs.28,10,000/- as under:-

Breakup of the Amount received and accrued interest Principal Amount : Rs.
28,10,000/- (Rupees Twenty Eight Lakh Ten Thousand Only) Period No. Amounts
due Rate of Interest amount of Interest days 20.08.2018 558 Rs. 28,10,000/- 8% p.a.
Rs. 3,43,666.85 (date of Judgment days passed by Ld. Single Judge of the Delhi High
Court) till 29.02.2020 (Receipt of part payment of Rs. 25,29,000/-) 30.02.2020 1470
Rs. 2,81,000/- 8% p.a. Rs. 90,535.89 till days 08.03.2024 (Date of Fixed Deposit @
6.5% p.a. created by the Delhi High Court Registry upon deposit of DD by
Respondent) 09.03.2024 153 Rs. 2,81,000/- 1.5% p.a. Rs. 1,766.84 till days (after
09.08.2024 subtracting (Date of dismissal interest of Application for rate of the
modification and FD created direction for by Delhi release of balance High Court
amount deposited Registry) Total interest amount Rs. 4,35,968.58/-

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170299800/

17

(Rs. Four Lakh Thirty Five Thousand Nine Hundred Sixty Eight and Paise Fifty Eight Only)

Dr. Poornima Advani vs Government Of Nct on 18 February, 2025

31. The respondents are directed to pay an amount of Rs.

4,35,968/- (Rs. Four Lakh Thirty Five Thousand Nine Hundred Sixty Eight Only) towards interest
within a period of two months from today without fail.

32. The appeal stands disposed of in the aforesaid terms.

Pending application(s), if any, shall also stand disposed of.

.................J. [J.B. PARDIWALA] .................J. [R. MAHADEVAN] NEW DELHI;

FEBRUARY 18, 2025

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170299800/

18

