Dr. Sharmad vs The State Of Kerala on 10 January, 2025

Dr. Sharmad vs The State Of Kerala on 10 January, 2025

Author: Dipankar Datta

Bench: Prashant Kumar Mishra, Dipankar Datta

                                                                                   REPORTABLE

2025 INSC 70
                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 13422 OF 2024
                                    [Arising out of SLP(C) NO. 18592 OF 2017]

            Dr. SHARMAD                                                       … APPELLANT
                                                        VERSUS
            STATE OF KERALA AND OTHERS                                         …RESPONDENTS

                                                         WITH
                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 13423 OF 2024
                                    [Arising out of SLP(C) NO. 24851 OF 2019]

            Dr. SHEELA T.A. AND OTHERS                                        … APPELLANTS
                                                        VERSUS
            STATE OF KERALA AND OTHERS                                         …RESPONDENTS

                                                    JUDGMENT

DIPANKAR DATTA, J.

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 13422 of 2024

1. This appeal, by special leave, carried by the appellant1 to this Court takes exception to the
judgment and order dated 20th January, 2017 of a Division Bench of the High Court of Kerala at
Ernakulam2 allowing Dr. Sharmad High Court a writ petition3 presented by the third respondent4.
The High Court set aside the judgment and order dated 15th March, 2013 of the Kerala
Administrative Tribunal at Thiruvananthapuram5, which dismissed the original application6 of Dr.
Jyothish filed under Section 19 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 in limine.

2. A short question arises for decision in the appeal. It is, whether the High Court was justified in
interfering with the order granting promotion to Dr. Sharmad to the post of Assistant Professor,
Department of Neurosurgery, Medical Education Service, Health and Family Welfare Department,
Kerala7 on 06th February, 2013.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159616406/

1

Dr. Sharmad vs The State Of Kerala on 10 January, 2025

3. For the purpose of a decision on this appeal, it would be appropriate to note the respective profile
of Dr. Sharmad and Dr. Jyothish. The same is indicated in a tabular form hereunder:

                Dr. Sharmad                          Dr. Jyothish

      Appointed as Lecturer (with         Appointed as Lecturer, with M. Ch
      MBBS) on 22.10.1999.                degree, on 09.03.2005.
      Promoted as Assistant Professor     Promoted as Assistant Professor
      on 11.01.2007.                      on 22.07.2008.
      Acquired M. Ch degree on            -------
      31.07.2008.
      Completed 5 years on the post of    Completed 5 years on the post of
      Assistant     Professor,    after   Assistant     Professor      on
      acquisition of M. Ch degree, on     21.07.2013.
      30.07.2013.
      Promoted as Associate Professor     Promoted as Associate Professor
      on 06.02.2013.                      in May, 2023.
      Promoted     as   Professor    on   Promoted    as  Professor    on
      09.05.2023.                         11.11.2024.

To retire on 31.05.2029. To retire on 30.04.2031. Dr. Jyothish Tribunal OA 476 of 2013 the said
post

4. It is not in dispute that the vacancy on the said post of Associate Professor, which is the bone of
contention in this appeal, arose on 13th November, 2012. For recruitment in the Medical Education
Service under the Health and Family Welfare Department, Govt. of Kerala, rules under the proviso
to clause (2) of Article 309 of the Constitution of India have not been framed. However, recruitment
from time to time has been made in terms of Government Orders issued by the relevant department.
At the time of occurrence of the vacancy on the said post of Assistant Professor, Government Order8
dated 07th April, 2008 was in force. It was issued in “supersession of all existing rules and orders in
force regarding qualification and method of appointment of the faculties under Medical Education
Services”. The said G.O. provided qualifications for appointment in Branch – I i.e. Administrative
Cadre and Branch – II i.e. Teaching Cadre. The discipline of neurosurgery was included under Head
‘C’ of Branch - II i.e. medical (super specialties). The categories of faculties covered by the said G.O.
were (i) Professor,

(ii) Associate Professor, and (iii) Assistant Professor.

5. Insofar as Branch – I i.e. Administrative Cadre is concerned, the same bore two posts i.e. Director
of Medical Education and Joint Director of Medical Education/Principals of Medical Colleges.
Under the column experience, we find the requirement for appointment on the posts of Director of
Medical Education and Joint Director of Medical Education/Principals to be common. The same
reads as under:

G.O. “Minimum 10 years of Physical Teaching Experience in Government Medical
Colleges (under Medical Education Department in Kerala) after acquiring
postgraduate degree”.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159616406/

2

Dr. Sharmad vs The State Of Kerala on 10 January, 2025

(emphasis supplied)

6. For recruitment and appointment on the posts of Professor, Associate Professor and Assistant
Professor, the educational qualifications appear to be the same. An aspirant must have the degree of
M. Ch in Neurosurgery or DNB (Neurosurgery). The experience criteria required for the said three
posts, however, vary. The same are set out hereunder:

Professor Associate Professor Assistant Professor One year Physical Five years
Physical Three years Physical Teaching experience Teaching experience Teaching
experience as Associate as Assistant as Senior Lecturer/ Professor. Professor.
Lecturer.

7. If the experience criteria required for appointment on the posts under Branch - I i.e. –
Administrative Cadre are juxtaposed with the experience criteria required for appointment on the
teaching posts of Professor/Associate Professor/Assistant Professor, what stands out is that in case
of posts in the teaching cadre, the words “after acquiring postgraduate degree” are conspicuous by
its absence under the column ‘experience’.

8. Dr. Jyothish claimed before the High Court that notwithstanding absence of such words under
the column experience for Branch - II i.e. Teaching Cadre, the said requirement has to be read into
it. Reference was made by him to Rules 10 and 28, Part II of the Kerala State and Subordinate
Services Rules, 19589 to contend that Dr. Sharmad did not possess the requisite experience to
satisfy the mandatory eligibility qualifications and was illegally appointed on promotion to the said
post of Associate Professor by the official respondents. On the contrary, Dr. Sharmad claimed, in
light of the criteria for experience for appointment in Branch - I i.e. Administrative Cadre, that it is
not the requirement of G.O. dated 07th April, 2008 that an aspirant ought to have 5 (five) years
physical teaching experience as an Assistant Professor (regular) after acquiring postgraduate degree.
In such view of the matter, the official respondents did not commit any illegality in promoting Dr.
Sharmad as an Associate Professor even before efflux of 5 (five) years since acquisition of the degree
of M. Ch.

9. The official respondents sought to defend the promotion of Dr. Sharmad to the said post of
Associate Professor by referring to G.O. dated 14th December, 2009 issued by the Health and
Family Welfare Department on the subject of pay and allowances, inter alia, of the members of the
Kerala Medical Education Service. According to them, G.O. dated 14th December, 2009 abrogated
G.O dated 07th April, 2008 and in terms of the former, Dr. Sharmad did satisfy the eligibility
criteria for promotion to the said post of Associate Professor. While providing for revised scale of
pay for Associate Professors, G.O. dated 14th December, 2009 laid down as follows:

KS and SSR 1.5 Revised scale of Associate Professors

a) Medical & Dental

i) ***

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159616406/

3

Dr. Sharmad vs The State Of Kerala on 10 January, 2025

ii) Incumbent Assistant Professors with five years (for teachers with Super specialty
degree in the concerned discipline this will be two years after acquiring
Superspeciality degree) teaching experience as Assistant Professor in the current pay
scale of Rs. 12000-18300 including Time Bound Higher Grade service and a total
service of 8 years after acquiring Post Graduate Degree (5 years for Superspeciality
degree holders) in all grades put together will be promoted and placed in the pay
band of Rs.37,400-67,000 with Academic Grade Pay of Rs.9,000 and shall be
redesignated as Associate Professors; however they will have to publish two Research
papers within a period of two years promotion in Peer Indexed/National Journals as
per MCI/DCI regulations;

however for teachers of Dental Colleges, as per the Dental Council of India regulations, only Post PG
teaching experience will be reckoned as eligible service for placement as Associate Professor.

iii) Incumbent Assistant Professors who have not completed 5 years teaching service (or having less
than 2 years service for superspeciality degree holders) in the cadre of Assistant Professor (including
TBCP/CAP grade) as on 01.01.2006 will be placed in the appropriate stage in the pay band of
Rs.15,600-39,100 and Academic Grade Pay of Rs.8,000/-, till they complete the required period of
5/2 years respectively. Thereafter on completion of 5 years service as Assistant Professor, including
Time Bound Cadre Promotion grade in pre-revised scale (2 years for superspeciality degree holders)
and a total service of 8 years after acquiring Post graduate Degree (5 years for superspeciality degree
holders) in all grades put together, they will be promoted and placed in the appropriate stage in the
Pay band of Rs.37,400-67,000 with Academic Grade pay of Rs.9,000/- and redesignated as
Associate Professor, subject to fulfilling academic performance requirements to be specified.
However they will have to publish two Research papers within a period of two years in Peer
Indexed/National Journals as per MOI regulations; provided that for Dental College teachers, only
post PG teaching experience will be reckoned as per Dental Council of India norms for promotion.”

10. Though the claim of Dr. Jyothish failed before the Tribunal, as noticed above, he succeeded
before the High Court which went on to hold that reliance placed by the official respondents on G.O.
dated 14th December, 2009 was absolutely misplaced. The High Court further held that Dr.
Sharmad lacked 5 years physical teaching experience as Assistant Professor after acquiring the
degree of M. Ch. and, therefore, ought not to have been promoted ahead of others who did satisfy
the eligibility criteria. Arguments of Dr. Jyotish relying on Rules 10 and 28 of the KS and SSR were
accepted. Accordingly, the High Court set aside the appointment on promotion of Dr. Sharmad to
the said post of Associate Professor and directed the official respondents to convene a review
Departmental Promotion Committee meeting for the purpose of drawing an appropriate select list
to fill up the said post of Associate Professor. It was also observed that while preparing the select
list, the relevant recruitment rules in force, namely, G.O. dated 07th April, 2008 and the relevant
provision of Rule 28 of Part II, KS and SSR shall be looked into while excluding G.O. dated 14th
December, 2009 from consideration.

11. We have heard Mr. Giri and Mr. Chitambaresh, learned senior counsel representing Dr. Sharmad
and Dr. Jyotish, respectively. We have also heard Mr. C.K. Sasi, learned counsel for the official

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159616406/

4

respondents.

Dr. Sharmad vs The State Of Kerala on 10 January, 2025

12. The eligibility criteria for appointment on posts borne in Branch – I i.e. Administrative Cadre
and in Branch – II i.e. Teaching Cadre, in the absence of recruitment rules framed under Article 309
of the Constitution, are provided by G.O. dated 07th April, 2008 which is the executive order
governing recruitment. That is a position, which is accepted even by Dr. Jyotish. According to him,
Dr. Sharmad does not qualify in terms thereof.

13. Law is settled that in the absence of rules, recourse to recruitment based on executive orders
could be taken. Even without examining whether G.O. dated 14th December, 2009 had any
application to the promotional appointment in question, it would be just and proper to focus on the
requirements of G.O. dated 07th April, 2008.

14. The contents under the column ‘experience’ in G.O. dated 07th April, 2008, extracted supra,
have been read. A plain and literal reading does not lead to the conclusion that 5 years’ experience of
physical teaching as an Assistant Professor after acquiring M. Ch. degree is one of the requisite
qualifications.

15. Strong reliance has been placed by Mr. Chitambaresh on Rule 10(ab) of Part – II, KS and SSR. A
perusal of certain provisions of the KS and SSR would be of profit:

2 (15) "Service" means a group of persons classified by the State Government as a
State or a Subordinate Service as the case may be.

2 (16) "Special Rules" shall mean the rules in Part III applicable to each service or
class of service.

10. Qualifications - (a)(i) The educational or other qualifications, if any, required for
a post shall be as specified in the Special Rules applicable to the service in which that
post is included or as specified in the executive orders of Government in cases where
Special Rules have not been issued for the post/service.

(ii) Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules or in the Special Rules, the qualifications
recognised by executive orders or standing orders of Government as equivalent to a qualification
specified for a post, in the Special Rules or found acceptable by the Commission as per rule 13(b)(i)
of the said rules in cases where acceptance of equivalent qualifications is provided for in the rules
and such of those qualifications which pre-suppose the acquisition of the lower qualification
prescribed for the post, shall also be sufficient for the post. ***

16. Turning to Rule 10(ab), it appears to have been incorporated in 1993 by an amendment. The text
of Rule 10(ab) reads:

“Where the Special Rules or Recruitment Rules for a post in any service prescribe
qualification of experience, it shall, unless otherwise specified, be one gained by

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159616406/

5

Dr. Sharmad vs The State Of Kerala on 10 January, 2025

persons on temporary or regular appointment in capacities other than paid or unpaid
apprentices, trainees and casual labourers in Central or State Government service or
in Public Sector Undertaking or Registered Private Sector Undertaking, after
acquiring the basic qualification for the post:

Provided that the experience gained as factory workers on daily wages of a
permanent nature may be accepted, if the service is continuous and not of a casual
nature.”

17. ‘Recruitment Rules’ is used in Rule 10(ab) as an alternative to Special Rules, without the same
being defined. To understand what ‘Recruitment Rules’ would mean in the context, one may
simultaneously read Rule 10(a)(i) extracted supra.

18. Thus, without ‘Recruitment Rules’ being defined, it can take colour from Rule 10(a)(i) and be
understood to mean and include executive orders of the Government in a case where Special Rules
are absent.

19. Even if the KS and SSR were applicable, nothing turns on it because Rule 10(ab) itself
consciously uses the expression “unless otherwise specified”. The Tribunal briefly assigned a reason
as to how such expression was material for dislodging the argument of Dr. Jyotish. While we concur
with the Tribunal, we wish to elaborate a little further for the sake of clarity.

20. Our reading of Rule 10 of the KS SSR, as originally framed in 1958, together with the
amendments incorporated in it from time to time, including Rule 10(ab), leads us to the irresistible
conclusion that Rule 10 is entirely irrelevant and immaterial for appointment on promotion in the
Administrative and Teaching Cadres of the Medical Education Services. The recruitment rules with
which we are concerned, i.e., G.O. dated 07th April, 2008, was issued at a point of time when Rule
10(ab) had already found its way in the KS and SSR by an amendment. G.O. dated 07th April, 2008
was issued superseding all existing rules and orders in force on the method of appointment of the
faculties under medical education service. The executive must, therefore, be deemed to be aware of
what the KS and SSR, which are the general rules, provided. Notwithstanding the same, G.O. dated
07th April, 2008 was issued governing recruitment in two branches i.e. Administrative and
Teaching Cadres. G.O. dated 07th April, 2008 is, thus, a special rule as distinguished from a general
rule like the KS and SSR. Rule 10(ab), on its own showing, having referred to the expression “unless
otherwise specified”, the same has to be given some meaning or else it would be rendered
redundant. It is well settled that no word, no phrase and no expression used in a legislation should
be excluded as surplusage, while the courts embark on a course of interpretation. In our reading, the
distinction in the qualifications for posts in Branch-I and Branch-II in G.O. dated 07th April, 2008
would constitute the specification which is excluded from the purview of Rule 10(ab) and such rule
had / has no application to the promotional appointment in question. The Tribunal was quite right
in its observation.

21. We also propose to assign one other reason, in continuation of the one discussed above, to
support the view of the Tribunal that the original application of Dr. Jyotish did deserve in limine

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159616406/

6

dismissal.

Dr. Sharmad vs The State Of Kerala on 10 January, 2025

22. This is a case where the maxim expressio unius est exclusio alterius (meaning whatever has not
been included has impliedly been excluded) would apply. In G.O. dated 07th April, 2008, the words
“after acquiring postgraduate degree” are specifically included in the column for experience qua
eligibility criteria for appointment on the posts of Director of Medical Education and Joint Director
of Medical Education/Principals of Medical Colleges, i.e., posts in Branch – I i.e. Administrative
Cadre. If, indeed, it were the intention of the executive that aspirants for the said post of Associate
Professor, or, for that matter, for the post of Professor were required to have physical teaching
experience in the feeder posts for specified number of years “after acquiring postgraduate degree”, it
defies reason as to why the same qualification was not included for appointments on promotion to
posts borne in Branch – II i.e. Teaching Cadre but included for the posts borne in Branch – I i.e.
Administrative Cadre. The submission on behalf of Dr. Jyotish that posts borne in the
Administrative Cadre have responsibilities different from those borne in the Teaching Cadre, though
attractive at first blush, pales into insignificance primarily for the reason that insistence of physical
teaching experience of a specified number of years with a particular postgraduate or super speciality
degree would seem to be more required and demanding for appointment on posts in the Teaching
Cadre rather than those in the Administrative Cadre. We are, thus, minded to hold that the
exclusion of the words “after acquiring postgraduate degree” is deliberate and conscious and the
contentions advanced by Mr. Chitambaresh, to the contrary, do not commend acceptance.

23. Note to Rule 28(b)(1A) of Part – II, KS and SSR also does not come to the rescue of Dr. Jyotish.
The provision therein would apply if on the relevant date there is no qualified candidate for
promotion. That is not the case here. As on the date of occurrence of vacancy i.e. 13th November,
2012, Dr. Sharmad had physical teaching experience of more than 5 years as Assistant Professor (he
having joined on 11th January, 2007). He being eligible, in terms of the recruitment rules, there was
no occasion for invoking the said note. The High Court erred in placing reliance on Rule 28(b)(1A).

24. It is now time to consider the decisions cited by Mr. Chitambaresh.

25. Shesharao Jangluji Bagde v. Bhaiyya s/o Govindrao Karale10 was relied on for the proposition
that experience gained has to be subsequent to the acquisition of qualification. What this Court in
paragraph 3 held is this:

“3. *** Normally when we talk of an experience, unless the context otherwise
demands, it should be taken as experience after acquiring the minimum
qualifications required and, therefore, necessarily will have to be posterior to the
acquisition of the qualification. However, in the case of a promotion the same
interpretation may not be just or warranted. It would 1991 Supp (1) SCC 367 depend
on the relevant provisions as also the particular type of experience which is required.
***” (emphasis supplied)

26. It is clear as daylight that what this Court held and what is argued as a proposition of law are at
variance. The particular type of experience required by G.O. dated 07th April, 2008 was possessed

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159616406/

7

Dr. Sharmad vs The State Of Kerala on 10 January, 2025

by Dr. Sharmad; hence, this decision does not come to the rescue of Dr. Jyotish. Furthermore, an
examination of the ratio of the decision favours the case of Dr. Sharmad. Not only does the passage
begin with ‘(N)ormally’ leaving room for cases which are other than normal, this Court also qualified
that experience required should be deemed to be experience gained after acquiring the minimum
qualifications, unless the context otherwise demands. This is crucial. Also, such a general
interpretation may not arise in case of promotional appointments. G.O. dated 07th April, 2008, read
as a whole, evinces without any ambiguity the view of the Government that where the experience
had to be gained posterior to the acquisition of qualification, it had directly stated so. Thus, in the
context of this case, absence of such a stipulation gives rise to but one conclusion, that the
Government did not demand such post-qualification experience for the posts under consideration
here. Although, normally, experience gained after acquiring a particular qualification could
justifiably be insisted upon by the employer, there could be exceptions and the present case is one
such exception. It is well settled that the intention of the rule framer has to be assessed on both
parameters i.e. the words used and that of necessary implication. The requisite of post-qualification
experience being present in Branch – I, and absent from Branch – II, necessarily implies that it was
not a requirement for appointments on promotion to posts borne in Branch – II.

27. The next decision cited is Arun Kumar Agarwal (Dr.) v. State of Bihar11 for the proposition that
if a candidate is available with super speciality, he should be given preference. We need to read
paragraph 12 of the decision to understand what precisely was held by this Court. The relevant
sentence reads:

“12. *** Thus the appellant having a degree in superspeciality and also having
research work or working experience has been rightly given preference in the matter
of appointment to the post of Assistant Professor in Neurosurgery over respondent 5
who did not have a degree in superspeciality.”

28. Arun Kumar Agarwal (Dr.) (supra) is distinguishable on facts. Since ‘preference’
has been referred to, it goes without saying that the ratio thereof could apply where
other qualifications / things being equal, preference is given to an aspirant having
higher qualification. In the case before us, although both Dr. Sharmad and Dr.
Jyotish were holders of M. Ch. degrees, as on date of occurrence of the vacancy on the
said post of Associate Professor i.e. 13th November, 2012, Dr. Jyotish did not have
the requisite experience of 5 years physical teaching as an Assistant Professor (he
admittedly having been promoted to such post only on 22nd July, 2008). Question of
preferring Dr. Jyotish to Dr. Sharmad did not arise at all since the former was 1991
Supp (1) SCC 287 deficient insofar as experience on the post of Assistant Professor is
concerned.

29. The upshot of the aforesaid discussion leaves us with no option but to hold that
the impugned judgment and order of the High Court is unsustainable. The same is set
aside and the judgment and order of the Tribunal restored, with the result that the
original application of Dr. Jyotish shall stand dismissed.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159616406/

8

Dr. Sharmad vs The State Of Kerala on 10 January, 2025

30. Civil Appeal No. 13422 of 2024 is, thus, allowed. Parties shall, however, bear their
own costs.

31. Pending application, if any, stands disposed of.

32. The High Court, vide the impugned judgment and order dated 4th April, 2017,
modified the order dated 9th January, 2015 of the Tribunal under challenge before it
and disposed of the original petition12 preferred by Dr. R. Jayaprakash. This appeal,
by special leave, is directed against the said judgment and order.

33. Promotion from the post of Senior Lecturer to the post of Assistant Professor in
Paediatrics was the subject matter of consideration in the original application before
the Tribunal. Whether three years’ physical teaching experience gained after
acquisition of Post Graduate (PG) qualification is the prescribed condition that an
aspirant was required to fulfil, fell for examination. The Tribunal held that experience
gained only after acquiring PG qualification would count.

34. The operative part of the High Court’s order reads as follows:

“In the said circumstances, the impugned order passed by the Tribunal in T.A.
No.4858/12 to the extent it held that Rule 10(ab) of the General Rules is applicable in
the matter of promotion to the post of Assistant Professor in the Medical Education
Department is confirmed. However, the consequential direction issued by the
Tribunal to the first respondent to review promotion of the applicant and respondent
Nos.4 to 6 and assign the dates of promotion to the post of Assistant Professor,
having due regard to the date of occurrence of the vacancy and the date of acquisition
of Post Graduate qualification in the feeder category, stand set aside.”

35. The decisions cited by Mr. Romy Chacko, learned senior counsel for the
impleading applicants have been considered.

36. Indian Airlines Ltd. v. S Gopalakrishnan13 laid down the law upon consideration
of the general information instructions which clearly indicated that the experience
would be computed after the date of acquiring necessary qualifications. That is not
the case here. The requirements in Indian Airlines Ltd. (supra) are strikingly
dissimilar to the recruitment rules governing promotional appointments, which are
under consideration. This decision, therefore, is of no assistance to Mr. Chacko.

37. The decisions of the High Court, viz., Sirajudheen v. Public Service
Commission14, Rabi v. State of Kerala15 and A. Basheer v. Saiful Islam A.16, once
again did not have the occasion to consider G.O. 2001 (2) SCC 362 1999 (1) LLN 408
2007 SCC OnLine Ker 418 2014 SCC OnLine Ker 18469 dated 07th April, 2008 since
the recruitment in question in all three cases were in different departments of the
Govt. of Kerala. The said decisions having been rendered upon examination of rules

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159616406/

9

Dr. Sharmad vs The State Of Kerala on 10 January, 2025

governing appointments on the posts of Assistant Motor Vehicle Inspector, Reader in
Political Science and Assistant Professor in the Kerala Dental Education Service,
respectively, which are at variance with G.O. dated 07th April, 2008, these three
decisions of the High Court also do not help Mr. Chacko.

38. Having regard to the findings and conclusions that we have recorded while
allowing Civil Appeal No. 13422 of 2024, the judgment and order under challenge
dated 4th April, 2017 cannot be sustained in law. The same is set aside with the result
that the original application of Dr. R. Jayaprakash shall stand dismissed.

39. Thus, Civil Appeal No. 13423 of 2024 too stands allowed.

40. Pending application, if any, stands disposed of.

………………………………………J. (DIPANKAR DATTA) ………….……………………………J. (PRASHANT
KUMAR MISHRA) New Delhi.

January 10, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159616406/

10

