Sambhubhai Raisangbhai Padhiyar vs The State Of Gujarat on 17 December, 2024

Sambhubhai Raisangbhai Padhiyar vs The State Of Gujarat on
17 December, 2024

Bench: Aravind Kumar, B.R. Gavai

2024 INSC 987                                                     REPORTABLE

                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                              CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                        CRIMINAL APPEAL Nos. _________ of 2024
                    (@ Special Leave Petition (Crl.) Nos. 9015-9016 of 2019)

             SAMBHUBHAI RAISANGBHAI
             PADHIYAR                                             APPELLANT(s)

                                               VERSUS

             STATE OF GUJARAT                                   RESPONDENT(s)

                                                 WITH

                               Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 9162/2021

                                             JUDGMENT

K.V. Viswanathan, J.

Criminal Appeal Nos. _________ of 2024 (@ Special Leave Petition (Crl.) Nos. 9015-9016 of
2019)

1. 13:44:28 IST Reason:

Leave granted.

2. Wednesday, 13th April 2016 dawned normally for the family of Pravingiri Gosai (PW-9), a farmer,
who also alternated as the temple priest at Piludara village under the Vedaj Police Station, Bharuch
District in the State of Gujarat. However, by dusk the situation had turned macabre for them, when
their four-year old child was found murdered in the village outskirts.

3. The appellant herein stood trial for the offences of kidnapping, sexual assault and murder of the
said child and was convicted and sentenced to death by the Trial Court. The High Court of Gujarat at

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164245449/

1

Sambhubhai Raisangbhai Padhiyar vs The State Of Gujarat on 17 December, 2024

Ahmedabad, by the judgment dated 03.04.2019 in R/Criminal Confirmation Case No. 2 of 2018
with R/Criminal Appeal No. 1207 of 2018, confirmed the conviction and sentence of death imposed
on him for the offences punishable under Sections 302, 364, and 377 of the Indian Penal Code (for
short ‘IPC’) and Sections 4 and 6 of the Protection of Children from Sexual offences Act, 2012 (for
short ‘POCSO Act’). The appellant is before us in appeal by way of special leave.

Brief Facts:

4. Pravingiri Gosai (PW-9) and his wife Artiben (PW-13.2) left their house at 06:00 a.m. in the
morning of 13.04.2016 to get fodder for their cattle leaving their two small children Rohit @ Shital,
aged about four years, the deceased and Rajeshwari, aged three months, along with PW-9’s mother
at home. When they returned at 11.00 a.m., PW-9’s mother and children were at home. PW-9 left
again to install a Dish TV in the village and returned at around 1 O’clock. He noticed that Rohit was
not at home and when he inquired from his wife Arti, she replied that Rohit was playing near the
temple and had not been seen since long. The desperate father continued his inquiries when PW-10
Jyotsnaben, his sister-in-law, who lived in the neighborhood told him that when Rohit was playing
near the temple about 12:30 PM, the appellant who belonged to their village took the deceased and
when she inquired from the appellant as to where he was taking the deceased, the appellant in spite
of being dissuaded from doing so, told her that he will buy the child ice- cream and return in a while.

5. Since Rohit had not returned, PW-9 continued his search in the village when he met the appellant
under a jamun tree behind the Pir Dargah at the bank of the lake at about 2 O’clock. When PW-9
inquired about his son with the appellant, the appellant told him that he gave the deceased
ice-cream to eat and sent him home. PW-9 went home and when Rohit was not there, he came back
to the lake, the appellant was not found. PW-13.2 Artiben, the mother of the deceased also carried
out the search carried out and after receiving information from PW- 11 Manoj Kumar Parmar that
the deceased was taken by the appellant, she along with her sister-in-law PW-10, and daughter went
to the appellant’s house. The appellant’s mother was there and the appellant was not there. They left
a message with the appellant’s mother that the appellant may be told to send their son (deceased)
back home.

6. PW-9 continued his inquiries and search when he received a call from Manoj Kumar Parmar
(PW-11) who asked PW-9 to come to the bank of the lake behind the Pir Dargah. When PW-9
reached the spot, he found the dead body of his son lying naked near the bushes.

7. PW-9 lodged a complaint around 06:45 at the Vedaj Police Station which resulted in registration
of an FIR and the subsequent proceedings. After the inquest, the body of the deceased was sent for
postmortem to BKS Medical College Vadodara. The postmortem report reveals that death was due
to asphyxia due to throttling. A number of injuries were found on the body of the deceased which are
as follows:

“The following injuries were observed during the external examination of the dead
body.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164245449/

2

Sambhubhai Raisangbhai Padhiyar vs The State Of Gujarat on 17 December, 2024

(1) Multiple scratch abrasions of size varying from 0.1 cm x 0.5 cm to 1.5 cm x 0.1 cm
with underlying contusions of size varying from 1 cm x 1 cm to 2.5 cm x 2 cm present
over perianal region. Perianal skin swollen, reddish in colour. Anal orifice dilated,
roomy diameter of anal orifice is 2.5 cm. Part of rectum protruded out through anal
orifice.

(2) A bite mark in form of pressure abrasion of size 4 cm x 3.5 cm present over right
cheek, 3 cm above right angle of mandible and 4 cm right to midline.

(3) Multiple laceration of size varying from 0.5 cm x 0.2 cm to 1 cm x 0.2 cm x tissue
deep with underlying contusions of size varying from 1 cm x 0.5 cm to 1.5 cm x 1 cm
present over inner aspects of both lips.

(4) Multiple crescentic shaped abrasions of size varying from 0.5 cm x 0.1 cm to 1.2
cm x 0.1 cm in an area of 5 cm x 3 cm present over left side of neck, 3.5 cm left to
midline and 2 cm below chin.

(5) Two abrasions of size 1.5 cm x 0.5 cm and 0.5 cm x 0.2 cm present over right side
of the neck, 1.5 cm below chin and 2 cm, 3 cm right to midline respectively.

(6) Multiple scratch abrasions of size varying from 8.5 cm x 0.5 cm to 2.5 cm x 0.5 cm
present in an area of 20 cm x 9 cm, over back of right thigh.

Note: All abrasions and contusions are reddish in colour. Margins of all lacerated wounds are
irregular and contused with red clotted blood over it.

All of the above mentioned injuries were antemortem in origin.” It will be clear from the above that
the deceased was also subjected to penetrative sexual assault through the anus. PW-8 Dr. Kalpesh
Kumar who led the postmortem team has categorically opined that the cause of death was asphyxia
due to throttling. In view of this, there is no iota of doubt that the deceased had a homicidal death.
The only question that arises is as to whether there is any evidence against the appellant to convict
him for the offences charged.

8. The appellant was arrested (at about 20:45 hrs. to 21:26 hrs.) on 14.04.2016 and his medical
examination revealed that there were injury marks on his genitals as spoken to by PW-7 Dr.
Kamlesh Kumar.

9. The prosecution attempts to rely on the discovery panchnama (Exh.18) to reinforce their case that
it was pursuant to the appellant’s statement that the place of occurrence was discovered. PW-4
Bharat Kumar and PW-5 Arjun Sinh were examined in support of the said purported discovery
panchnama. This document, however, is seriously disputed by the defence. According to the
defence, the panchnama (Exh.9) of the place of the occurrence was already drawn on 14.04.2016
between 16:00 hrs and 18:30 hrs and by the time the discovery panchnama (Exh.18) was drawn at
around 09:00 a.m. on 15.04.2016, the place of occurrence was already known to the prosecution.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164245449/

3

Sambhubhai Raisangbhai Padhiyar vs The State Of Gujarat on 17 December, 2024

10. It is also the case of the prosecution that as part of the same transaction when the place of
occurrence was discovered and after the said panchnama was drawn at around 09:00 a.m. on
15.04.2016, the accused voluntarily expressed willingness to show the place where he had thrown
the clothes of the victim and in pursuance thereof the recovery panchnama (Exh.21) was drawn up
between 09:15 hours and 09:45 hrs on 15.04.2016 and a light pink coloured Tshirt and a red
coloured leggings were recovered The prosecution has examined PW-6 Maheshbhai in support of
the recoveries. The defence has strongly objected to the admissibility of the recoveries on the ground
that no statement of the accused was recorded on this aspect and that what is available is merely a
purported recovery carried out. We have considered this aspect in the later part of the judgment
coupled with the applicability of Section 8 of the Evidence Act to see if the conduct of the accused in
leading to the place where the clothes of the deceased were found would be admissible in evidence.

11. We have heard Ms. Uttara Babbar, learned senior counsel for the appellant, appearing pro bono,
who presented the case comprehensively and filed detailed written submissions. We have also heard
Ms. Swati Ghildiyal, learned counsel for the State who in ably advancing the State’s case, left no
stone unturned in countering the submissions of the learned senior counsel for the appellant.
Detailed written submissions were also filed by her. We have perused the records including the
records of the trial court.

12. The case rests on circumstantial evidence. We are conscious of the five golden principles
repeatedly reiterated by this Court which are to be borne in mind in cases involved with
circumstantial evidence. In the leading case of Sharad Birdhichand Sarda vs State of Maharashtra,
(1984) 4 SCC 116, it was held as under:-

“153. A close analysis of this decision would show that the following conditions must
be fulfilled before a case against an accused can be said to be fully established:

“(1) the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should be
fully established.

It may be noted here that this Court indicated that the circumstances concerned
“must or should” and not “may be” established. There is not only a grammatical but a
legal distinction between “may be proved” and “must be or should be proved” as was
held by this Court in Shivaji Sahabrao Bobade v. State of Maharashtra [(1973) 2 SCC
793 : 1973 SCC (Cri) 1033 : 1973 Crl LJ 1783] where the observations were made:

“Certainly, it is a primary principle that the accused must be and not merely may be
guilty before a court can convict and the mental distance between ‘may be’ and ‘must
be’ is long and divides vague conjectures from sure conclusions.” (2) the facts so
established should be consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused,
that is to say, they should not be explainable on any other hypothesis except that the
accused is guilty, (3) the circumstances should be of a conclusive nature and
tendency, (4) they should exclude every possible hypothesis except the one to be
proved, and (5) there must be a chain of evidence so complete as not to leave any

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164245449/

4

Sambhubhai Raisangbhai Padhiyar vs The State Of Gujarat on 17 December, 2024

reasonable ground for the conclusion consistent with the innocence of the accused
and must show that in all human probability the act must have been done by the
accused.” Approaching the case at hand with the above principles in mind, we find
the following.

Circumstance No. 1: The appellant last seen with the deceased

13. It is the consistent case of the prosecution that the deceased child Rohit @ Shital was barely four
years old and was playing near his house when the accused took him from there under the pretext of
getting him ice-cream. PW-10 Jyotsnaben, who was the aunt of the deceased and who lived nearby,
clearly deposed that on the day of the incident when she was cooking near the front side of the
house, the appellant came to her and asked for water. Thereafter, while leaving, the accused took the
victim. When she asked the appellant where he was taking the victim, the appellant replied that he
was taking the victim to get ice-cream and he will send him after that. When PW-10 told him not to
do so, the appellant stated that he would send him back after getting the child ice-cream, and so
saying took the child with him.

14. It is undisputed that the family of the deceased knew the appellant and his family. PW-10 further
deposed that when after a long time the deceased did not return, she informed the same to her
sister-in-law PW-13.2 Artiben. PW-10 maintained her narration in the cross where it also emerges
that she searched for child at the ice-cream shop of Kabo and Yogesh in the village and was told that
the victim had not been there.

15. The deposition of PW-10 Jyotsnaben is fully corroborated by the evidence given by PW-11 Manoj
Kumar. PW-11 states that he was running a garment shop at Piludara village; that on the day of the
incident, the appellant Shambhu passed by his shop at about 12 O’clock; that Pravingiri’s son was
with the appellant; that on being asked the appellant informed that he was going to the shop of
Kaliya to get ice-cream. PW-11 also stated that when the appellant was passing by the shop along
with victim, PW-12 Somabhai Ranchhodbhai, Ranjitbhai Fatesang and Raysangbhai Manorbhai
were also present. The defence contends that PW-12 did not support the case of the prosecution and
was declared hostile. This aspect of the matter does not detract from the clinching evidence of the
evidence of aunt of the deceased - PW-10 Jyotsnaben which we find very natural or the evidence of
PW-11 Manoj Kumar who had no reason to falsely depose to the said fact. The only suggestion given
to PW-11 is that he was deposing because he was friend of the father of the deceased. We are not
persuaded to discredit the testimony of PW-11 on this score.

16. Apart from PW-10 and PW-11, PW-13.1 Sursangbhai also speaks about the appellant taking the
deceased and the appellant stating that he was going to get the child ice-cream. PW-13.1 states that
thereafter he went inside the house and left for the farm. It was strongly contended by the defence
that in the cross- examination, he had deposed that he had not seen the appellant passing by the
shop along with the deceased. The portion of the cross-examination has to be read in the context of
the earlier statements occurring therein. They are as follows:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164245449/

5

Sambhubhai Raisangbhai Padhiyar vs The State Of Gujarat on 17 December, 2024

“It is not true that Manojbhai’s shop is located at the distance of half kilometer from
my house. It is true that Manojbhai’s shop is in the market it is true that Manojbhai
runs business of ice cream and other goods. Kaliya’s shop is located in the other
market. I had reached Manojbhai’s shop at about 1 o’clock. It is true that the market
was open and there was movement of people. It is true that I had not seen Shambhu
passing by the shop along with the son of Pravin. Pravin bhai Maharaj is my friend. I
do not know his family members.” It will be seen that PW-13.1 states that he reached
Manojbhai’s shop at about 1 O’clock and that market was open and there was
movement of people and thereafter the statement occurs that he had not seen
appellant passing by along with the son of Pravingiri. Mrs. Swati Ghildiyal, learned
counsel for the State, in her written submissions, has furnished the portion as in
Gujarati which was also read to us and translated at the time of the oral hearing.
According to the learned counsel for the State, the particular sentence only meant
that PW-13.1, did not see the appellant leaving or going away from the shop and that
this was only because he had gone into his house prior to that. We are inclined to
accept the meaning as it comes out from the Gujarati version. The small
discrepancies insofar as the timings are concerned are only natural as the witnesses
were deposing nearly two years after the incident. They are not material
discrepancies.

17. Hence, it is undisputed that between 12:00 and 01:00 PM, the appellant went to the
neighborhood of the house of the deceased and partook water from the aunt PW-10, engaged in a
conversation with her and in spite of being dissuaded, took the deceased child under the pretext of
buying him ice-cream. The time lag between the accused being last seen and the sighting of the dead
body lying is also extremely short. PW-11 Manoj Kumar states that at about 5 O’clock in the evening
when they were searching for the victim and when they were near the boundary wall of the lake near
the Dargah, some persons informed them that a dead body was lying in the acacia bushes behind the
Dargah.

18. The incident has clearly occurred between 12:00 noon and 05:00 PM on 13.04.2016. The timing
is also corroborated by the doctor PW-8 who did the postmortem on 14.04.2016 between 03:35 PM
and 04:45 PM and he further deposed that death would have occurred 24 to 36 hours before the
postmortem. There are some important aspects which require to be noticed here and that is what
brings out the clinching nature of the case against the appellant.

19. The deceased, aged between three and a half and four years, was a small child, just out of
toddlerhood and at the pre- school stage. This is very significant because when the appellant has
from the neighborhood of the house of the deceased taken the deceased one would expect that the
small child would be brought back and dropped at the house. The appellant offered no explanation
as to what happened after the time he spent with the child and has no case that he handed over the
child to any other person or that he dropped the child home. Unlike in the case of grownups, where
an explanation about the manner of parting company could in a given case be acceptable in the case
of a small child who has been picked up from neighborhood of his house, it would be normal to
expect that the small child would be dropped back home or an explanation about entrusting of the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164245449/

6

Sambhubhai Raisangbhai Padhiyar vs The State Of Gujarat on 17 December, 2024

child to another person to be safely taken home is given. The appellant’s lack of explanation is to say
the least baffling.

20. According to PW-9 the father of the deceased, when he went in search of the child for the second
time to the area where PW-11 had told him about the appellant having proceeded with child, PW-9
actually met with the appellant and asked about the deceased. The appellant on asking told PW-9
that he gave ice- cream to the deceased and sent him. This statement in the deposition is also
mentioned at the earliest point in the First Information Report lodged on 13.04.2016 at about 07:30
PM in the evening.

21. It is well settled that if the accused is last seen with the deceased and particularly in a case of this
nature when the time gap between the last seen stage and occurrence of death is so short, the
accused must offer a plausible explanation as to how he parted company with the deceased and the
explanation offered must be satisfactory. Section 106 of the Evidence Act mandates that when any
fact is especially within the knowledge of any person, the burden of proving that fact is upon him. It
is on this principle that this Court has repeatedly held that if an accused fails to offer an explanation,
he fails to discharge the burden cast upon him under Section 106 and if he fails to offer a reasonable
explanation that itself provides an additional link in the chain of circumstances [See State of
Rajasthan Vs. Kashiram (2006) 12 SCC 254 and Pappu Vs. State of UP (2022) 10 SCC 321].
Circumstance No. 2: Found in the vicinity of the scene of crime at about the time of crime:

22. Both in the First Information Report and in the evidence, PW-9 speaks about his going to the
lake. It is not in dispute that it was this place, viz, near the boundary wall of the lake behind the
Dargah of Pir in the acacia bushes, the body of the deceased was found naked at around 5 O’clock on
13.04.2016. The presence of the accused at the scene of crime in the afternoon at about 2 O’clock in
the background of the evidence of last seen of PW-10, 11 and 13.2, is a clear link in the chain of
circumstances which point to the guilt of the accused. If one couples this fact with the fact that he
was not at home around the time when PW-10 Jyotsnaben and PW13.2 Artiben, the mother visited
the house of the appellant, it reinforces the evidence of PW-9 that in the afternoon, on the date of
crime, the appellant was at the place of the crime and the deceased who was taken from the house
was not with him at that moment.

Circumstance No. 3: Injury on the private parts of the accused

23. PW-7, Dr. Kamlesh Kumar who examined the accused on 15.04.2016 deposed that there was
injury on the genitals of the accused. Exh.P-27 certificate also reveals that there were abrasions on
the prepuce of the accused. It will be seen from the injuries on the deceased as reflected in the
evidence of PW-8 Dr. Kalpesh and the postmortem report Exh. P.28 that the perianal region of the
deceased had multiple scratch abrasions with the underlying contusions; that the perianal skin was
swollen and reddish in colour; the anal orifice dilated, roomy and that part of the rectum protruded
out through the anal orifice. The doctor has also opined that these injuries were antemortem in
origin. The abrasions in the prepuce of the accused were there even two days after the incident. The
only suggestion in the cross-examination to the doctor raised that if a person scratches the genitals a
lot, signs of contusions could be observed. No other explanation is offered. Considering the overall

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164245449/

7

Sambhubhai Raisangbhai Padhiyar vs The State Of Gujarat on 17 December, 2024

facts, we are inclined to accept this circumstance as an additional link in the chain of circumstances.
Circumstance No. 4: Conduct under Section 8 of the Evidence Act:

24. Irrespective of the admissibility of the discovery, panchnama (Exh.18) and the
recovery panchnama Exh. 21 and irrespective of the admissibility of the recovery of
the clothes of the deceased on the statement of the accused, we find that the conduct
of the appellant in leading the investigation team and the panchas and pointing out
where the apparel of the deceased was hidden would be admissible. In this case
PW-17, the Investigating Officer has clearly deposed that the accused showed
willingness to show the place where he had thrown the clothes. PW-17, his team and
the panchas reached by walking to the place as indicated by the accused. This Court
in A.N. Venkatesh and another v. State of Karnataka (2005) 7 SCC 714 relying on
Prakash Chand v. State (Delhi Admn.), (1949) 3 SCC 90 held as under:

“9. By virtue of Section 8 of the Evidence Act, the conduct of the accused person is
relevant, if such conduct influences or is influenced by any fact in issue or relevant
fact. The evidence of the circumstance, simpliciter, that the accused pointed out to
the police officer, the place where the dead body of the kidnapped boy was found and
on their pointing out the body was exhumed, would be admissible as conduct under
Section 8 irrespective of the fact whether the statement made by the accused
contemporaneously with or antecedent to such conduct falls within the purview of
Section 27 or not as held by this Court in Prakash Chand v. State (Delhi Admn.)
[(1979) 3 SCC 90 : 1979 SCC (Cri) 656 :

AIR 1979 SC 400] . Even if we hold that the disclosure statement made by the
accused-appellants (Exts. P-15 and P-16) is not admissible under Section 27 of the
Evidence Act, still it is relevant under Section 8. The evidence of the investigating
officer and PWs 1, 2, 7 and PW 4 the spot mahazar witness that the accused had taken
them to the spot and pointed out the place where the dead body was buried, is an
admissible piece of evidence under Section 8 as the conduct of the accused. Presence
of A-1 and A-2 at a place where ransom demand was to be fulfilled and their action of
fleeing on spotting the police party is a relevant circumstance and are admissible
under Section 8 of the Evidence Act.” We take this as an additional link in the chain
of circumstances.

Circumstance No. 5: Matching of Blood Group

25. Blood group on the clothes of the deceased tallied with the blood group of the
accused as per Exh.50, the Serological Analysis Report. PW-9 the father of the
deceased identified the clothes worn by the deceased on the fateful day. PW-17 the
Investigating Officer Gajendra Kumar has clearly deposed that the apparel of the
deceased was recovered near the situs of the crime. PW-7 Dr. Kamlesh Kumar who
medically examined the appellant deposed that samples of pubic hair, blood, saliva,
semen and nails were obtained of the accused and he further deposed that the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164245449/

8

Sambhubhai Raisangbhai Padhiyar vs The State Of Gujarat on 17 December, 2024

samples were sealed and the Muddamal was sent for further investigation through
police constable to FSL, Surat. Coming back to PW-17, he deposed about receiving
the sealed samples and keeping it in safe custody. Thereafter, he deposed that a
forwarding note was prepared for analysis of the aforementioned Muddamal and the
sealed samples to FSL, Surat and that a constable was deputed to submit the same to
FSL, Surat. The receipt obtained was duly filed. The Biological and Serological
Reports received from FSL, Surat were marked as Exh.49 and Exh.50 respectively.
The Serological analysis clearly showed that the small trouser (leggings), the anal
swab (semen) and the perianal swab (semen) had blood of group O. The accused had
also blood group O. We are satisfied with the chain of custody as emerging from the
evidence. The defence has a case that sample mark H mentioned in Exh.47 which is
the forwarding letter to the forensic science laboratory has neither been analyzed in
the biological analysis Exh.49 or in the serological analysis Exh.50 and hence
tampering cannot be ruled out. The State has countered the submission by
contending that sample mark ‘H’ in Exh.47 is a Khaki cover and is not an item
recovered from the accused and as such the State counsel contends that in all
likelihood sample mark H was a cover in which all other samples were put. The
matching of the blood group has occurred in sample F1 which is the anal swab
(semen) and F2 perianal swab (semen). The blood group of the aforesaid semen was
found to be O. It should be noted that the sample of semen of appellant along with
blood and saliva in sample no. G1 to G4 also had blood group O. The judgment in
Prakash Vs. State of Karnataka (2014) 12 SCC 133 cited by the appellant also does not
advance the case of the defence. It is clear from the facts of the case, that the blood
sample therein was decomposed and its original grouping could not be determined.
In any event, coupled with other circumstances indicated hereinabove, we are
inclined to consider the matching of blood group as an additional link in the chain as
far as the facts of this case is concerned.

26. The argument of Ms. Uttara Babbar, learned senior counsel is that no DNA test was carried out.
No doubt, the DNA test was not carried out and it would have been better for the prosecution to
have done the same. However, keeping the overall conspectus of the case in mind, we do not think
that not conducting DNA test was fatal to the prosecution. We draw support from the judgment of
this Court in Veerendra v. State of Madhya Pradesh, (2022) 8 SCC 668, wherein it was held as
under:

“53. In view of the nature of the provision under Section 53-ACrPC and the decisions
referred to, we are also of the considered view that the lapse or omission (purposeful
or otherwise) to carry out DNA profiling, by itself, cannot be permitted to decide the
fate of a trial for the offence of rape especially, when it is combined with the
commission of the offence of murder as in case of acquittal only on account of such a
flaw or defect in the investigation the cause of criminal justice would become the
victim. The upshot of this discussion is that even if such a flaw had occurred in the
investigation in a given case, the court has still a duty to consider whether the
materials and evidence available on record before it, are enough and cogent to prove

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164245449/

9

Sambhubhai Raisangbhai Padhiyar vs The State Of Gujarat on 17 December, 2024

the case of the prosecution. In a case which rests on circumstantial evidence, the
Court has to consider whether, despite such a lapse, the various links in the chain of
circumstances form a complete chain pointing to the guilt of the accused alone in
exclusion of all hypothesis of innocence in his favour.”

27. In view of the circumstances elucidated above, we do not feel the need to comment upon the
admissibility of the discovery panchnama Exh.P.18 and the recovery panchnama Exh.P.21. Even
eschewing the aspect of discovery under Section 27, we have found that other circumstantial
evidence does exist pointing to the guilt of the appellant.

Presumption under the POCSO Act

28. It is clearly established in evidence that the deceased was subjected to a brutal sexual assault.
The injuries as evidenced in the postmortem report Exh.P.28 particularly injury no. 1 clearly
indicate that the deceased was subjected to aggressive penetrative sexual assault. The injury on the
prepuce of the penis of the accused along with the matching of the blood group coupled with other
circumstantial evidence clearly constitute foundational facts for raising presumption under Sections
29 and 30 of the POCSO Act. Sections 29 and 30 of the POCSO Act reads as under:

“29. Presumption as to certain offences.—Where a person is prosecuted for
committing or abetting or attempting to commit any offence under Sections 3, 5, 7
and Section 9 of this Act, the Special Court shall presume, that such person has
committed or abetted or attempted to commit the offence, as the case may be unless
the contrary is proved.

30. Presumption of culpable mental state:- (1) In any prosecution for any offence
under this Act which requires a culpable mental state on the part of the accused, the
Special Court shall presume the existence of such mental state but it shall be a
defence for the accused to prove the fact that he had no such mental state with
respect to the act charged as an offence in that prosecution.

(2) For the purposes of this section, a fact is said to be proved only when the Special Court believes it
to exist beyond reasonable doubt and not merely when its existence is established by a
preponderance of probability.”

29. It will be seen that presumption under Section 29 is available where the foundational facts exist
for commission of offence under Section 5 of the POCSO Act. Section 5 of the POCSO Act deals with
aggravated penetrative sexual assault and Section 6 speaks of punishment for aggravated
penetrative sexual assault. Section 3 of the POCSO Act defines what penetrative sexual assault is.
The relevant Sections are extracted hereinbelow.

“3. Penetrative sexual assault. - A person is said to commit "penetrative sexual assault" if-

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164245449/

10

Sambhubhai Raisangbhai Padhiyar vs The State Of Gujarat on 17 December, 2024

(a) he penetrates his penis, to any extent, into the vagina, mouth, urethra or anus of a child or makes
the child to do so with him or any other person; or

5. Aggravated penetrative sexual assault.— (i) whoever commits penetrative sexual assault causing
grievous hurt or causing bodily harm and injury or injury to the sexual organs of the child; or

(m) whoever commits penetrative sexual assault on a child below twelve years; or

6. Punishment for aggravated penetrative sexual assault.—(1) Whoever commits aggravated
penetrative sexual assault shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not
be less than twenty years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, which shall mean
imprisonment for the remainder of natural life of that person, and shall also be liable to fine, or with
death.

(2) The fine imposed under sub-section (1) shall be just and reasonable and paid to the victim to
meet the medical expenses and rehabilitation of such victim.]

30. The manner in which the appellant enticed the deceased child under the pretext of buying
ice-cream in spite of being dissuaded by the aunt (PW-10) and without the consent of the lawful
guardians also makes out an offence under Section 364 of IPC. The aggravated penetrative sexual
assault clearly establishes offence under Section 377 of IPC and Sections 4 and 6 of the POCSO Act.
The appellant has not rebutted the presumption by adducing proof to the contrary.

31. For the reasons stated above, we are satisfied that the circumstances enumerated hereinabove
are fully established; that the circumstances so established are consistent only with the hypothesis of
the guilt of the accused and are not explainable by any other hypothesis; that the circumstances are
conclusive in nature and further that the chain of circumstance is so complete as to point to the
conclusion that the appellant is guilty of the offences charged. In view of the same, we uphold the
conviction as imposed by the Trial Court and confirmed by the High Court. Sentence:

32. The Trial Court has imposed the sentence of death and the High Court has confirmed the same.
It is time for us to draw up a balance sheet of the aggravating and mitigating circumstances to
decide whether the case falls in the category of rarest of rare case. We also need to examine whether
the sentence of life imprisonment is foreclosed and the possibility of reformation is completely ruled
out.

33. Without doubt, the crime committed by the appellant was diabolic in character. He enticed the
innocent child by tempting him with ice-cream and brutally sodomized and murdered the four-year
old. The appellant also mercilessly strangulated the deceased. The post-mortem report clearly
indicated that death was due to asphyxia by throttling.

34. On the mitigating side, the appellant was 24 years of age when the incident happened; he had no
criminal antecedents; the appellant hails from a low socio-economic household as the Mitigation
Investigation Report filed by Ms. Komal of Project 39A, pursuant to the order of this Court dated

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164245449/

11

Sambhubhai Raisangbhai Padhiyar vs The State Of Gujarat on 17 December, 2024

05.10.2023 indicates. The mitigation report further indicates that experts have opined that the
appellant is diagnosed with moderate intensity psychotic features and intellectual disability and that
the appellant had in his early childhood contacted Tuberculosis Meningitis (TBM). The appellant,
according to the report, maintains family ties with his 64-year-old mother who takes care of his 10
year old daughter. The appellant’s wife has deserted him.

35. By an order of 05.10.2023, we also called for the conduct and behaviour of the appellant from
the Superintendent of Vadodara Central Jail as well as a report on his mental health. The report
from the Superintendent of Vadoara Jail indicates, that the behaviour of the appellant in prison is
completely normal and that his conduct in jail is good. The report from the Hospital for Mental
Health indicates that the appellant has no psychiatric problem at present. The report does indicate a
feeling of remorse in the appellant. The appellant has contended that the projective test adopted by
the Hospital for Mental Health has its limitations for reliability. Be that as it may.

36. Considering the overall facts and circumstances, we hold that the present is not a case where it
can be said that the possibility of reformation is completely ruled out. The option of life
imprisonment is also not foreclosed. The case does not fall in the category of rarest of rare case. We
are of the opinion that ends of justice would be met if we adopt the path carved out in Swami
Shraddananda Vs. State of Karnataka (2008) 13 SCC 767.

37. Even though the case of the appellant falls short of the rarest of rare category, considering the
nature of the crime, we are strongly of the view that a sentence of life imprisonment which normally
works out for 14 years would be grossly disproportionate and inadequate. Having regard to the
nature of the offence, a sentence of imprisonment for a prescribed period without remission would
alone be proportionate to the crime and also not jeopardize the public confidence in the efficacy of
the legal system.

38. This Court recently in Nawas Alias Mulanavas Vs. State of Kerala (2024) SCC OnLine SC 315,
adverting to this aspect had the following to say :-

“29. How much is too much and how much is too little? This is the difficult area we
have tried to address here. As rightly observed, there can be no straitjacket formulae.
Pegging the point up to which remission powers cannot be invoked is an exercise that
has to be carefully undertaken and the discretion should be exercised on reasonable
grounds. The spectrum is very large. The principle in Swamy Shraddananda (supra)
as affirmed in V. Sriharan (supra) was evolved as the normally accepted norm of 14
years was found to be grossly disproportionate on the lower side. At the same time,
since it is a matter concerning the liberty of the individual, courts should also guard
against any disproportion in the imposition, on the higher side too. A delicate balance
has to be struck. While undue leniency, which will affect the public confidence and
the efficacy of the legal system, should not be shown, at the same time, since a good
part of the convict's life with freedom is being sliced away (except in cases where the
Court decides to impose imprisonment till rest of the full life), in view of his
incarceration, care should be taken that the period fixed is also not harsh and

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164245449/

12

Sambhubhai Raisangbhai Padhiyar vs The State Of Gujarat on 17 December, 2024

excessive. While by the very nature of the task mathematical exactitude is an
impossibility, that will not deter the Court from imposing a period of sentence which
will constitute “a just dessert” for the convict…..”

39. Applying this principle, we hold that a sentence of imprisonment for a period of 25 (twenty-five)
years without remission would be ‘a just dessert’.

40. The trial Court had sentenced the appellant to death under Section 302 IPC, to simple
imprisonment of 10 (ten) years and a fine of Rs.10,000/- for offence under Section 364 and to life
imprisonment and a fine of Rs.10,000/- for offence under Section 6 of the POCSO Act. No separate
sentences were awarded for offences punishable under Section 4 of the POCSO Act and Section 377
of IPC. The trial Court had directed that the accused should suffer all the above ordered
punishments together. The High Court had confirmed the death sentence and dismissed the appeal
of the appellant.

41. In view of what we have held hereinabove, while maintaining the conviction under Sections 302,
364, 377 of IPC and Sections 4 and 6 of the POCSO Act, we set aside the sentence of death for the
offence under Section 302 and substitute the same with that of rigorous imprisonment for a period
of 25 (twenty- five) years without remission. We also order that the sentence imposed for offences
under Section 364 IPC (10 years S.I. and Rs. 10,000/- fine) and Section 6 of the POCSO Act (life
imprisonment and Rs.10,000/- fine) shall run concurrently with the sentence of rigorous
imprisonment for a period of 25 years without remission, which we have presently ordered.

42. The appeals shall stand partly allowed in the above terms. Considering the socio-economic
condition of the accused on the facts of the present case, we set aside the fine amounts imposed.
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 9162 of 2021:

43. This Special Leave Petition arises out of an order of the High Court of Gujarat at Ahmedabad in
R/Special Criminal Application No.18906 of 2021 whereby the High Court denied parole to the
petitioner.

44. In view of the judgment passed in Criminal Appeal (Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 9015-9016 of
2019, no orders are required to be passed in this Special Leave Petition. The Special Leave Petition
is, accordingly, dismissed. However, the dismissal of the Special Leave Petition will not debar the
petitioner from availing such remedies as are available under law and in accordance with our
judgment rendered hereinabove.

………........................J. [B.R. GAVAI] ……….........................J. [ARAVIND KUMAR]
……….........................J. [K. V. VISWANATHAN] New Delhi;

17th December, 2024.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164245449/

13

