Frank Vitus vs Narcotics Control Bureau on 6 January, 2025

Frank Vitus vs Narcotics Control Bureau on 6 January, 2025

Author: Abhay S. Oka

Bench: Abhay S. Oka

2025 INSC 30                                                                REPORTABLE

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 2814-2815 OF 2024

                            FRANK VITUS                                   …APPELLANT

                                                        Versus

                            NARCOTICS CONTROL BUREAU
                            AND ORS.                                   …RESPONDENTS

                                                       ORDER

ABHAY S. OKA, J.

FACTUAL ASPECTS

1. By judgment and order dated 08th July, 2024, two main issues concerning bail conditions were
decided. Now, the issue that remains to be answered is whether it is necessary to implead a Foreign
Registration Officer appointed under Rule 3 of the Registration of Foreigners Rules, 1992 (for short
‘the Rules’) in the bail application filed by a foreigner within the meaning of the Foreigners Act, 1946
(for short ‘the Act’). Under a citizen of India.

2. Under Section 3 of the Act, there is a power vested in the Central Government to issue an order
making provisions either generally or concerning any particular foreigner or class of foreigners of
prohibiting, regulating or restricting the entry of foreigners into India or their departure therefrom
or their presence or continued presence. Under clause (g) of Section 3(2), a power has been
conferred on the Central Government to issue an order directing that a foreigner shall be arrested or
detained or confined.

3. In the exercise of the power conferred under Section 3 of the Act, the Foreigners Order, 1948 (for
short, ‘the Order’) has been issued. Clause 2(2) of the Order provides for appointing a Civil

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/3991386/

1

Frank Vitus vs Narcotics Control Bureau on 6 January, 2025

Authority by the Central Government. Clause 5 of the Order deals with the power to grant
permission to depart from India. Clause 5 of the Order reads thus:

“5. Power to grant permission to depart from India.

(1) No foreigner shall leave India:-

(a) otherwise than at such port or other recognised place of departure on the borders
of India as a Registration Officer having jurisdiction at that port or place may appoint
in this behalf, either for foreigners generally or for any specified class or description
of foreigners; or

(b) without the leave of the civil authority having jurisdiction at such port or place.

(2) Leave shall be refused if the civil authority is satisfied that

(a) the foreigner has failed to comply with the formalities of departure prescribed
under the Registration of Foreigners Rules, 1939;

(b) the foreigners presence is required in India to answer a criminal charge;

(c) the foreigners departure will prejudice the relations of the Central Government
with a foreign power;

(d) the departure of the foreigner has been prohibited under an order issued by a
competent authority.

(3) (a) Notwithstanding anything contained in the above sub-paragraphs, a civil
authority may prohibit the departure of a foreigner where it is satisfied that such
departure would not be conducive to the public interest.

(b) Whenever a civil authority issues an order under clause (a), it shall report the
matter forthwith to the Central Government which may cancel or modify the order in
such manner as it thinks fit.” (emphasis added) Under sub-clause (2) of clause 5,
leave must be refused by the Civil Authority if it is satisfied that the foreigner’s
presence is required in India to answer a criminal charge.

4. Shri Vinay Navare, learned senior counsel appointed as Amicus Curiae, has suggested that
considering the powers vested in Civil Authorities under the Order, it will be appropriate to direct
that while considering the prayer for granting bail in case of a foreign national who is accused of
serious offences, a notice should be issued to the Civil Authority so that the said authority can be
heard on the prayer for grant of bail and on bail conditions, in the event the court is inclined to grant
bail. Shri. Vikramjeet Banerjee, learned Additional Solicitor General of India has also submitted that
it is always advisable to give notice of the bail application to the authorities under the Act and the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/3991386/

2

Rules.

Frank Vitus vs Narcotics Control Bureau on 6 January, 2025

5. Under clause (b) of Section 3(2) of the Act, there is a power vested in the Central Government to
issue an order generally or with respect to any particular foreigner or class of foreigners that they
shall not depart from India or shall depart subject to observance of such conditions on departure as
may be prescribed. The Rules do not impose any such restriction on departure from India. However,
as noted earlier, according to clause 5(1)(b) of the Order, no foreigner shall leave India without the
leave of the Civil Authority having jurisdiction. When a foreigner’s presence is required in India to
answer a criminal charge, permission to leave India must be refused. Under the Order, the Civil
Authority can impose restrictions on the movements of a foreigner. Therefore, once a foreigner is
released on bail, he cannot leave India without the permission of the Civil Authority, as provided in
clause 5 of the Order. Under clause 11 and other clauses of the Order, various restrictions can be
imposed on a foreigner while he is in India. The said power is wholly independent of the power to
grant bail. As of today, there is no order passed by the Central Government for giving effect to clause
(g) of Section 3(2) of the Act. In any event, even if such an order is issued, the power to arrest or
detain a foreigner under the Act is independent of the power of the criminal court to grant bail.
Notwithstanding the bail granted by a criminal court, the power to arrest and detain a foreigner can
be exercised, provided the Central Government makes an order in terms of clause (g) of Section 3(2)
of the Act.

6. Therefore, we do not see any propriety in issuing a direction that either the Civil Authority or the
Registration Officer should be made a party to a bail application filed by a foreigner or a notice of
the bail application be issued to the said authorities. The reason is that the authorities under the Act
and the Order have no locus to oppose bail application filed by a foreigner unless bail is sought
where the allegation is of the offence punishable under Section 14 of the Act. The impleadment of
the Civil Authority or Registration Officer in all bail applications filed by foreigners may result in
unnecessary delay in deciding the bail applications.

7. All that can be done is that while releasing a foreigner on bail, the Court should direct the
investigating agency or the State, as the case may be, to immediately inform the concerned
Registration Officer appointed under Rule 3 of the Rules about the grant of bail so that the
Registration Officer can bring the fact of the grant of bail to the notice of concerned Civil Authority.

8. In addition to what we held by judgment and order dated 08th July, 2024, we issue the following
directions:

(i) While granting bail to a foreigner within the meaning of the Act, the concerned
court shall issue direction to the State or prosecuting agency, as the case may be, to
immediately communicate the order granting bail to the concerned Registration
Officer appointed under Rule 3 of the Rules who, in turn, shall communicate the
order to all concerned authorities including the Civil Authorities. If such information
is furnished, it will enable the authorities under the Act, the Rules and the Order to
take appropriate steps in accordance with the law; and

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/3991386/

3

Frank Vitus vs Narcotics Control Bureau on 6 January, 2025

(ii) A copy of this order shall be forwarded to Registrar Generals of all the High
Courts, who in turn will forward the copies of the order to all the criminal courts in
the respective States.

9. The Criminal Appeals shall be treated as disposed of in terms of the judgment and order dated
08th July, 2024 and this order.

10. We appreciate the valuable assistance rendered by Shri Vinay Navare, learned senior counsel
appointed as Amicus Curiae and Shri Vikramjeet Banerjee, learned Additional Solicitor General of
India.

………………………………......…J [ABHAY S. OKA] ….………………………………..J [UJJAL BHUYAN] NEW
DELHI, JANUARY 06, 2025

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/3991386/

4

