Gangubai Raghunath Ayare vs Gangaram Sakharam Dhuri (D) Thr. His ... on 17 March, 2025

Gangubai Raghunath Ayare vs Gangaram Sakharam Dhuri (D)
Thr. His ... on 17 March, 2025

Author: Sudhanshu Dhulia

Bench: Sudhanshu Dhulia

                                              1

                                                                 REPORTABLE
2025 INSC 355                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                CIVIL APPEAL NO.3183 OF 2009

                    GANGUBAI RAGHUNATH AYARE                   …APPELLANT

                                            VERSUS

                   GANGARAM SAKHARAM DHURI (D)
                   THR. LRs AND ORS.                       …RESPONDENTS

                   GANGARAM SAKHARAM DHURI (D) THR. LRs (R1 to R8)
                   R1: ANANDI GANGARAM DHURI (D) THR. LRs (R2 to R8)
                   R2: SUNANDA GANGARAM DHURI
                   R3: VAISHALI VILAS MAJALKAR
                   R4: KAVITA KASHIRAM UGAVE
                   R5: VITHAL GANGARAM DHURI
                   R6: MANGESH GANGARAM DHURI
                   R7: BABAJI GANGARAM DHURI
                   R8: GEETA SUBHASH BARASKAR
                   R9: LAXMIBAI VISHNU SHELAR
                   LADUBAI MAHADEV RANE (D) THR. LRs (R10 to R13)
                   R10: HEMLATA ARJUN TAWDE
                   R11: PRATIBHA SAWANT
                   R12: SUPRIYA PAWAR
                   R13: SUNANDA RANE
                   R14: SHANTABAI MAHADEV AYARE (D)
                   R15: PUSHPA PRABHAKAR GUDEKAR (LR of R14)
   Signature Not Verified

   Digitally signed by
   SAPNA BISHT
   Date: 2025.03.18
   16:59:26 IST
                   R16: TAI SHANKAR PAWAR

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176927579/

1

Gangubai Raghunath Ayare vs Gangaram Sakharam Dhuri (D) Thr. His ... on 17 March, 2025

   Reason:

                                        JUDGMENT

AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH, J.

Heard learned counsel and senior counsel appearing for the respective parties.

2. The present appeal is directed against the Final Judgment and Order dated 20/21.02.20071 in
First Appeal No.116 of 1988 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Impugned Judgment’) passed by a
learned Single Judge (as he then was) of the High Court of Judicature at Bombay, reversing
Judgment and Decree dated 18/19.09.1987 passed by the City Civil Court, Bombay (hereinafter
referred to as the ‘Trial Court’) in Suit No.2060 of 1970.

3. At the outset, it is gainful to take note of the position of the contesting parties before the
respective Courts, as under:

            Name     Trial Court                     High Court              This Court
          Gangubai     Plaintiff                     Respondent               Appellant
          Raghunath                                     No.1
          Ayare
          Gangaram Defendant No.2                Appellants No.1-           Respondents
          Sakharam                                      8                     No.1-8
          Dhuri                                      (Died -
                                                 Represented by
                                                      LRs2)
          Vishnu          Defendant No.1           Respondent              Respondent No.9
          Shelar            (Died during              No.2
                          pendency of the
                                suit -
                          Represented by

2007 SCC OnLine Bom 144 | (2007) 5 Mah LJ 136 | (2007) 5 Bom CR 306. The abbreviation
expands to Legal Representatives.

                  his widow
               Laxmibai Vishnu
                   Shelar)
 Ladubai       Defendant No.3            Respondent        Respondents
 Mahadev                                     No.3           No.10-13
 Rana                                       [Died -
                                       Represented by

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176927579/

2

Gangubai Raghunath Ayare vs Gangaram Sakharam Dhuri (D) Thr. His ... on 17 March, 2025

                                       LRs 3(A) to 3(D)]
 Shantabai      Defendant No.4           Respondent        Respondents

 Ayare                                      [Died -
                                       Represented by
                                           LR 4(a)]
 Tai          Defendant No.5             Respondent
                                                Respondent
 Shankar                                     No.5 No.16
 Pawar

1 Defendant No.1 is the real brother of the Plaintiff and Defendants No.3-5.

2 Defendant No.2 is the purchaser as per the Sale Deed executed by Defendant No.1.

FACTUAL SCENARIO:

4. For the sake of convenience, the parties are referred to as per their original status
before the Trial Court.

5. The dispute in the suit pertains to property bearing C.T.S. No.1048 admeasuring
398.5 square yards altogether, with a building thereon by the name ‘Sai Niwas’
situated at Bandra, Bombay – 50 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘suit property’).

6. One Gangaram Thakoji Shelar (hereinafter referred to as the ‘deceased’) was the
exclusive owner of the suit property. The deceased passed away on 13.05.1967. At the
time of his death, the deceased was survived by his widow Sunderbai, his son Vishnu
and four daughters namely, the Plaintiff and the third to fifth defendants, who were
his only legal heirs and representatives.

7. The Plaintiff stated that the deceased was the absolute owner of the suit property.
It is stated that one of the rooms i.e., Room No.1 in the suit property was let out to
Raghunath Narayan Ayare, the Plaintiff’s husband on a monthly rent of Rs.20/-. The
Plaintiff, with her husband and her family members, have been occupying Room
No.1, as tenant(s) thereof, during the lifetime of the deceased. It is stated that after
the death of the deceased, Vishnu, being the only male member in the family and also
the Plaintiff’s and the third to fifth defendants’ brother, started managing the affairs
of and looking after the suit property.

8. The Plaintiff contends that her brother, Vishnu, had, in the course of management
of the suit property, obtained her as well as her sisters’ signatures, on some blank
papers, including for the purpose of effecting transfer thereof in the public record in
the names of all the legal heirs.

9. According to the Plaintiff, her husband received Letter dated 10.01.1969 sent to
him by the second defendant alleging that the Plaintiff was in possession of Room

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176927579/

3

Gangubai Raghunath Ayare vs Gangaram Sakharam Dhuri (D) Thr. His ... on 17 March, 2025

No.1 in the suit property as a licensee of Vishnu. According to the Plaintiff, she learnt,
for the first time, from the said Letter that Vishnu had sold ½ portion of the suit
property to the second defendant based on the Relinquishment Deed dated
11.12.1967, purportedly executed by the Plaintiff and the third to fifth defendants in
favour of Vishnu. The plaintiff's husband replied to the said Letter by pointing out
that he was a tenant in respect of Room No.1, and not a Licensee. It was contended in
the reply that the Plaintiff, being one of the co-owners of the suit property, the
transaction in favour of the second defendant by Vishnu was not binding on her.

10. The Plaintiff filed Suit No.2060 of 1970 for administration of the estate of the
deceased seeking the following reliefs (sic):

‘a) estate and life of the deceased be ascertained and thereafter the same be
administered by and under the directions of this Hon'ble Court;

b that the share of the plaintiff and the Original defendant Nos. 1 and 3 to 5 in the
state of the said deceased be ascertained and declared.

c that it be declared that the said sale deed 10 th January 1969 executed by Original
1st defendant in favour of the 2 nd defendant is null and void and not binding on the
estate of the said deceased and/or plaintiff's share therein and that the 2 nd
defendant be decreed and ordered to deliver possession of ½ portion of the said
property comprised in the said sale deed of the estate of the said deceased.

d That for the purpose aforesaid enquiries be made, orders be passed and action be
taken as may appear necessary of this Hon'ble Court in that behalf;

e That the original and present 1st defend and their heirs be decreed and ordered to
disclose of the estate of the said deceased and to account for his dealings with the said
estate. f That pending the hearing and final disposal of the suit, Court Receiver, High
Court, Bombay, be a pointed as Receiver of the said property viz. Sai Niwas, Bandra,
Bombay 50, with all powers under order 40 and Rule 1 of the Civil Procedure Code.

g This pending the hearing and final disposal of the suit present 1st defendant and
2nd defendant be restrained by an order of injunction of this Hon'ble Court in any
manner to deal with, dispose of and/or alienating, transferring, encumbering the said
property or any portion thereof.

h That an interim orders in terms of prayers above. i That costs of and incidental to
the suit be provided for. j That for such further and other reliefs as the nature and
circumstances of the case may require be granted.’

11. The Trial Court framed issues and found as below:

  S. No.                      Issues                     Finding

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176927579/

4

Gangubai Raghunath Ayare vs Gangaram Sakharam Dhuri (D) Thr. His ... on 17 March, 2025

      1       Is the suit bad for misjoinder of        [Considered

              parties and causes of action?            unnecessary]

      2       Does the Plaintiff prove that the            Yes

              property sold under the Sale Deed

              dated 10.01.1969 by the original 1 st

              defendant to the 2nd defendant form

              part of the estate of the deceased

              Gangaram Thakoji Shelar?

      3       Does the Plaintiff prove that the Sale

              Deed dated 10.01.1969 is not binding

              upon the Plaintiff?

      4       Does the Plaintiff prove that the Sale

              Deed dated 10.01.1969 is null and

              void and illegal?

      5       Costs?                                   As per order

      6       What Order?

12. The Trial Court held that the suit for administration of property is not
maintainable as the children of Vishnu, who died during the pendency of the suit,
were not brought on record, and for ascertainment and administration of the estate
and determination of the share and income etc., no issues were raised and no data
was available. The Trial Court held that the Relinquishment Deed dated 11.12.1967
was not proved in accordance with law and the transfer in favour of the second
defendant was null and void and was not binding on the Plaintiff. The suit was
decreed declaring that the Sale Deed dated 10.01.1969 executed by Vishnu in favour
of the second defendant was null and void and directing the second defendant to
handover possession of ½ portion of the suit property, which was subject-matter of
the Sale Deed in question. Further, the Trial Court also granted liberty to the Plaintiff
to claim the other reliefs prayed for in the suit separately.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176927579/

5

Gangubai Raghunath Ayare vs Gangaram Sakharam Dhuri (D) Thr. His ... on 17 March, 2025

13. The Judgment/Decree of the Trial Court was assailed by the second defendant
before the High Court in a First Appeal. The High Court allowed the appeal and held
that the date on which the sale deed was executed by Vishnu, he had 1/6 th undivided
share in the property of the deceased. Though he had professed to sell ½ of the entire
property, the Sale Deed would not become void or illegal only on that ground. The
High Court held that the purchaser under the Sale Deed would certainly get what
Vishnu was entitled to transfer, namely, his undivided share in the suit property. It
was held that the Sale Deed dated 10.01.1969 would be valid to the extent of the
undivided 1/5 th share of Vishnu and the finding of the Trial Court, that the Sale
Deed was null and void, was set aside.

14. The High Court also opined that the Trial Court had passed a decree for
possession against the second defendant which could not be done as the third to fifth
defendants had not filed any suit nor paid any Court Fees on their claim regards
possession of their share(s). As the share of the Plaintiff was only to the extent of 1/5
th, ½ of the suit property could not be given to the Plaintiff.

15. The High Court went on to hold that once the Trial Court had found that the suit
for administration of the deceased’s estate was not maintainable, it could not have
granted prayer (c) supra, claimed in the suit, which was in the nature of a
consequential relief.

SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE PLAINTIFF:

16. Learned counsel for the Plaintiff submitted that Vishnu could not have sold in
favour of the second defendant more than his share in the suit property. It was
contended that, at best, he could have transferred 1/6th of the share, as on the date of
the Sale Deed and 1/5th share after the demise of his mother.

17. It is submitted that as per Section 443 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, if at
all the remedy for partition was to be availed, it was to be by the second defendant to
demarcate his separate share, as acquired from Vishnu, and that the High Court had
erred in holding otherwise. The Plaintiff, having a share in the property, correctly
filed a suit for declaration and possession for recovery of the area in possession of the
second defendant (Respondents No.1-8 herein), in excess of the entitlement.

1 8 .   I t   w a s   u r g e d   t h a t   c o n c u r r e n t   f i n d i n g s   d e m o n s t r a t e   t h a t   t h e   s e c o n d
defendant/vendee was not a bonafide purchaser without notice and he, or his LRs,
cannot be granted the benefit of pendency of the proceedings, which were instituted
in the year 1970 i.e., immediately after the Sale Deed dated 10.01.1969 and, have
been contested since then.

‘44. Transfer by one co-owner.—Where one of two or more co-owners of immoveable property
legally competent in that behalf transfers his share of such property or any interest therein, the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176927579/

6

Gangubai Raghunath Ayare vs Gangaram Sakharam Dhuri (D) Thr. His ... on 17 March, 2025

transferee acquires as to such share or interest, and so far as is necessary to give effect to the
transfer, the transferor's right to joint possession or other common or part enjoyment of the
property, and to enforce a partition of the same, but subject to the conditions and liabilities
affecting, at the date of the transfer, the share or interest so transferred.

Where the transferee of a share of a dwelling-house belonging to an undivided family is not a
member of the family, nothing in this section shall be deemed to entitle him to joint possession or
other common or part enjoyment of the house.’

19. Furthermore, it was submitted that initially Vishnu was made party to the suit and after his
death, his widow was impleaded, though his other legal heirs were not impleaded. However, that
would not in any manner affect the suit since, as on the date when the suit was instituted, Vishnu
had transferred his entire share in the suit property in favour of the second defendant. Hence, it was
urged that the estate of Vishnu having passed onto the second defendant was represented in its
entirety through the said party, who in any event, was the main contesting party. Our interference
with the Impugned Judgment was, hence, sought by the Plaintiff.

SUBMISSIONS BY THE SECOND DEFENDANT’S LRS:

20. It was submitted, by learned senior counsel, that although Vishnu, while executing the Sale Deed
had claimed to be the exclusive owner of the entire suit property, it is well-settled that an undivided
share in a Hindu Undivided Family property can be transferred for valuable consideration by way of
sale.

21. It was advanced that the Plaintiff cannot seek the relief to obtain a separate share in the property
in question, in a suit for administration of an estate, and such relief can be granted only in a
properly-instituted partition suit.

22. Lastly, it was contended that the second defendant’s LRs were ready and willing to pay whatever
reasonable amount that this Court may direct, or in the alternative, pay 6% simple interest from
10.01.1969 till date on the original consideration or a lump-sum amount of Rupees 15,00,000/-
(Rupees Fifteen Lakhs), which is a fair offer, if one considers that the equities, as on date, are in
their favour, as the Plaintiff has failed before the High Court.

ANALYSIS, REASONING AND CONCLUSION:

23. We are of the firm opinion that the High Court rightly reversed the finding of the Trial Court
which set aside the Sale Deed dated 10.01.1969 in favour of the second defendant by Vishnu in toto,
inasmuch as Vishnu had 1/5 th undivided share in the suit property, belonging to the deceased. The
High Court has also rightly set aside the decree of possession against the second defendant, as the
said relief was incapable of being granted by reason of the fact that the third to fifth defendants had
not filed any suit in this behalf, whilst the Plaintiff herself was entitled only to a 1/5 th share in the
suit property. The suit, as filed by the Plaintiff, sought administration of the deceased’s estate, with
the ancillary prayer being to ascertain the share of the Plaintiff and the original defendants no.1 and

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176927579/

7

Gangubai Raghunath Ayare vs Gangaram Sakharam Dhuri (D) Thr. His ... on 17 March, 2025

3 to 5 in the suit property.

24. We accord our imprimatur to the conclusion drawn by the High Court that when the principal
prayer for administration of the estate was rejected by the Trial Court, that too as non-maintainable,
any other prayer which indirectly seeks partition cannot be granted, until the proper parties are
impleaded in the suit. As noted hereinbefore, the third to fifth defendants, who are the Plaintiff’s
sisters, have not filed any suit seeking their share in the suit property. Specifically, on the facts of
this case, on the passing away of Vishnu, during the pendency of the suit, only his wife was brought
on record, whereas his sons and daughters were not impleaded into the suit by the Plaintiff. In the
case of Chief Conservator of Forests, Government of Andhra Pradesh v Collector, (2003) 3 SCC 472,
the Court explained, through Hon. Quadri, J.:

‘12. It needs to be noted here that a legal entity — a natural person or an artificial
person — can sue or be sued in his/its own name in a court of law or a tribunal. It is
not merely a procedural formality but is essentially a matter of substance and
considerable significance. That is why there are special provisions in the Constitution
and the Code of Civil Procedure as to how the Central Government or the
Government of a State may sue or be sued. So also there are special provisions in
regard to other juristic persons specifying as to how they can sue or be sued. In giving
description of a party it will be useful to remember the distinction between
misdescription or misnomer of a party and misjoinder or non- joinder of a party
suing or being sued. In the case of misdescription of a party, the court may at any
stage of the suit/proceedings permit correction of the cause-title so that the party
before the court is correctly described; however, a misdescription of a party will not
be fatal to the maintainability of the suit/proceedings. Though Rule 9 of Order 1
CPC4 ‘9. Misjoinder and non-joinder.—No suit shall be defeated by reason of the
misjoinder or non-joinder of parties, and the Court may in every suit deal with the
matter in controversy so far as regards the rights and interests of the parties actually
before it:

mandates that no suit shall be defeated by reason of the misjoinder or non-joinder of
parties, it is important to notice that the proviso thereto clarifies that nothing in that
Rule shall apply to non-joinder of a necessary party. Therefore, care must be taken to
ensure that the necessary party is before the court, be it a plaintiff or a defendant,
otherwise, the suit or the proceedings will have to fail. Rule 10 of Order 1 CPC
provides remedy when a suit is filed in the name of the wrong plaintiff and empowers
the court to strike out any party improperly joined or to implead a necessary party at
any stage of the proceedings.’ (emphasis supplied)

25. In the decision rendered in Bachhaj Nahar v Nilima Mandal, (2008) 17 SCC 491, the Court,
speaking through Hon’ble Raveendran, J., held:

‘23.5 It is fundamental that in a civil suit, relief to be granted can be only with
reference to the prayers made in the pleadings. That apart, in civil suits, grant of

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176927579/

8

Gangubai Raghunath Ayare vs Gangaram Sakharam Dhuri (D) Thr. His ... on 17 March, 2025

relief is circumscribed by various factors like court fee, limitation, parties to the suits,
as also grounds barring relief, like res judicata, estoppel, acquiescence, non-joinder of
causes of action or parties, etc., which require pleading and proof. Therefore, it would
be hazardous to hold that in a civil suit whatever be the relief that is prayed, the court
can on examination of facts grant any relief as it thinks fit. In a suit for recovery of
rupees one lakh, the court cannot grant a decree for rupees ten lakhs. In a suit for
recovery possession of property ‘A’, court cannot grant possession of property ‘B’. In a
suit praying for permanent injunction, court cannot grant a relief of declaration or
possession. The jurisdiction to grant relief in a civil suit necessarily depends on the
pleadings, prayer, court fee paid, evidence let in, etc.’ (emphasis supplied) Provided
that nothing in this rule shall apply to non-joinder of a necessary party.’ Para 23 of
B a c h h a j   N a h a r   ( s u p r a )   w a s   c o r r e c t e d   v i d e   O f f i c i a l   C o r r i g e n d u m
No.F.3/Ed.B.J./89/2009 dated 17.07.2009.

26. In view of the reasons stated above, this Court directs that the Plaintiff cannot be disturbed with
her possession until the suit property is partitioned in accordance with law. The second defendant
shall only have 1/5th share in the suit property, which fell to Vishnu on the demise of the deceased,
as the Sale Deed dated 10.01.1969 in favour of the second defendant by Vishnu is held valid only to
such extent.

27. Considering the passage of time of half a century and the current scenario where parties are
represented through their legal heirs, the Trial Court concerned shall positively endeavour to decide
the partition suit, if so filed, within three months from the date of filing thereof, in terms of the
liberty granted hereinabove.

28. This Court, while granting leave on 01.05.2009, ordered that ‘Until further orders, it is directed
that subject matter of dispute shall not be alienated by any of the parties.’ As the said Order has
continued for over a decade and a half, in the interest of justice, there shall be status quo in the said
terms, till the time the suit property is partitioned as per law.

29. The Civil Appeal is disposed of, with the aforesaid observations and directions. Costs made easy.

30. I.A. No.14513/2022 is an application to ‘Condone the delay of 916 days & Setting aside
abatement in filing the Application to bring on Record the LRs of Deceased Respondent No. 1’6
(sic). I.A. No.72967/2021 is an application to ‘Allow the present application to bring on record the
Legal Representatives of the deceased Respondent No.1 who are already on record in the present
appeal as Respondents No.2-8 as mentioned in paragraph 3 of the present application’7 (sic).
Considering that the LRs to be brought on record are already arrayed as parties to this appeal, both
the I.A.s are allowed, thereby condoning the delay, setting aside the abatement, and bringing the
said LRs on record on behalf of the first respondent herein, who passed away on 28.09.2018, as per
the Death Certificate dated 01.02.2021 issued by the Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai.

……………….………………., J.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176927579/

9

Gangubai Raghunath Ayare vs Gangaram Sakharam Dhuri (D) Thr. His ... on 17 March, 2025

[SUDHANSHU DHULIA] ……………….………………., J.

[AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH] NEW DELHI MARCH 17, 2025 Party description is as per this
appeal.

Ibid.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176927579/

10

