Tirith Kumar vs Daduram on 19 December, 2024

Tirith Kumar vs Daduram on 19 December, 2024

Author: Sanjay Karol

Bench: Sanjay Karol, C.T. Ravikumar

                                                                                     REPORTABLE
2024 INSC 1005
                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                            CIVIL APPEAL NO. 13516 OF 2024
                                           (Arising out of SLP (C) NO.21506/2019)

                   TIRITH KUMAR & ORS.                                           … APPELLANTS

                                                              VERSUS

                   DADURAM & ORS.                                                … RESPONDENTS

                                                       JUDGMENT

SANJAY KAROL, J.

THE CHALLENGE

1. This appeal questions the correctness of the judgment and order passed by the High Court of
Chhattisgarh, Bilaspur, in Second Appeal No. 270 of 2003, dated 6th February 2019 and it raises the
question as to whether the Hindu Succession Act, 19561 could be applied to the parties to the instant
lis? The Courts below i.e. the First Appellate Court2 in Civil Appeal No.09A/2001 vide judgment
dated 27th January, 2003 and the Trial Court3 in Civil Suit No. 131A of 1995, by judgment dated
16th December, 2000 found the appellants to be Hereinafter referred to as ‘HSA, 1956’.

The Court of Additional District Judge, Sakti, District Bilaspur. The Court of Civil Judge Class-2,
Sakti, District Bilaspur. ‘sufficiently hinduised', having given up their customs as part of a tribal
community and therefore are governed by Hindu law, and thereby the respondents herein do not
have any rights over the property originally belonging to Mardan.

BRIEF FACTS

2. Brief facts as emanating from the record are:-

2.1 This dispute, at the heart of it, pertains to ownership of land between two sides of

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/179507118/

1

Tirith Kumar vs Daduram on 19 December, 2024

the same family, with a common ancestor by the name of Chuchrung. This common
ancestor had two sons named Mardan and Puni Ram. The sons and legal heirs of
Puni Ram set the law in motion, seeking a declaration that the suit property situated
at village Bagri Pali, measuring 13.95 acres bearing Khasra No. 26, belongs to them
and for a permanent injunction against the respondents.

2.2 The following is the family tree:

2.3 The dispute came before the Court of Civil Judge Class-2, Sakti, District Bilaspur,
wherein six issues were framed. A perusal of the judgment shows that questions 2 to
6 were questions of fact. It was held as follows:

2.3.1 Relying on the testimony and cross-examination of PW1, Anandram is now
represented by the present appellants and also the statement of DW1, Daduram, it
was held that both the plaintiffs and defendants “abide and follow the Hindu
principles of law”. 2.3.2 The dispute regarding the death of Mardan was resolved with
the Court observing that he had indeed died prior to the coming into force of the
Hindu Succession Act, 1956. To return such a finding, reliance was placed on the
evidence of PW1, Ugrasen PW2 and Karamaha PW3. It was further stated that DW1
himself, in his cross-examination, accepted such a fact.

2.3.3 Qua the possession of the suit property, it was held that post the death of
Mardan in 1951, Puni Ram, father of the plaintiff, took possession. Any right
possessed by Mardan would not have transferred over to his daughters as prior to the
HSA 1956, a daughter does not receive any property upon the death of her father.
2.3.4 In conclusion, it was held that the defendants did not have any right of
ownership over the property, which originally belonged to Mardan and that the
successors of Puni Ram had the right over the said property. It was ordered that the
defendants would not interfere in the ownership of the plaintiffs.

2.4 The defendants, aggrieved by the findings summarised above, appealed the
judgment. The First Appellate Court agreed with the findings arrived by the Court
below in as much as that both parties did indeed follow the Hindu Religion and that
the death of Mardan was prior to coming into force of the HSA, 1956, and as a result,
the daughters of Mardan had no right over the subject property.

2.5 Further aggrieved, the matter was carried to the High Court in the Second Appeal.
The substantial questions of law framed are as under:

1. Whether the parties follow the principle of Hindu Law and have been following as
on today?

2. Whether Mardan and Puni Ram in succession the property which they had
received and from the said property the income which accrued from the same both

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/179507118/

2

Mardan and Puni Ram purchased other property?

Tirith Kumar vs Daduram on 19 December, 2024

3. Whether the death of Mardan was done in the year 1951 since then the property of
Muni Ram in succession has received and at present the Plaintiffs are in use,
occupation and possession of the said property?

4. Whether the defendants, in accordance with law, got their name entered and are in
use, occupation and possession?

5. Assistance and expenses

6. Whether Mardan died before coming into force the Hindu Succession Act, 1956, in
case yes and then the results? 2.6 The reasoning of the High Court in overturning the
findings returned by the Courts below is that:

2.6.1 The Court noticed Section 2 (2) of the HSA, 1956 and the judgment of this Court
in Madhu Kishwar & Ors. v. State of Bihar4, and held that HSA, 1956 does not apply
to the parties as they are Sawara, a notified scheduled tribe within the meaning of
Article 366(25), and there is no notification on record which de-

notifies them or directs the application of HSA, 1956 to them. 2.6.2 In regard to the question of
whether the parties have become sufficiently hinduised reference was made to Smt Butaki Bai &
Ors. v. Sukhbati & Ors. In the present facts, it was held:

“The plaintiffs neither in the plaint nor in their evidence particularised the prevalent
tribal customs except pleadings some ceremonies of marriage in their caste. It has
neither been pleaded nor proved that they have abandoned their law of origin
(customary law) and they have given up their customary succession and did not state
anything so as to be governed by in their matter of succession and inheritance by any
school of hindu law…” 2.6.3 In the aforesaid backdrop, the Court invoked the Central
Provinces Laws Act, 1875 and in particular Sections 5 and 6 thereof.

Referring to the judgment of this Court in M.V. Elisabeth and Others v. Harwan Investments and
Trading Pvt. Ltd. Hanoekar House, Swatontapeth, Vasco-De-Gama, Goa5, as also certain other
(1996) 5 SCC 125 1993 Supp (2) SCC 433 authorities, the Court invoked the principles of justice,
equity and good conscience to hold that the legal representatives of Mardan, i.e. his daughters and
their successors-in-interest, would be entitled to half share in the total suit property. The appeal was
partly allowed in these terms.

2.7 It is with this background that the present appeal has come up for consideration before this
Court.

OUR CONSIDERATION

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/179507118/

3

Tirith Kumar vs Daduram on 19 December, 2024

3. The parties to the present lis claim to be Hindus and therefore ask that they be governed by
Hindu law in matters of inheritance. The High Court has disallowed this contention on the ground
that the parties are members of the Sawara tribe, which is a notified tribe under Article 342 of the
Constitution of India. The constitutional position in regard to Articles 341 and 342, which deal with
scheduled castes and tribes, respectively, has been delineated by a Constitution Bench of this Court
in M.R. Balaji v. State of Mysore6 in the following terms:

“20. …It was realised that in the Indian Society there were other classes of citizens
who were equally, or may be somewhat less, backward than the Scheduled Castes and
Tribes and it was thought that some special provision ought to be made even for
them. Article 34(1) provides for the issue of public notification specifying the castes,
races or tribes which shall, for the purposes of this Constitution, be deemed to be
Scheduled Castes either in the State or the Union territory as the case may be.
Similarly Article 342 makes a provision for the issue of public notification in respect
of Scheduled Tribes. Under Article 338(3), it is provided that 1962 SCC OnLine SC
147 references to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes shall be construed as
including references to such other Backward Classes as the President may, on receipt
of the report of a commission appointed under Article 340(1) by order, specify and
also to the Anglo-Indian community. It would thus be seen that this provision
contemplates that some Backward Classes may by the Presidential order be included
in Scheduled Castes and Tribes.” We may also notice the observations in State of
Maharashtra v. Milind7 in this context:

“11. By virtue of powers vested under Articles 341 and 342 of the Constitution of
India, the President is empowered to issue public notification for the first time
specifying the castes, races or tribes or part of or groups within castes, races, or tribes
which shall, for the purposes of the Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled Castes or
Scheduled Tribes in relation to a State or Union Territory, as the case may be. The
language and terms of Articles 341 and 342 are identical. What is said in relation to
Article 341 mutatis mutandis applies to Article 342. The laudable object of the said
articles is to provide additional protection to the members of the Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes having regard to social and educational backwardness from
which they have been suffering since a considerable length of time. The words
“castes” or “tribes” in the expression “Scheduled Castes” and “Scheduled Tribes” are
not used in the ordinary sense of the terms but are used in the sense of the definitions
contained in Articles 366(24) and 366(25). In this view, a caste is a Scheduled Caste
or a tribe is a Scheduled Tribe only if they are included in the President's Orders
issued under Articles 341 and 342 for the purpose of the Constitution. Exercising the
powers vested in him, the President has issued the Constitution (Scheduled Castes)
Order, 1950 and the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950. Subsequently,
some orders were issued under the said articles in relation to Union Territories and
other States and there have been certain amendments in relation to Orders issued, by
amendment Acts passed by Parliament.” (Emphasis supplied) Recently, a
seven-judge Bench in State of Punjab v. Davinder Singh8 also made a reference to

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/179507118/

4

Tirith Kumar vs Daduram on 19 December, 2024

these judgments.

(2001) 1 SCC 4 2024 SCC OnLine SC 1860

4. As is clear from the aforesaid extracts, the lists made under Articles 341 and 342 are to be
amended only with the permission of the President. So, naturally, for a tribe to be notified as a
scheduled tribe, a notification to that effect has to be issued and vice versa, i.e. for a tribe to be
de-notified as well. The High Court noted that the parties did not produce any notification
demonstrating that the Sawara tribe stands de-notified. There is no possibility of a different view on
this question.

5. The HSA, 1956, at the very outset, details as to whom the legislation would apply, and it clearly
states that scheduled castes and tribes shall be outside its purview of application. Section 2(2)
thereof reads as under:

“2. Application of Act.― (1)This Act applies― … (2) Notwithstanding anything
contained in sub-section (1), nothing contained in this Act shall apply to the members
of any Scheduled Tribe within the meaning of clause (25) of article 366 of the
Constitution unless the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette,
otherwise directs.”

6. The words of the section are explicit. The HSA, 1956, cannot apply to scheduled tribes. This
position of law is well settled. We may reproduce with profit the observations made in certain
judgments of this Court.

6.1 In Madhu Kishwar v. State of Bihar9, MM Punchhi, J as his Lordship then was, noted the
application of Section 2(2) of HSA as follows:

“4. …Sub-section (2) of Section 2 of the Hindu Succession Act significantly provides
that nothing contained in the Act shall apply (1996) 5 SCC 125 to the members of any
Scheduled Tribe within the meaning of clause (25) of Article 366 of the Constitution
unless otherwise directed by the Central Government by means of a notification in
the Official Gazette. Section 3(2) further provides that in the Act, unless the context
otherwise requires, words importing the masculine gender shall not be taken to
include females. (emphasis supplied) General rule of legislative practice is that unless
there is anything repugnant in the subject or context, words importing the masculine
gender used in statutes are to be taken to include females.

Attention be drawn to Section 13 of the General Clauses Act. But in matters of succession the general
rule of plurality would have to be applied with circumspection. The afore provision thus appears to
have been inserted ex abundanti cautela. Even under Section 3 of the Indian Succession Act the
State Government is empowered to exempt any race, sect or tribe from the operation of the Act and
the tribes of Mundas, Oraons, Santhals etc. in the State of Bihar, who are included in our concern,
have been so exempted. Thus neither the Hindu Succession Act, nor the Indian Succession Act, nor

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/179507118/

5

Tirith Kumar vs Daduram on 19 December, 2024

even the Shariat law is applicable to the custom-governed tribals. And custom, as is well recognized,
varies from people to people and region to region.” The aforesaid position was reiterated by a Bench
of three learned judges in Ahmedabad Women Action Group (AWAG) v. Union of India10. 6.2 We
find that the aforesaid position has been consistently adopted by the High Courts as well. Reference
may be made to Bhuri v. Maroti11, Bhagwati v. Cheduram12, and Bini B. (Dr.) v. Jayan P.R.13. Here
only we may clarify that this reference to judgments of the High Courts shall not be construed as a
comment upon their merits.

7. Therefore, the Courts below clearly erred on this count, and the High Court took the correct view.
Having observed this, the High Court then proceeded to grant a portion as property to Mardan’s
daughters and their descendants on (1997) 3 SCC 573 2015 SCC OnLine Bom 3173 2019 SCC OnLine
Chh 209 2015 SCC OnLine Ker 39489 the grounds of justice, equity and good conscience,
apparently but without explicit mention, taking cue from the dissenting judgment Madhu Kishwar
(supra) by Ramaswamy, J., wherein he held as under:

“38. Law is the manifestation of principles of justice, equity and good conscience.
Rule of law should establish a uniform pattern for harmonious existence in a society
where every individual would exercise his rights to his best advantage to achieve
excellence, subject to protective discrimination. The best advantage of one person
could be the worst disadvantage to another. Law steps in to iron out such creases and
ensures equality of protection to individuals as well as group liberties. Man's status is
a creature of substantive as well as procedural law to which legal incidents would
attach. Justice, equality and fraternity are trinity for social and economic equality… x
x x

56. I would hold that the provisions of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 and the Indian
Succession Act, 1925 though in terms, would not apply to the Scheduled Tribes, the
general principles contained therein being consistent with justice, equity, fairness,
justness and good conscience would apply to them. Accordingly I hold that the
Scheduled Tribe women would succeed to the estate of their parent, brother,
husband, as heirs by intestate succession and inherit the property with equal share
with the male heir with absolute rights as per the general principles of the Hindu
Succession Act, 1956, as amended and interpreted by this Court and equally of the
Indian Succession Act to tribal Christians…”

8. Let us examine a few pronouncements on the application of principle of justice, equity and good
conscience.

8.1 In M. Siddiq (Ram Janmabhumi Temple-5 J.) v. Suresh Das14, five learned judges extensively
dealt with the concept of justice, equity and good conscience. A few of the relevant paragraphs are as
under:

“1003. …The modification of general rules to the circumstances of the case is guided
by equity, not in derogation or negation of (2020) 1 SCC 1 positive law, but in

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/179507118/

6

Tirith Kumar vs Daduram on 19 December, 2024

addition to it. It supplements positive law but does not supplant it. In a second sense,
however, where positive law is silent as to the applicable legal principles, equity
assumes a primary role as the source of law itself. Equity steps in to fill the gaps that
exist in positive law. Thus, where no positive law is discernible, courts turn to equity
as a source of the applicable law.

In addition to these, Derrett notes that there is a third sense in which equity or aequitas assumed
importance — where established political authority is taken away or is in doubt and the formal
sources of law are in doubt, the nature of judicial office requires a decision in accordance with ex
bono et aequo.

x x x x x 1019. …There is (at least in theory) a reduced scope for the application of justice, equity and
good conscience when doctrinal positions established under a statute cover factual situations or
where the principles underlying the system of personal law in question can be definitively
ascertained. But even then, it would do a disservice to judicial craft to adopt a theory which excludes
the application of justice, equity and good conscience to areas of law governed by statute. For the
law develops interstitially, as Judges work themselves in tandem with statute law to arrive at just
outcomes. Where the rights of the parties are not governed by a particular personal law, or where
the personal law is silent or incapable of being ascertained by a court, where a code has a lacuna, or
where the source of law fails or requires to be supplemented, justice, equity and good conscience
may properly be referred to.

x x x x x 1022. The common underlying thread is that justice, good conscience and equity plays a
supplementary role in enabling courts to mould the relief to suit the circumstances that present
themselves before courts with the principal purpose of ensuring a just outcome. Where the existing
statutory framework is inadequate for courts to adjudicate upon the dispute before them, or no
settled judicial doctrine or custom can be availed of, courts may legitimately take recourse to the
principles of justice, equity and good conscience to effectively and fairly dispose of the case. A court
cannot abdicate its responsibility to decide a dispute over legal rights merely because the facts of a
case do not readily submit themselves to the application of the letter of the existing law. Courts in
India have long availed of the principles of justice, good conscience and equity to supplement the
incompleteness or inapplicability of the letter of the law with the ground realities of legal disputes to
do justice between the parties. Equity, as an essential component of justice, formed the final step in
the just adjudication of disputes.” (Emphasis supplied) 8.2 In a case concerning the devolution of
property either by custom or by law, when it comes to a ‘dasi’, arising out of the State of Madras,
M.C. Mahajan, J., as his Lordship then was observed in Saraswathi Ammal v. Jagadambal15 as
follows:

“21. … In the absence of proof of existence of a custom governing succession the
decision of the case has to rest on the rules of justice, equity and good conscience
because admittedly no clear text of Hindu law applies to such a case. The High Court
thought that the just rule to apply was one of propinquity to the case, according to
which the married and dasi daughters would take the mother's property in equal
shares. No exception can be taken to this finding given by the High Court. No other

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/179507118/

7

Tirith Kumar vs Daduram on 19 December, 2024

rule was suggested to us leading to a contrary result.” 8.3 In M.V. Elisabeth (supra),
the Court held as under:

“86. The judicial power of this country, which is an aspect of national sovereignty, is
vested in the people and is articulated in the provisions of the Constitution and the
laws and is exercised by courts empowered to exercise it. It is absurd to confine that
power to the provisions of imperial statutes of a bygone age. Access to Court which is
an important right vested in every citizen implies the existence of the power of the
Court to render justice according to law. Where statute is silent and judicial
intervention is required, Courts strive to redress grievances according to what is
perceived to be principles of justice, equity and good conscience.”

9. Having considered the pronouncements of this Court as aforesaid, and keeping in view the fact
that Mardan passed away in the year 1951, that is, prior to the enactment of HSA, 1956, we find no
error in the judgment of the High Court applying the provisions of the Central Provinces Laws Act,
1875 and more particularly Section 6 thereof which postulates the application of the (1953) 1 SCC
362 principle of justice, equity and good conscience, to account for possibilities not covered by
Section 5 of the Act.

10. We find that a coordinate Bench of this Court in Kamla Neti v. LAO16, held in para 11 thereof
that equity cannot supplant the law, and when the law is clear, the same has to be applied. That case
pertains to the division of compensation awarded for land acquired, however, the present dispute
pertains directly to succession of property, and therefore in our considered view, this case stands on
a different footing.

11.Kamla Neti (supra) is, therefore, distinguishable on facts and not applicable to the present case.
However, the recommendation/suggestion made therein to the Central Government to look into
pathways to secure the right of survivorship to female tribals is hereby reiterated. For emphasis, the
observations in this regard are also extracted herein below:

“17. Before parting, we may observe that there may not be any justification to deny
the right of survivorship so far as the female member of the tribal community is
concerned. When the daughter belonging to the non-tribal community is entitled to
the equal share in the property of the father, there is no reason to deny such right to
the daughter of the Tribal community. Female tribal is entitled to parity with male
tribal in intestate succession. To deny the equal right to the daughter belonging to the
tribal even after a period of 70 years of the Constitution of India under which right to
equality is guaranteed, it is high time for the Central Government to look into the
matter and if required, to amend the provisions of the Hindu Succession Act by which
the Hindu Succession Act is not made applicable to the members of the Scheduled
Tribe.

18. Therefore, though we dismiss the present appeal, it is directed to examine the
question by the Central Government to consider it just and necessary to withdraw the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/179507118/

8

Tirith Kumar vs Daduram on 19 December, 2024

exemptions provided under the (2023) 3 SCC 528 Hindu Succession Act insofar as
the applicability of the provisions of the Hindu Succession Act to the Scheduled
Tribes is concerned and whether to bring a suitable amendment or not. We hope and
trust that the Central Government will look into the matter and take an appropriate
decision taking into consideration the right to equality guaranteed under Articles 14
and 21 of the Constitution of India.”

12. With the aforesaid observations, the appeal is dismissed as bereft of merit. Pending applications,
if any, shall stand disposed of.

......…………………J. (C.T. RAVIKUMAR) ......……...…………J. (SANJAY KAROL) Date: 19th December,
2024;

Place: New Delhi.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/179507118/

9

