Garden Reach Shipbuilders And ... vs Grse Limited Workmens Union on 25 February, 2025

Garden Reach Shipbuilders And ... vs Grse Limited Workmens
Union on 25 February, 2025

Author: Dipankar Datta

Bench: Rajesh Bindal, Dipankar Datta

                                                                                 REPORTABLE
2025 INSC 363
                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3243 OF 2025
                                    [arising out of SLP (C) No. 28399/2024]

        GARDEN REACH SHIPBUILDERS AND
        ENGINEERS LIMITED                                                     APPELLANT

                                                    VERSUS

        GRSE LIMITED WORKMENS UNION & ORS.                                    RESPONDENTS

                                                  JUDGMENT

1. Leave granted.

2. This appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated September 04, 20241 passed by an
Hon’ble Division Bench 2 of the High Court of Judicature at Calcutta3. In course of deciding an
intra-court appeal 4 filed under clause 15 of the Letters Patent by the respondents in this appeal 5,
their writ petition6 was allowed, the order impugned in the writ petition set aside and directions
were issued to the appellant-Garden Reach Shipbuilders and Engineers Limited 7 to appoint 48
(forty-eight) of the 51 (fifty-one) writ petitioners on compassionate 1 impugned order 2 Division
Bench 3 High Court 4 MAT 850 of 2022 5 writ petitioners 7 GRSE Ltd.

ground.

3. Having regard to the order we propose to pass, it is not considered necessary to delve deep into
the facts giving rise to the writ petition.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/141785233/

1

Garden Reach Shipbuilders And ... vs Grse Limited Workmens Union on 25 February, 2025

4. Suffice it to note, the subject matter of the writ petition concerned refusal to offer compassionate
appointment by GRSE Ltd. to the writ petitioners. A learned Single Judge8 of the High Court by an
order dated February 21, 2022 (under challenge in the intra-court appeal) had de-listed the writ
petition awaiting a decision of this Court on the reference made to a larger bench in State Bank of
India v. Sheo Shankar Tewari 9, with liberty to mention after the reference is answered. The Single
Judge had referred to the decision of a bench of three-Judges in N.C. Santhosh v. State of Karnataka
10. We are inclined to observe that the said decision, at the relevant time, had settled the issue as
regards the policy that would apply in considering applications for compassionate appointment, yet,
the Single Judge refrained from proceeding with hearing of the writ petition on the specious ground
of the pending reference. Although the Single Judge may not have been entirely right in de- listing
the writ petition on the stated ground and ought to have proceeded with consideration of the writ
petition finally, giving due regard to the law then prevailing, rights of the parties were not
determined and no judgment was rendered if seen within the prism of clause 15 of the Letters
Patent; thus, it is debatable as to whether an intra-court appeal could have at all been maintained
before the appellate court against the order of de-listing in view of 8 Single Judge 9 (2019) 5 SCC
600 10 Civil Appeal Nos. 9280-81 of 2014, since reported in (2020) 7 SCC 617 the decision of this
Court in Shah Babulal Khimji v. Jayaben D. Kania11. At any rate, even if an intra-court appeal was
maintainable against the order of de- listing, the writ petition not having been heard finally and on it
being de-listed by the Single Judge with liberty to mention after the reference is answered by this
Court, at the highest, intervention to the limited extent of requesting the Single Judge to decide the
writ petition in accordance with law was open and permissible. However, it has intrigued us to no
end as to how the writ petition could be heard by the Division Bench.

5. At this stage, our attention has been invited by Mr. Soumya Majumdar, learned senior counsel
appearing for the writ petitioners to an order dated March 11, 2024 passed by another Division
Bench 12 which was then seized of the intra-court appeal. It was pointed out that before such bench,
learned senior counsel appearing for GRSE Ltd. had agreed to the suggestion of counsel for the writ
petitioners to disposal of the writ petition by the appellate court and it is pursuant thereto that the
records of the writ petition were placed before the Division Bench which ultimately, upon a
contested hearing, proceeded to pass the impugned order finally disposing of the intra-court appeal
as well as the writ petition in favour of the writ petitioners. It is, therefore, submitted that GRSE Ltd.
having also agreed to consideration and disposal of the writ petition by the appellate court, this
Court may not take too technical a view of the matter and decide the appeal on its merits.

6. This appeal involves a serious question as to whether judicial discipline and propriety, in the light
of Rule 26 of the Rules framed by the High Court at 11 (1981) 4 SCC 8 12 predecessor Division Bench
Calcutta under Article 225 of the Constitution of India in relation to applications under Article 226
thereof and the powers of the Hon’ble the Chief Justice of the High Court13 as the master of the
roster, were maintained. Rule 26, to the extent relevant, reads as follows:

“26. *** A Judge, for the reasons recorded, at the hearing or at any subsequent stage
of the proceeding may make it returnable before a Division Bench or may while
hearing the Rule, refer the same to the Division Bench for hearing.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/141785233/

2

Garden Reach Shipbuilders And ... vs Grse Limited Workmens Union on 25 February, 2025

***”

7. The Single Judge not having referred the writ petition to a bench of two Judges for
hearing, the predecessor Division Bench was not quite correct in accepting the
suggestion of the parties and agreeing to hear the writ petition without having any
authorization from the Chief Justice in this behalf 14, and more particularly bearing
in mind the well-settled principle that ‘consent does not confer jurisdiction’. A
judicial order based on consent of the parties, which is in the teeth of the Writ Rules
and seeks to unsettle and even override the determination made by the Chief Justice,
could not have vested jurisdiction in the appellate court to hear the pending writ
petition. As a sequitur, the Division Bench which passed the impugned order could
not have assumed unto itself the jurisdiction to decide the writ petition based on the
earlier order dated March 11, 2024. The Division Bench, without feeling bound by the
said order, could and did have the jurisdiction to decline to hear the writ petition in
the absence of any determination. We presently consider it expedient to advert to this
aspect of the matter.

13 Chief Justice 14 determination, as is commonly referred to in the High Court

8. The cause-list of the predecessor Division Bench dated March 11, 2024 would reveal that it had,
inter alia, the determination to hear “APPEAL FROM ORDER RELATING TO SERVICE (GROUP
VI) INCLUDING APPLICATIONS CONNECTED THERETO [EXCLUDING ...]”. We have further
noticed from the cause-lists of August 16, 2024 (the date on which the writ petition, after hearing,
was reserved for judgment) and September 4, 2024 (the date when the writ petition was allowed by
the impugned order) that the Division Bench had the same determination, i.e., to hear, inter alia,
“APPEAL FROM ORDER RELATING TO SERVICE (GROUP VI) INCLUDING APPLICATIONS
CONNECTED THERETO [EXCLUDING ...]”. Moreover, as per the roster set by the Chief Justice,
determination was not given either to the predecessor Division Bench or to the Division Bench to
hear writ petitions under ‘Service (Group VI)’ of the Classification List appended to the Writ Rules.
We have also noticed that determination to hear writ petitions relating to Group VI, as made by the
Chief Justice, was given to single benches on the relevant dates. On the face of such determination,
neither the predecessor Division Bench nor the Division Bench of the High Court could have
assumed jurisdiction to hear the writ petition premised on the legal position that they had
jurisdiction to hear appeals from orders passed on writ petitions relating to Group VI.

9. In the light of the law laid down by the High Court itself 15 in Sohan Lal Baid v. State of West
Bengal 16, as approved by a three-Judge Bench of this Court in State of Rajasthan v. Prakash
Chand17 which has subsequently been approved by a Constitution Bench in Campaign for Judicial
15 authoritatively speaking through Hon’ble P.D. Desai, CJ. (as the Chief Justice then was) 16 AIR
1990 Calcutta 168 17 (1998) 1 SCC 1 Accountability and Reforms v. Union of India 18, as well as Rule
26 (supra), we hold that any order which a bench - comprising of two judges or a single judge - may
choose to make in a case that is not placed before them/him by the Chief Justice of the High Court
or in accordance with His Lordship’s directions, such an order is without jurisdiction. In other
words, an adjudication, beyond allocation, is void and such adjudication has to be considered a

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/141785233/

3

Garden Reach Shipbuilders And ... vs Grse Limited Workmens Union on 25 February, 2025

nullity. It needs no emphasis that the Chief Justice of the High Court, being the primus inter pares,
has been vested with the power and authority to set the roster, as articulated in Sohan Lal Baid
(supra), and such roster is final and binding on all the ‘Companion Justices’ of the said court.
Plainly, therefore, the order dated March 11, 2024 and the impugned order are without jurisdiction.

10. On this limited ground, but without examining the merits of the rival claims, the impugned order
is liable to be and is, accordingly, set aside. We order a remand, with the result that the writ petition
shall stand revived on the file of the High Court. We request the Chief Justice of the High Court to
assign the writ petition to an appropriate bench for its consideration and disposal, as early as
possible, but preferably within six months from today, considering that the respondents have been
waiting for their turn for compassionate appointment and the appellants have their own reasons for
not proceeding with making such appointment resulting in a delayed determination.

11. We, however, record the statement of Mr. Nidhesh Gupta, learned senior counsel appearing for
GRSE Ltd. that till such time the writ petition is disposed of by the appropriate Bench of the High
Court to which it is assigned by the Chief Justice, no appointment shall be made so as to render the
writ petition 18 (2018) 1 SCC 196 infructuous. That would take care of the anxiety of the writ
petitioners of being non-suited, if appointments were made to defeat their rights. Hence, we refrain
from making any interim order to be operative during the pendency of the writ petition or to extend
the ad-interim order dated August 1, 2016, passed on such writ petition.

12. The appeal is, accordingly, allowed on the aforesaid terms. Pending application(s), if any, shall
stand disposed of.

.............................J. [DIPANKAR DATTA] .............................J. [RAJESH BINDAL] New Delhi;

February 25, 2025.

ITEM NO.44                  COURT NO.14                      SECTION XVI

                 S U P R E M E C O U R T O F            I N D I A
                         RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal(C) No(s). 28399/2024 [Arising out of impugned final
judgment and order dated 04-09-2024 in MAT No. 850/2022 passed by the High Court at Calcutta]
GARDEN REACH SHIPBUILDERS AND ENGINEERS LIMITED Petitioner(s) VERSUS GRSE
LIMITED WORKMENS UNION & ORS. Respondent(s) FOR ADMISSION [TO BE TAKEN UP AT
12.00 NOON] IA No. 276829/2024 - PERMISSION TO FILE ADDITIONAL DOCUMENTS/FACTS/
ANNEXURES IA No. 275183/2024 - STAY APPLICATION Date : 25-02-2025 This matter was
called on for hearing today.

CORAM :    HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE DIPANKAR DATTA
           HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE RAJESH BINDAL

For Petitioner(s) :Mr. Ranjit Kumar, Sr. Adv.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/141785233/

4

Garden Reach Shipbuilders And ... vs Grse Limited Workmens Union on 25 February, 2025

                   Mr. Brijender Chahar, Sr. Adv.
                   Mr. Nidhesh Gupta, Sr. Adv.
                   Mr. Ranjay De, Sr. Adv.
                   Mr. Ranjan Kumar Pandey, AOR
                   Mr. Sandeep Bisht, Adv.
                   Mr. Yati Ranjan, Adv.
                   Mr. Akash Dixit, Adv.
                   Ms. Swati Bansal, Adv.

For Respondent(s) :Mr. Soumya Majumdar, Sr. Adv.

Mr. Swarnendu Chatterjee, AOR Mr. Nilay Sengupta, Adv.

Mr. Sujit Banerjee, Adv.

Ms. Deepakshi Garg, Adv.

Ms. Harshita Rawat, Adv.

Mr. Shreekant Neelappa Terdal, AOR UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following O R
D E R

1. Leave granted.

2. The appeal is allowed in terms of the signed reportable judgment.

3. Pending applications, if any, shall also stand disposed of.

(JATINDER KAUR)                                     (SUDHIR KUMAR SHARMA)
P.S. to REGISTRAR                                     COURT MASTER (NSH)

(Signed reportable judgment is placed on the file)

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/141785233/

5

