Geddam Jhansi vs The State Of Telangana on 7 February, 2025

Geddam Jhansi vs The State Of Telangana on 7 February, 2025

Author: Pankaj Mithal

Bench: Pankaj Mithal

2025 INSC 160                                                                  REPORTABLE

                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(s). _____ OF 2025
                             (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Criminal) No.9556 of 2022)

                            GEDDAM JHANSI & ANR.                               ...APPELLANTS (S)

                                                                VERSUS

                            THE STATE OF TELANGANA & ORS.                      …RESPONDENT(S)

                                                               With

                                           CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(s). _____ OF 2025
                                 (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Criminal) No.428 of 2024

                                 GEDDAM JHANSI                                ...APPELLANTS (S)

                                                                VERSUS

                            THE STATE OF TELANGANA & ANR.                     …RESPONDENT(S)

                                                     JUDGMENT

NONGMEIKAPAM KOTISWAR SINGH, J.

Leave granted in both the SLPs.

17:42:54 IST Reason:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/192533816/

1

Geddam Jhansi vs The State Of Telangana on 7 February, 2025

2. This common order disposes of both the Criminal Appeals arising out of Special
Leave Petition (Criminal) No. 9556 of 2022 and Special Leave Petition (Criminal) No.
428 of 2024 as both these appeals relate to similar and connected incidents.

3. Special Leave Petition (Criminal) No. 9556 of 2022 was filed against the judgement
and order dated 04.04.2022 passed by the Ld. Single Bench of the High Court for the
State of Telangana in Criminal Petition No. 3105 of 2022 whereunder the High Court
declined to quash the criminal proceedings in C.C. No. 46 of 2022 under Section
498A, 506 Indian Penal Code (for short “IPC”) and Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry
Prohibition Act, 1961 (for short “Dowry Act”) pending before the Court of the Judicial
Magistrate, First Class, Bhongir under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (for short “CrPC”) by holding that, prima facie, there are certain
allegations against both the appellants, Geddam Jhansi and Geddam Sathyakama
Jabali, and that these are triable issues for which the appellants have to face trial and
prove their innocence.

4. Special Leave Petition (Criminal) No. 428 of 2024 has been preferred against the
judgement and order dated 03.02.2022 passed by the Ld. Single Bench of the High
Court for the State of Telangana in Criminal Petition No. 1002 of 2022 whereunder
the High Court declined to quash the criminal proceedings under the Protection of
Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 (for short “DV Act”) in DVC No. 25 of
2021 pending before the Court of the Additional Judicial Magistrate, First Class,
Bhongir under Section 482 of CrPC on similar ground by holding that, prima facie,
there are specific allegations against the sole appellant, Geddam Jhansi, and the same
have to be decided only after enquiry.

5. Being aggrieved by the refusal of the High Court to quash the aforesaid criminal
proceedings pending before the concerned Magistrates, the present appeals have
been preferred.

6. The gravamen of the plea of the appellants in both the appeals is that the
allegations against them are vague and are of a generalised nature without any
specific overt act attributed to them, thus, incapable of being fastened with criminal
liability, which unfortunately, the High Court had failed to appreciate.

7. The relevant facts in brief as may be culled from the pleadings is that a written
complaint was filed before the Mahila Police Station Bhuvanagiri on 17.09.2021 by
one Premlata (hereinafter referred to as “complainant”) in which it was mentioned
that she was married to one Samuel Suresh, a doctor by profession and a resident of
Chennai on 17.08.2016 and at the time of marriage her mother-in-law, Pathagadda,
had demanded a sum of Rs.30 Lakhs and accordingly, the complainant’s mother had
given Rs.10 Lakhs by way of cash and 15 tolas of gold as dowry to her mother-in-law.
It was stated that for about five months after the marriage, the complainant’s
husband had treated her well and took care of her properly. Unfortunately, later, her

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/192533816/

2

Geddam Jhansi vs The State Of Telangana on 7 February, 2025

husband suspecting her character started harassing her mentally and physically to
get additional dowry of Rs.10 Lakhs, for which her mother-in-law, the younger sister
of her mother-in-law, namely, Geddam Jhansi (Appellant No.1), her brother-in-

law, Sudheer, and the son of Geddam Jhansi, namely, Geddam Sathyakama Jabali (Appellant No.2)
pressurized her to act according to her husband’s and mother in law’s wishes and also threatened to
kill her if the demand for dowry was not met. It was also alleged that because of their behaviour, the
complainant’s mother organised panchayat several times before the elders and other family
members. It was alleged that in front of the elders, her husband had agreed to take care of her
properly but as usual after sometime he started harassing her because of which she ultimately
approached the police for counselling but there was no change in their behaviour leaving her no
alternative but to file the aforesaid complaint.

8. On the basis of the aforesaid complaint, FIR No. 54 of 2021 was registered at Bhongir Women PS,
Rahakonda District, under Sections 498A, 506 IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry Act against
the complainant's husband, complainant's mother-in-law, complainant’s brother in law and the
present two appellants. On completion of the investigation, Charge Sheet No. 46 of 2021 was filed
before the Court of the Judicial Magistrate, First Class, Bhongir under Sections 498A, 506 IPC and
Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry Act against the aforesaid accused including the present two
appellants, which is now pending before the aforesaid court in C.C. No. 46 of 2022.

9. Apart from the aforesaid complaint filed before the Mahila Police Station, another complaint was
filed by the complainant on 20.09.2021 before the Protection Officer, Bhuvanagari alleging cruelty
and criminal intimidation under the DV Act, 2005 making similar allegations with the additional
allegations that on one occasion, her husband asked her not to touch his clothes and to go away
from the kitchen and that he tried to burn his socks because the complainant had washed them. It
was also alleged that her husband had influenced his friends to talk ill of her, who in turn used to
call the complainant and ask her to leave her husband, further telling her that her husband has a
girlfriend who had taken divorce to marry him. It was also alleged that on 17.10.2020 at around
10:00 p.m, the complainant was beaten and pushed out of the matrimonial house by her husband.

10. The complainant accordingly, approached the Judicial Magistrate First Class, Bhongir where a
case under DV Act, being DVC No. 25 of 2021 was registered and is now pending.

11. At this stage it may be apposite to mention herein that the allegations are not one way and the
husband had made counter allegations against the complainant. Before the aforesaid complaints
were filed by the complainant, the husband of the complainant instituted a divorce proceeding
before the Court of the Principal District Judge at Kanchipuram, which was registered as I.D.O.P.
No. 44 of 2021 under Section 10 of the Indian Divorce Act, 1869 alleging neglect, insensitivity to the
needs of the husband, incompatibility, concealment of facts, showing hostile attitude towards the
husband, refusal to consummate the marriage, causing mental and physical harassment and
desertion since 10 April 2018.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/192533816/

3

Geddam Jhansi vs The State Of Telangana on 7 February, 2025

12. As we proceed to examine the issues involved, we may briefly allude to the law relating to
quashing of FIRs/criminal proceedings, which is well-settled and summarised by this Court in the
State of Haryana and Ors. vs. Bhajan Lal and Ors., 1992 Supp (1) SCC 335 in which this Court held
as below:

“102. In the backdrop of the interpretation of the various relevant provisions of the
Code under Chapter XIV and of the principles of law enunciated by this Court in a
series of decisions relating to the exercise of the extraordinary power under Article
226 or the inherent powers under Section 482 of the Code which we have extracted
and reproduced above, we give the following categories of cases by way of illustration
wherein such power could be exercised either to prevent abuse of the process of any
court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice, though it may not be possible to lay
down any precise, clearly defined and sufficiently channelised and inflexible
guidelines or rigid formulae and to give an exhaustive list of myriad kinds of cases
wherein such power should be exercised.

(1) Where the allegations made in the first information report or the complaint, even
if they are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie
constitute any offence or make out a case against the accused.

(2) Where the allegations in the first information report and other materials, if any,
accompanying the FIR do not disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an
investigation by police officers under Section 156(1) of the Code except under an
order of a Magistrate within the purview of Section 155(2) of the Code. (3) Where the
uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR or complaint and the evidence collected
in support of the same do not disclose the commission of any offence and make out a
case against the accused.

(4) Where, the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a cognizable offence but
constitute only a non-cognizable offence, no investigation is permitted by a police
officer without an order of a Magistrate as contemplated under Section 155(2) of the
Code.

(5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so absurd and inherently
improbable on the basis of which no prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion
that there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused. (6) Where there is
an express legal bar engrafted in any of the provisions of the Code or the concerned
Act (under which a criminal proceeding is instituted) to the institution and
continuance of the proceedings and/or where there is a specific provision in the Code
or the concerned Act, providing efficacious redress for the grievance of the aggrieved
party (7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with mala fide and/or
where the proceeding is maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking
vengeance on the accused and with a view to spite him due to private and personal
grudge.”

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/192533816/

4

Geddam Jhansi vs The State Of Telangana on 7 February, 2025

13. In the present case, the charge-sheet has been filed before the Court of the Magistrate in C.C. No.
46 of 2022 after investigation was completed by the police on the basis of the complaint/FIR lodged
by the complainant and another proceeding is also pending under the DV Act before the Court of the
Additional Judicial Magistrate. However, this will not preclude this Court from interfering with the
criminal proceedings, if upon perusal of the complaints, the materials gathered during the
investigation and in the charge-sheet, it is found that no prima facie case has been made out against
the appellants and the criminal proceedings amount to abuse of the process of law. As mentioned
above, the common plea of the appellants in both the proceedings is that allegations against them
are of a generalized nature devoid of specific offending acts to constitute offences punishable under
law.

14. In this regard, we may recall what this Court has held in Anand Kumar Mohatta v. State (NCT of
Delhi), (2019) 11 SCC 706 as regards permissibility of quashing of proceeding once charge-sheet is
filed as follows:

“14. First, we would like to deal with the submission of the learned Senior Counsel for
Respondent 2 that once the charge-sheet is filed, petition for quashing of FIR is
untenable. We do not see any merit in this submission, keeping in mind the position
of this Court in Joseph Salvaraj A. v. State of Gujarat [Joseph Salvaraj A. v. State of
Gujarat, (2011) 7 SCC 59 : (2011) 3 SCC (Cri) 23] . In Joseph Salvaraj A. [Joseph
Salvaraj A. v. State of Gujarat, (2011) 7 SCC 59 : (2011) 3 SCC (Cri) 23] , this Court
while deciding the question whether the High Court could entertain the Section 482
petition for quashing of FIR, when the charge-sheet was filed by the police during the
pendency of the Section 482 petition, observed : (SCC p. 63, para 16) “16. Thus, from
the general conspectus of the various sections under which the appellant is being
charged and is to be prosecuted would show that the same are not made out even
prima facie from the complainant's FIR. Even if the charge-sheet had been filed, the
learned Single Judge [Joesph Saivaraj A. v.

State of Gujarat, 2007 SCC OnLine Guj 365] could have still examined whether the offences alleged
to have been committed by the appellant were prima facie made out from the complainant's FIR,
charge-sheet, documents, etc. or not.”

15. Even otherwise also, it must be remembered that the provision invoked by the accused before the
High Court is Section 482 of the CrPC and that this Court is hearing an appeal from an order under
Section 482 of the CrPC. Section 482 of the CrPC reads as follows:

“482. Saving of inherent powers of the High Court.—Nothing in this Code shall be
deemed to limit or affect the inherent powers of the High Court to make such orders
as may be necessary to give effect to any order under this Code, or to prevent abuse of
the process of any court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice.”

16. There is nothing in the words of this section which restricts the exercise of inherent powers by
the Court to prevent the abuse of process of court or miscarriage of justice only up to the stage of the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/192533816/

5

Geddam Jhansi vs The State Of Telangana on 7 February, 2025

FIR. It is settled principle of law that the High Court can exercise jurisdiction under Section 482 of
CrPC even when the discharge application is pending with the trial court [G. Sagar Suri v. State of
U.P., (2000) 2 SCC 636, para 7, Umesh Kumar v. State of A.P., (2013) 10 SCC 591, para 20]. Indeed,
it would be a travesty to hold that proceedings initiated against a person can be interfered with at
the stage of FIR but not if it has advanced and the allegations have materialised into a charge-sheet.
On the contrary it could be said that the abuse of process caused by the registration of the FIR
stands aggravated if the FIR has taken the form of a charge-sheet after investigation. The power is
undoubtedly conferred to prevent abuse of process of any court.

15. Keeping the aforesaid legal position in mind, we will examine whether the facts/materials
obtaining in the present case would warrant interference of this Court under Section 482 of the
CrPC for quashing the said criminal proceedings pending before the concerned courts.

16. As far as the first complaint is concerned, out of which the criminal proceeding in “C.C. No.46 of
2022” has arisen, which is pending before the Court of the Judicial Magistrate, First Class, Bhongir,
where the charge-sheet has been filed, the relevant portions of the said complaint read as follows: -

“xxxxxx On 17.08.2016, I was married to Samuel Suresh. S/o. Late Janardhan Rao,
aged 38 years, Caste: SC (Madiga). Occupation: Doctor, R/o Pondicherry in Chennai.
At the time of marriage, my mother-in-law demanded Rs. 30,00,000/- and
accordingly my mother has given Rs. 10.00.000/- by way of cash and 15 tulas gold as
dowry to my mother-

in-law. After the marriage for a period of 5 months or so, my husband has taken care of me properly.
Thereafter my husband started suspecting my character and harassed mentally and physically to get
additional dowry of Rs.10,00,000/-. I submit that my mother-in-law Pathagadda Bharathi and
younger sister of my Mother-in-Law namely Geddam Jhansi, my brother-in-law Sudheer and son of
younger sister of my Mother-in-law namely Geddam Satya Rama Jabili all the persons referred
above used to pressurize to act according to my husband's and Mother-in-law's wish, otherwise they
threatened to kill me. In this regard my mother organized Panchayathi several times, before the
elders and family members. In front of the elders, my husband agreed to take care of me properly
but as usual, after sometime, he started harassing me. Thereafter. I have approached Bhongiri
Mahila Police Station and have given a complaint. Thereafter, Police personnel called them for
counselling, but there was no change in the behaviour. In view of the above I request to take legal
action, on all persons mentioned above.” (emphasis added)

17. Charge-sheet is filed only on culmination of the investigation during which time the investigating
agency collects all the relevant evidence in support of the complaint on the basis of which a clear
prima facie case indicating commission of the offence must be made out against the accused
warranting trial. The investigation may uncover/throw up more detailed and additional facts and
evidence that would support the complaint/FIR. Accordingly, this Court will examine the
charge-sheet filed and examine the evidence which has been gathered in the present case relating to
“C.C. No. 46 of 2022” to see if any new facts or evidence had been disclosed.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/192533816/

6

Geddam Jhansi vs The State Of Telangana on 7 February, 2025

18. In this regard we may refer to the charge-sheet filed in connection with the aforesaid case,
relevant portions of which are reproduced hereinbelow: -

“As per the evidence collected, during the course of the investigation and as per
detailed and discreet enquiries, prima-facie care is made out against the A-1 to A-5
for the offence punishable U/s 498-(A). 406, 506 IPC & Sec 3 & 4 Dowry Prohibition
Act-1961.

During the further course of the Investigation, since the prima- facie offence is
proved against the accused A-1. A-2 & A-4 on 23.09.2021 the LW-07 has Register
post under sub-section (1) of Section 41 A of Criminal Procedure Code to them, but
A-1, A-2 & A- 4 was Rejected the Post, after that A-1 received anticipatory bail
H o n ' b l e   c o u r t   o f   5   a d d i t i o n a l   d i s t r i c t   a n d   s e s s i o n s   j u d g e   a t   B h o n g i r
Cri.M.P.No.410/2021 on 27-11-2021 A-3 & A-5 on 02.11.2021 the LW-07 has served
the notices them under sub-section (1) of Section

41.A of Criminal Procedure Code with directions to appear before me.

Accordingly, on 03.12.2021, the accused A-3 & A-5 have complied with the instructions of LW-07 by
appearing before her. As such, as per the directions of the Hon'ble Apex Court and since the offence
is having the punishment of less than seven years Imprisonment, the LW. 07 has served notices
under sub-section (3) of section 41 A of Criminal Procedure to the accused A-3 & A-5 directing them
to appear before the Hon'ble trial court as when they received the summons.

Investigation done so far in this case it well established that LW-1 Panthagadda Premalatha is the
complainant & victim legally wedded of the A-1 is resident of H No 1-11-14. Near By Meg Market.
Jangaon (V&M&D), Present at Yadagirigutta (V&M). Yadadri- Bhongir (Dist), the LW-2 S Potta
Chandralah, the Lw-3. Smt Potta Bharathamma are parents respectively of victim and circumstant
witness to the incident, the LW.4, Sri Eppialapally Narendar, the LW- 5 Sri Bollepally Janardhan are
panchayath elders & circumstantial witness to the incident. Whereas the accused A-1 Panthagadda
Shymul Suresh is the son of A-2, the A-2. Panthagadda Bharathi, are resident of Thiruvikanagar.
Madhaliya Pet. Pondicherry, the A-3 /Geddam Jhand. Small Mother-in-law of A-1, the A-4
Panthagadda Sudheer, the AS Geddam Sathyakama Jabal @Amancherla Jabali are Brothers of A-1
are resident of Jawaharagar, Hyderabad.

The LW-1 marriage was performed on 17.08.2016 with the A- 1 as per customs prevailing in their
community and the presence of their relatives. At the time of LW-1 marriage. her in-laws.

Demand Rs. 30,00,000/-Cash for dowry, in which, LW-2 & 3 have gave Rs. 10,00,000/- cash, 15
Thule's Gold to them as dowry, After marriage the couple had lead happy conjugal life of 5 Months.
thereafter A-1 suspecting the Lw-1 character and also used to harassed mentally and physically to
bring Additional Rs.10.00.000/- dowry from her parent's house otherwise A-1 do the 2 marriage
with other women, A-2 to A-5 are supported to A-1 Due to such harassment, the LWs 26 3 was
placed the matter before the elders LW1-4 & 5 who are circumstantial witness & Panchayath elders.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/192533816/

7

Geddam Jhansi vs The State Of Telangana on 7 February, 2025

On request of the LWs 2 & 3, the elders held a panchayath 2018 May month 2 times at Chennai,
2018 July month one time at Hyderabad A-3 House, 2019 February Month one time. 2019 August
Month one time convinced them, A-1 to A-5 says in front of panchayath elders take good care of
Lw-1. but A-1 to A 5) are again harassed her. Later 2 years ago A1 to A-5 beaten the Lw-1 and necked
out in the house to bring additional Rs. 10,00,000/ dowry if not bring the amount they would kill
the LW-

1. Later Lw-1 filed a complaint against them in Woman PS Bhongir. Police are given counselling
them, but A1 to A 5 did not change their · attitude. Thus the A1 to A5 noted in Col. No 12 of this
charge sheet committed an offence punishable U/s 498-A. 406, 506 IPC & Sec 3 & 4 DP Act.”

19. Perusal of the charge-sheet would show that the investigating agency had relied on the
statements of the complainant, her parents and two other witnesses who are Panchayat elders to
substantiate the allegations. As far as the statement of the complainant is concerned, it is in the
form of the complaint which has been already reproduced hereinabove. We will now examine
whether any new or fresh evidence has been revealed in the course of the investigation from the
examination of other witnesses, namely, the complainant's parents and the two panchayat
witnesses.

20. The statements of the parents are carbon copy of each other and as such we may refer to the
statement of the father only, relevant portions of which read as follows: -

“I am resident of Yadadri Bhuvangiri district, Bibinagar, Brahmanapalli road. We
married our daughter Premalatha in 2016 to Panthagadda SamuelSuresh, s/o
Janardhan Rao, resident of Pondicherry. Our son-in-law works as a Doctor. At the
time of marriage, the Mother-in-law of my daughter demanded Rs.30,00,000 cash as
dowry and we gave Rs. 10,00,000/ cash and 15 sovereigns of gold as per her wish.
Five months after marriage, my daughter came to our house and told me: that her
husband-was suspecting her with every person she spoke further he told her that he
doesn't like her as she did not get the dowry as demanded by them and asked her to
get additional dowry of Rs. 10,00,000/ for his needs or else asked her to leave him so
that, he can marry again. He was harassing my daughter mentally and physically. My
daughter's Mother-in-law Bharathi, my daughter's mother-in-law's younger sister
Geddam Jhansi and her son Geddam Sathyacama, my daughter's husband's brother
Sudhir, Jabali, all of them supported my daughter's husband and told that as she
brought less dowry they warned her to listen to her husband or else they will kill her.
They used to say insulting words and used to abuse her and beat her. In this regard
we held panchayat with elders. When the elders convinced them, they used to say
they will look after her well and taken her with them, but used to harass her again.
These type of panchayats took place 4 times in Chennai and 5 times in Hyderabad.
Approximately about 2 years ago my daughter came to our house and told me that
when she questioned why they were doing like this, they said, how dare you to raise
your voice against us and all of them together abused her and beat her and pushed
her out of house. They threatened her saying that, if she comes home without getting

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/192533816/

8

Geddam Jhansi vs The State Of Telangana on 7 February, 2025

money of Rs.10,00,000/- they will kill her. After that, my daughter has given a
complaint against them in Bhuvanagiri Mahila Police Station and the police called
them and counselled them, but there was no change in them is what he stated.”
(emphasis added)

21. The other evidence is in the form of the statements of the two panchayat witnesses, namely, Sri
Eppala Pally Narendar and Sri Bollepally Janardhan. It is also noticed that their statements too are
reproduction of the other and as such examination of only one of the statements will suffice, for
which we may examine the statement of Sri Eppala Pally Narendar, relevant portions of which read
as follows: -

“I am a resident of Yadadri-Bhuvanagiri district…….After 5 months of their marriage
Chandraiah came to me and told me that his daughter came home and told him that
her husband is suspecting her with every person she spoke Further he told he doesn't
like her, as she did not get the dowry that they asked for he asked her to get
additional dowry of Rs 10,00,000 for his needs or else asked her to leave him so that
he can marry again. He used to harass mentally and physically. Premalatha's
Mother-in-law Bharathi, her Mother-in-law's younger sister Geddam Jhansi and her
son Geddam Sathyacama, Jabali, her husband's brother Subir, all of them together
supported her husband and told her that she brought less dowry and warned her to
listen to her husband or else they will kill her. They used to say insulting words and
used abuse her and beat her Premalatha's father told me that in this regard, they
were holding a panchayat with elders and asked me to come an panchayat elder.
Then I along with a few other elders went to the panchayat. We told them to be good
and they said we will look after Premalatha well and has taken her with them, but
again harassed her in the same way. In May 2018, one time in July 2018, one time in
February 2019, one time in 2019 August, in panchayats were held in Chennai and
Hyderabad (Jhansi's house). In the panchayat all the above persons, collectively told
that, if they give the dowry they asked for only, they will take Premalatha or else we
will get their boy married again. 1 came to know that at about 2 years ago all of them
together abused and beat Premalatha and pushed her out of house and threatened
her to get Rs.5,00,000 and then only they will allow her enter the house or else they
will kill her-is the statement given by him”

22. When we minutely examine the statements of the father and the mother of the complainant,
what can be seen is that as far as the demand for dowry of Rs. 30 Lakhs and giving of Rs. 10 lakhs
and 15 sovereigns of gold at the time of marriage of the complainant is concerned, it can be said that
it was within their direct knowledge. Being the father and mother, the complainant daughter would
naturally convey to them what had transpired with her in relation to her husband and family. Thus,
as regards other allegations of harassment, the same were informed to them by their daughter but
they were not witness to the same.

It may also be noted that as regards the alleged act of beating of the complainant by her husband
and other relatives mentioned by the parents, the complainant herself does not mention so in her

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/192533816/

9

Geddam Jhansi vs The State Of Telangana on 7 February, 2025

complaints. Therefore, this allegation of beating of the complainant is something which has been
added by the father and the mother of the complainant though they did not themselves witness the
same.

23. As regards the statement of Sri Eppala Pally Narender, the Panchayat elder, regarding the
incidents of harassment which are the subject matter of the complaint, the same has been stated by
him after he was informed by the father of the complainant. Thus, his evidence is nothing but
hearsay evidence. As far as the statement regarding holding of panchayat at Hyderabad and Chennai
is concerned, where the family members of the husband had allegedly stated that if the dowry is not
given as demanded, the complainant would not be taken back and they would get the husband
married again, the said statement is of a very generalised nature and vague in the sense that it does
not mention exactly when and in which Panchayat the aforesaid incident took place and what roles
the appellants played. Further, it is noticed that this witness as well as the other Panchayat witness
are residents of Bhongir which is in Telangana. It is not stated how they were also present in the
Panchayat meetings held in Chennai.

The aforesaid Panchayat witness mentioned about the alleged demand of dowry and threat meted
out to the complainant of being killed if the demand for dowry of Rs. 5 lakhs was not met, and about
the threat of the complainant being thrown out of the matrimonial house, but the said statement is
based on the information provided to him by the father of the complainant and is not based on
personal knowledge of the witness.

24. When the aforesaid statements are examined, it is evident that there certainly are specific
allegations made against the husband of the complainant, his mother (mother-in-law of the
complainant) about demand of dowry and harassment meted out to the complainant. However, as
regards the present appellants, the allegation against them is that they along with the other accused
family members used to pressurize the complainant to act according to her husband and her
mother-in-law’s wishes. Apart from this generalised allegation, there are no specific or overt acts
attributed to the appellants which would tantamount to acts of cruelty or physical or mental
harassment or being active participants in the demands for dowry.

25. From the above what is clearly evident is that the statements of the witnesses though support the
case of the complainant, do not disclose any new fact or provide better particulars beyond what had
already been stated by the complainant. As far as the present appellants are concerned, these
witnesses including the complainant merely make generalised allegations without any specific
evidence against them.

26. Thus, if the evidence of the complainant as well as the witnesses are taken at their face value,
what can be said to have been made out against the appellants is that the appellants and other
members of the family used to pressurize the complainant to act according to the wishes of her
husband and mother-in-law which is a very generalised allegation devoid of specific particulars.

27. As mentioned above, the statements of the mother and the father of the complainant as annexed
in the charge-sheet are carbon copies. Similarly, the same is in respect of the statements of the other

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/192533816/

10

Geddam Jhansi vs The State Of Telangana on 7 February, 2025

two independent witnesses, Epalla Pally Narender and Bollepally Janardhan. Under these
circumstances, discussed above, we have no hesitation to say that the identical statements of the
witnesses do not inspire confidence of this Court for continuation of the criminal proceedings with
regard to the present appellants.

28. Coming to the other case relating to domestic violence pending before the Court of Additional
Judicial Magistrate, First Class, Bhongir in DVC No. 25 of 2021, the same is based on the second
complaint dated 20.09.2021 filed by the complainant, relevant portions of which read as follows:-

“xxxxxx On 17.08.2016, I was married to Samuel Suresh….

After the, marriage for a period of 5 months or so, my husband has taken care of me
properly. Thereafter 1. My husband Samuel Suresh,

2. My mother-in-law Bharati Janardhan. 3. Younger sister of my mother-in law
Jhansi Geddam 4. My brother-in-law Pathagadda Sudheer 5. Son of my
mother-in-law's sister Geddam Sathyakama Jabill, all the above referred persons,
with a plan, started harassing me physically and mentally and demanded to get
additional dowry of Rs. 10,00,000/-. When I informed the same thing to my parents,
my parents organized a panchayat before my family members and elders.

My husband agreed to take care of me properly, before the elders, but as usual after some days he
started harassing me along with his family members. They made me to pay the house rent. At times
my husband stayed away from the house during nights. My husband used to tell each and everything
to my mother-in-law and he used to act as per her directions. Further my mother-in-law used to
pressurize me to purchase a new house and a car. They also tried to get a false report from the
psychiatrist, by taking an appointment with the doctor. Thereafter they forced me to address a letter
stating that, I was responsible for all the mistakes happened in our marital life. They have taken
money from me and have spent for their personal uses.

I submit that when meeting was held at the residence of younger sister of my mother-in-law, my
husband promised before my parents that he will take care of me properly. After that when I holded
his hand, he pushed me down and used to scold me for every small issue. Further he asked not to
touch his clothes and go away from the kitchen. Once he tried to burn his socks. because I washed
them. My husband has not supported me, even when requested him, that there is a problem in my
job and finally lost the job. My parents have invited my husband for my brother's marriage, but he
refused to attend the marriage and used to pressurize me to sign the letter. He used to tell bad about
me to his friends and they used to call me and asked me to leave my husband. One day, a girl called
me and said that my husband is having a girlfriend earlier and now she has taken divorce from her
husband and therefore he is planning to marry her. They have tortured me in many ways, but I
patiently tolerated their ill-treatment for a smooth marriage, but he has not understood me. He
tortured me mentally by scolding me and he used to go out with his friends and used to come at 3 or
4 in the early morning. On 17.10.20 at around 10:00 pm he necked me out of the house, therefore I
request you to take legal action on my husband Samuel Suresh and other family members for

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/192533816/

11

Geddam Jhansi vs The State Of Telangana on 7 February, 2025

torturing me physically and mentally. Further I request you to take action as per Domestic Violence
and see that protection order and residence order is provided in my favor. Further, see that every
month Rs.30,000/- is given to me, for my maintenance.” (emphasis added) The said second
complaint is more or less the reiteration of the allegations made in her first complaint with some
additional incidents. Perusal of the second complaint shows that no specific allegations about
harassment have been made against the appellants.

29. As far as the allegation of the complainant of being thrown out of her matrimonial house on
17.10.2020 is concerned, she made the specific allegation only against her husband and she did not
attribute any role of the appellants except for making a general allegation of harassing her physically
and mentally without specifying the actual role of the appellants.

30. It may be also noted that in the second complaint, the complainant had specifically stated that
when a meeting was held at the residence of the younger sister of her mother-in-law (Appellant
No.1), her husband promised before her parents that he would take care of her properly. This
statement shows that the Appellant No. 1 was trying to mediate and broker peace between the
complainant, her husband and her mother-in-law, which is inconsistent with the allegation that the
appellants were pressurising the complainant in support of the mother- in-law and the husband.

31. Invoking criminal process is a serious matter with penal consequences involving coercive
measures, which can be permitted only when specific act(s) which constitute offences punishable
under the penal code or any other penal statute are alleged or attributed to the accused and a prima
facie case is made out. It applies with equal force when criminal laws are invoked in domestic
disputes. Criminalising domestic disputes without specific allegations and credible materials to
support the same may have disastrous consequences for the institution of family, which is built on
the premise of love, affection, cordiality and mutual trust. Institution of family constitutes the core
of human society. Domestic relationships, such as those between family members, are guided by
deeply ingrained social values and cultural expectations. These relationships are often viewed as
sacred, demanding a higher level of respect, commitment, and emotional investment compared to
other social or professional associations. For the aforesaid reason, preservation of family
relationship has always been emphasised upon. Thus, when family relationships are sought to be
brought within the ambit of criminal proceedings rupturing the family bond, courts should be
circumspect and judicious, and should allow invocation of criminal process only when there are
specific allegations with supporting materials which clearly constitute criminal offences.

32. We have to keep in mind that in the context of matrimonial disputes, emotions run high, and as
such in the complaints filed alleging harassment or domestic violence, there may be a tendency to
implicate other members of the family who do not come to the rescue of the complainant or remain
mute spectators to any alleged incident of harassment, which in our view cannot by itself constitute
a criminal act without there being specific acts attributed to them. Further, when tempers run high
and relationships turn bitter, there is also a propensity to exaggerate the allegations, which does not
necessarily mean that such domestic disputes should be given the colour of criminality.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/192533816/

12

Geddam Jhansi vs The State Of Telangana on 7 February, 2025

33. It goes without saying that genuine cases of cruelty and violence in domestic sphere, which do
happen, ought to be handled with utmost sensitivity. Domestic violence typically happens within the
four walls of the house and not in the public gaze. Therefore, such violence is not noticed by public
at large, except perhaps by the immediate neighbours. Thus, providing visible evidence by the victim
of domestic violence may not be easily forthcoming and producing direct evidence may be hard and
arduous, which does not necessarily mean that domestic violence does not occur. In fact, to deal
with this pernicious phenomenon, stringent statutes like Protection from Domestic Violence Act,
2005, have been enacted with very expansive meaning and scope of what amounts to domestic
violence. Since, violence perpetrated within the domestic sphere by close relatives is now
criminalised entailing serious consequences on the perpetrators, the courts have to be careful while
dealing with such cases by examining whether there are specific allegations with instances against
the perpetrators and not generalised allegations. The purpose and mandate of the law to protect the
victims of domestic violence is of paramount importance, and as such, a balance has to be struck by
ensuring that while perpetrators are brought to book, all the family members or relatives are not
indiscriminately brought within the criminal net in a sweeping manner.

34. For a matrimonial relationship which is founded on the basis of cordiality and trust to turn sour
to an extent to make a partner to hurl allegations of domestic violence and harassment against the
other partner, would normally not happen at the spur of the moment and such acrimonious
relationship would develop only in course of time. Accordingly, such a situation would be the
culmination of a series of acts which turns, otherwise an amicable relationship, into a fractured one.
Thus, in such cases involving allegations of domestic violence or harassment, there would normally
be a series of offending acts, which would be required to be spelt out by the complainant against the
perpetrators in specific terms to rope such perpetrators in the criminal proceedings sought to be
initiated against them. Thus, mere general allegation of harassment without pointing out the
specifics against such perpetrators would not suffice, as is the case in respect of the present
appellants.

35. We are, thus, of the view that in criminal cases relating to domestic violence, the complaints and
charges should be specific, as far as possible, as against each and every member of the family who
are accused of such offences and sought to be prosecuted, as otherwise, it may amount to misuse of
the stringent criminal process by indiscriminately dragging all the members of the family. There
may be situations where some of the family members or relatives may turn a blind eye to the
violence or harassment perpetrated to the victim, and may not extend any helping hand to the
victim, which does not necessarily mean that they are also perpetrators of domestic violence, unless
the circumstances clearly indicate their involvement and instigation. Hence, implicating all such
relatives without making specific allegations and attributing offending acts to them and proceeding
against them without prima facie evidence that they were complicit and had actively collaborated
with the perpetrators of domestic violence, would amount to abuse of the process of law.

36. Our observations, however, should not be generalised to mean that relatives cannot be brought
under the purview of the aforesaid penal provisions when they have actively participated in
inflicting cruelty on the daughter-in-law/victim. What needs to be assessed is whether such
allegations are genuine with specific criminal role assigned to such members of the family or

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/192533816/

13

Geddam Jhansi vs The State Of Telangana on 7 February, 2025

whether it is merely a spill over and side-effect of a matrimonial discord and allegations made by an
emotionally disturbed person. Each and every case of domestic violence will thus depend on the
peculiar facts obtaining in each case.

37. In the present case, the charges against the accused including the appellants are sought to be
substantiated based on the statements of the complainant, her parents and two panchayat elders.

As discussed above, the statements of the two elders are based on the information provided by the
father of the complainant. These two witnesses did not witness any of the incidents of physical
harassment by the appellants. Though they were present in the panchayat to resolve the dispute
between the parties, their account of harassment of the complainant is based on what they had
learnt from the father of the complainant. As regards their knowledge of demand of dowry by the
appellants, the same is quite vague and without specific details.

Similarly, the statements of the parents of the complainant are based on the information provided
by the complainant/daughter. There is also nothing on record to show that the parents witnessed
any of the incidents of physical harassment of the complainant at the instance of the appellants.

Thus, the evidence against the appellants in these proceedings boils down to the evidence of the
complainant. The complainant in her complaints as mentioned above, did not assign any specific
role to the appellants concerning the demands of dowry and physical and mental harassment of the
complainant, except for making a sweeping allegation without specific details. The evidence of the
complainant is the foundation for the criminal proceedings against the appellants. As discussed
above, the evidence of the other witnesses do not disclose anything new as far as the appellants are
concerned.

In our considered view, the aforesaid materials do not constitute a prima facie case against the
appellants for continuing the criminal proceedings against them in the trial.

38. We have also noted that the appellants do not live with the principal accused. While the
marriage took place in Pondicherry and the complainant lived with her husband and mother-in-law
in Chennai, the appellants are residents of Hyderabad. As the appellants do not stay together with
the complainant and her husband and mother-in-law, to make the appellants as co-accused for
alleged offences committed in the matrimonial house of the complainant on the basis of very
generalised allegations does not appear to be tenable.

39. Under these circumstances, for the reasons discussed above, we are satisfied that the appellants
have been able to make out a case for interference in these proceedings qua the present appellants
as in our opinion no prima facie case has been made out against the appellants to continue with the
criminal proceedings against them and allowing these to continue would amount to abuse of the
process of the law.

40. Accordingly, we allow both the present Criminal Appeals as below:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/192533816/

14

Geddam Jhansi vs The State Of Telangana on 7 February, 2025

(i) The impugned judgement and order dated 04.04.2022 passed by the Ld. Single
Bench of the High Court for the State of Telangana in Criminal Petition No. 3105 of
2022 is set aside and the criminal proceedings in “C.C. No. 46 of 2022” pending
before the Court of the Judicial Magistrate, First Class, Bhongir under Section 482 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 is quashed qua the two appellants, Geddam
Jhansi and Geddam Sathyakama Jabali.

(ii) The impugned judgement and order dated 03.02.2022 passed by the Ld. Single
Bench of the High Court for the State of Telangana in Criminal Petition No. 1002 of
2022 is set aside and the criminal proceedings in DVC No. 25 of 2021 pending before
the Court of the Additional Judicial Magistrate, First Class, Bhongir is quashed qua
the appellant, Geddam Jhansi.

This is having regard to the criminal proceeding against her being quashed as above and as identical
allegation (paragraph 28 above) are made against her in DVC No. 25 of 2021, and in exercise of our
powers under Article 142 of the Constitution of India. This is also by bearing in mind the
relationship of the appellant Geddam Jhansi to the complainant, being the latters’s mother-in-law’s
sister.

41. However, it is made clear that the observations and findings recorded herein by this Court are in
the respect of the allegations made against the present appellants and the same will have no bearing
on the criminal proceedings against the other accused persons and the trial courts will not be
swayed by the observations and findings recorded herein by this Court and the trial courts are
expected to proceed with the criminal proceedings pending against the other accused persons after
proper appreciation of evidence and in accordance with law.

… … … … … … … … … … … J .   ( B .   V .   N A G A R A T H N A )   … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … J .
(NONGMEIKAPAM KOTISWAR SINGH) New Delhi;

February 07, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/192533816/

15

