Ankita Bhati vs Dev Raj Singh Bhati on 13 July, 2023

Ankita Bhati vs Dev Raj Singh Bhati on 13 July, 2023

Author: Abhay S. Oka

Bench: Sanjay Karol, Abhay S.Oka

2023 INSC 643                                                                           NON-REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL/CRIMINAL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

TRANSFER PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1770 OF 2021

ANKITA BHATI                                                    Petitioner(s)

VERSUS

DEV RAJ SINGH BHATI                                             Respondent(s)

WITH

TRANSFER PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO. 659 OF 2019

J U D G M E N T

ABHAY S. OKA, J.

1. Heard the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner and the learned senior counsel appearing
for the respondent.

2. This is a usual case where a matrimonial dispute which resulted in multiple cases being filed by
the parties. Though an effort was made to arrive at a mediated settlement, perhaps the parties have
not seen the reason and therefore, the mediation has failed.

3. Both the Transfer Petitions are filed by the wife which are strongly opposed by the husband.
There are 17:20:21 IST Reason:

multiple proceedings pending as stated above. The wife has filed a maintenance
petition under Section 18 of the Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act, 1956 which is
pending before the Additional District Judge at Solan, Himachal Pradesh. Apart from
that, there is a complaint filed by her under the Protection of Women from Domestic

1

Ankita Bhati vs Dev Raj Singh Bhati on 13 July, 2023

Violence Act, 2005 which is also pending in the Court of the Judicial Magistrate at
Solan. There is one more case which is a petition under Section 125 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 filed by the wife which is pending in the Court of the
learned Chief Judicial Magistrate at Kasauli, District Solan, Himachal Pradesh.
Lastly, there is a criminal case pending in the Court of the Chief Judicial Magistrate,
Jaisalmer, Rajasthan which is on the basis of a First Information Report lodged by
the wife for the offences punishable under Section 323, 341 and 498A of Indian Penal
Code, 1860.

4. Transfer Petition (Civil)No.1770 of 2021 is in respect of one more case which is filed by the
husband, which is pending in the Family Court at Jaisalmer, Rajasthan, which is a petition for
divorce. Transfer Petition (Criminal) No. 659 of 2019 is filed by the wife seeking transfer of the
criminal case pending at Jaisalmer which arises out of a First Information Report lodged by her.
Thus, there are more than one cases pending in the Courts in District Solan, Himachal Pradesh filed
at the instance of the wife. The respondent-husband is attending those cases and he has not sought
transfer of those cases.

5. The learned senior counsel appearing for the respondent has not raised serious issue about
transfer of the petition for divorce filed by the husband. However, his serious objection is to the
transfer of the criminal case which is pending in the Court at Jaisalmer, Rajasthan to the Court of
the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Kasauli, District Solan, Himachal Pradesh. His first
submission is that the State Government is not made a party to the Transfer Petition. The second
submission is that the trial has commenced in the sense that the charge has been framed. His third
submission is based on a decision of this Court in Jyoti Mishra v. Dhananjay Mishra1. His fourth
submission is based on another decision of this Court in the case of Nahar Singh Yadav and Anr. v.
Union of India and Ors.2

6. It cannot be disputed that the criminal case pending in the Court at Jaisalmer arises out of the
matrimonial dispute. We must note here that as far as the exercise of jurisdiction under Section 25
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and Section 406 of the Code of 1(2010) 8 SCC 803 2(2011) 1
SCC 307 Criminal Procedure, 1973 is concerned, it all depends on facts and circumstances of each
case. The consistent view taken by this Court is that normally the convenience of wife is to be seen
when the cases arise out of matrimonial dispute. In exceptional cases where the facts are glaring, a
departure can be made from this normal rule.

7. The decision in the case of Jyoti Mishra1 is in the facts of the case. This Court noticed that that
apart from the husband, there were other accused in the case which were not made parties to the
Transfer Petition. The second reason why this Court did not accede to the prayer of transfer was that
the respondent-accused will not be in a position to attend the proceedings at Indore, Madhya
Pradesh where the case was sought to be transferred for the various reasons. The Court discussed
the consequences of non-appearance of an accused in a criminal case.

8. In the facts of this case, it is not the contention of the respondent that there are other accused
who are not impleaded as parties. Secondly, the respondent- husband is attending to atleast two

2

Ankita Bhati vs Dev Raj Singh Bhati on 13 July, 2023

proceedings filed by the wife in the Courts in District Solan, Himachal Pradesh. Moreover, in a
criminal case arising out of matrimonial dispute, the Court can always grant exemption from
personal appearance to the accused and his presence can be procured only when it is absolutely
necessary. The possible prejudice to the husband can be always minimized by directing that as far as
possible, all cases should be kept on the same day.

9. Now coming to the case of Nahar Singh Yadav2, we may note here that the transfer of case was
sought in a prosecution filed by Central Bureau of Investigation for a very serious offences.
Paragraph 21 relied upon by the learned senior counsel appearing for the respondent deals with the
contingency where after transfer, the accused may not get fair trial. In this case, there is nothing
placed on record to show that after the transfer of the case, the respondent will not get a fair trial. In
Paragraph 22, this Court discusses the possibility of sending wrong signals by transferring the trial,
as it may reflect on the Court in which the case was originally pending. This becomes relevant when
the transfer is sought to be effected by making allegations against the Court or the Judge. In this
case, the transfer is sought purely on the ground of the convenience of the petitioner-wife. When
there are multiple proceedings between the husband and wife arising out of a matrimonial dispute,
in fact, such transfer is in the interests of husband, as all cases between the parties will be heard at
the same place. Therefore, we cannot accept the objections raised by the learned senior counsel
appearing for the respondent, while opposing the prayer for the transfer of the criminal case.

10. Even if we pass order of transfer, the State will hardly be affected, considering the nature of the
criminal proceedings. Therefore, in the facts of the case, we do not agree with the submission that
the State is a necessary party. The complainant and accused are before the Court.

11. Accordingly we pass the following order:

(i) Transfer Petition (C) No.1770 of 2021 is allowed. Accordingly, Divorce Petition
No.7 of 2021 titled "Dev Raj Singh Bhati v. Ankita Bhati", pending before the Family
Court, Jaisalmer, Rajasthan is ordered to be transferred to the District Judge, Family
Court, Solan, Himachal Pradesh;

(ii) Transfer Petition (Criminal)No.659 of 2019 is allowed. Accordingly, Criminal
Case No.393 of 2019 titled "State v. Dev Raj Singh", pending before the Chief Judicial
Magistrate, Jaisalmer, Rajasthan is ordered to be transferred to the Chief Judicial
Magistrate, Kasauli, district Solan, Himachal Pradesh;

(iii)The Court to which criminal case mentioned in clause (ii) above is transferred,
shall endeavour to fix the same date in the criminal case which is fixed in the other
matters pending in the Courts at Solan, Himachal Pradesh; and

(iv) On a formal application being made by the respondent-husband, the transferee
Court will grant exemption to the respondent-husband from personal appearance,
subject to the condition that whenever the said Court passes an order requiring his
personal presence, he shall personally remain present in the Court.

3

..........................J. (ABHAY S.OKA) ..........................J. (SANJAY KAROL) NEW DELHI;

Ankita Bhati vs Dev Raj Singh Bhati on 13 July, 2023

July 13, 2023.

4