Gopal Krishan vs Daulat Ram on 2 January, 2025

Gopal Krishan vs Daulat Ram on 2 January, 2025

Author: Sanjay Karol

Bench: Sanjay Karol, C.T. Ravikumar

2025 INSC 18                                                                                       REPORTABLE

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO(S) 13192 OF 2024
                             (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) No.25645 of 2018)

             GOPAL KRISHAN & ORS.                                                           … APPELLANT(S)

                                                             VERSUS

             DAULAT RAM & ORS.                                                             …RESPONDENT(S)

                                                       JUDGMENT

SANJAY KAROL J.

1. Impugned in this appeal is the judgment and order of the Punjab and Haryana High Court in RSA
No. 1935 of 2015 dated 26th March 2018 whereby it has been held that the Will, subject matter of
controversy, allegedly of one Sanjhi Ram, had not been proved, thereby finding that the Lower
Appellate Court1 had erred in holding otherwise. The said Lower Appellate Court had set aside the
decree of the Civil Court2 which had found that the Will and the subsequent Civil Appeal No. 27 of
2011, judgment dated 5th September 2014 delivered by The Court of Additional District Judge
(Adhoc), Fast Track Court, Gurdaspur.

Civil Suit No. 282 of 2006, judgment dated 24 th February 2011 delivered by Civil Judge, Senior
Division, Gurdaspur.

mutation of the properties enumerated therein was bad in law, as the Will was “illegal”, “null” and
“void”. The question that falls for our consideration is-

“What do the words “by the direction of the testator” as they appear in Section 63 (c) of the Indian
Succession Act, 1925 mean? Is the term to be interpreted liberally or strictly? Consequently, was the
High Court correct in holding, in agreement with the Civil Court, that the Will, subject matter of
dispute, stood not proved?”

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/105871119/

1

2. Facts, shorn of unnecessary details, as they appear from the record are as follows: -

Gopal Krishan vs Daulat Ram on 2 January, 2025

2.1 Sanjhi Ram3, was the owner of 1/4th share of land measuring 40 canals, 3 marlas,
comprised in Khewat no.7, Khatauni no.9, Rett no. 9, Kila no. 9/8 situated in the
Revenue Estate of Village Umarpura, Khurd, Tehsil and District Gurdaspur, Punjab.
His share in the aforesaid property was to the extent of 10 canals and 1 marla4.

2.2 The Testator had no children and resided with his nephew Gopal Krishan5. He
executed a Will on 7th November 2005 and passed away the next day on 8th
November 2005. The death certificate issued by the competent authority is dated
19th November 2005.

2.3 Having received the property by virtue of the aforesaid Will, the appellant
transferred the same in favour of his four sons viz., Ravinder Kumar; Rajinder
Kumar; Satish Kumar and Roop Lal vide Sale Deed dated 16th January 2006. The
said property was sold jointly for a sum of Rs.98,000/- to Madhu Sharma and Meena
Kumari, vide Sale Deed dated 3rd February 2006.

2.4 Respondent nos.1 to 7 herein filed a Suit bearing No. 282 of 2006 before the Civil
Court, seeking declaration to the effect inter alia (i) that the plaintiffs (respondents
herein) were the owners of Sanjhi Ram’s 1/4 th share; (ii) that the Will dated 7th
November 2005 was forged and fabricated;

Testator Suit property Hereafter appellant no.1 and (iii) that the mutation carried out subsequent to
the execution of such a Will is illegal and not binding on the plaintiffs. 2.5 By way of written
statement dated 24th April 2006 the contentions made in the plaint were denied.

[

3. The Trial Court framed seven issues primarily pertaining to, (a) validity of the Will subject matter
of the present lis; (b) whether the plaintiffs are estopped by their act and conduct from filing the
suit; and (c) whether the plaintiffs have the locus standi to file the suit and whether the same is
maintainable, within limitation and filed with sufficient court fees, being affixed thereto.

3.1 Of primary importance to the present adjudication is the findings qua issue no.1. The relevant
extracts from the judgment of the Civil Court are as below:-

“10. On going through the file I find it has been admitted by the witnesses of the
defendants that Sanjhi Ram remained ill. The claim of the Plaintiffs is that he died on
7.11.2005 and the claim of the Defendants that the died on 8.11.2005. The defendants
did not being the death certificate of Shri Sanjhi Ram on the file and thus failed to
rebut the contention of the Plaintiffs. The visit of Sanjhi Ram at Tehsil Gurdaspur on
7.11.2005 and then executing the Will on the said day without any registration of the
same and adjustment of lines on the page in the lower portion and further adjusting

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/105871119/

2

Gopal Krishan vs Daulat Ram on 2 January, 2025

the seal by the scribe in the left margin and further the place the thumb mark alleged
to be of Sanjhi Ram make the will suspicious which cannot be relied on.”

4. On appeal the Lower Appellate Court relied on a judgment returned by a Division Bench of the
High Court of Judicature at Allahabad and one judgment of the Rajasthan High Court to hold that
even if the Testator was ill, so long as his mental faculties were not affected, no inference could be
drawn that he was not of sound state of mind or that he could not execute a Will. In the facts of the
instant case, it was observed that nowhere did the case record reflect that Sanjhi Ram’s mental
faculties were in any way questionable nor was he disoriented or affected by illness. In regard to
other observations of the Civil Court reproduced (supra) the Lower Appellate Court held as under:-

“16. As noted above, learned Lower Court had found the Will Ex.D1 suspicious also
for the reason that the spacing in between last lines in this Will was narrower than
the space available between lines in remaining upper part of this Will. In this context
learned counsel for the appellants has relied upon Judgment Bahadur Singh versus
Poonam Sin h & Ors, (Supra) which applies to the facts of the case in hand. Vide it
Hon’ble High Court categorically observed that merely because the spacing of last
two three lines is less than the earlier lines it cannot be said that the Will is not
genuine. To accommodate writing in one page, sometimes last lines are written
closely and therefore such circumstances should not be considered as adverse
circumstances. In the case in hand also Will Ex.P1 is on a single page. Moreover, the
lines on more than two third of this page have equal spacing between them. It is in
the last 1/3rd part of the page of Will that spacing goes on narrowing. When the Will
is on a single page only narrowing of space towards end of the writing has to be taken
as a natural phenomenon.” Having observed as above, the Will was held to be valid
and genuine, so also it was held that the consequent sale deeds cannot be held
invalid. The judgment of the lower Court was set aside.

5. In second appeal the High Court found that: -

(A) The reduction of space while concluding the Will had “totally escaped the notice
of the Court’s below”, and that this was a glaring illegality and perversity. The
attesting witness, Janak Raj (DW-1) had not stated in his examination that his thumb
print had been appended to the Will upon the direction of the Testator which is a
requirement in law. For such a conclusion, reliance was placed on Janki Narayan
Bhoir v. Narayan Mandeo Kadam6 and the Judgment of the Division Bench of the
High Court titled Kanwaljit Kaur v. Joginder Singh Badwal (deceased through LRs)7.

(B) Placing reliance on the Constitution Bench Judgment of this Court in Pankajakshi
(Dead) through LRs v. Chandrika and Ors.8, the Court without framing substantial
questions of law set aside the judgment of the Lower Appellate Court. The appeal
preferred by the present respondents was thus allowed.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/105871119/

3

Gopal Krishan vs Daulat Ram on 2 January, 2025

6. Having traversed the Courts below as aforesaid, the dispute stands before us. We have heard the
learned counsel for the parties.

7. Section 63 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 runs thus:-

“63. Execution of unprivileged Wills.— Every testator, not being a soldier employed
in an expedition or engaged in actual warfare, or an airman so employed or engaged,
or a mariner at sea, shall execute his Will according to the following rules:—

(a) The testator shall sign or shall affix his mark to the Will, or it shall be signed by
some other person in his presence and by his direction.

(b) The signature or mark of the testator, or the signature of the person signing for
him, shall be so placed that it shall appear that it was intended thereby to give effect
to the writing as a Will.

(c) The Will shall be attested by two or more witnesses, each of whom has seen the
testator sign or affix his mark to the Will or has seen some other person sign the Will,
in the presence and by the direction of the testator, or has received from the testator
a personal acknowledgement of his signature or mark, or the signature of such other
person; and each of the witnesses shall sign the Will in the presence of the testator,
but it shall not be necessary that more than one witness be present at the same time,
and no particular form of attestation shall be necessary.” (emphasis supplied) As seen
above, Section 63(c) enumerates five distinct situations:

(2003) 2 SCC 91 (2016) 6 SCC 157 A is the testator of the Will in question. B and C
have signed the Will. For B and C to qualify as attestors,-

Situation 1:

Each of them has to have seen A sign the will or put his mark on it;

OR Situation 2:

They should have seen some other person, let’s say D sign the will in the presence of
and on the direction of A;

OR Situation 3:

They ought to have received a personal acknowledgment from A to the effect that A
had signed the Will or has affixed his mark thereon; With the use of the conjunctive,
‘and’ one further stipulation has been provided: B, C, D or any other witness is
required to sign the Will in the presence of A however it is not necessitated that more
than one witness be present at the same time.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/105871119/

4

Gopal Krishan vs Daulat Ram on 2 January, 2025

The statutory language also clarifies that B and C, the attestors, are not required to
follow any particular prescribed format.

8. The requisites for proving of a Will are well established. They were recently reiterated in a
Judgment of this Court in Meena Pradhan and others v. Kamla Pradhan and Another9. See also
Shivakumar and Others v. Sharanabasappa and Others10. The principles as summarised by the
former are reproduced as below:-

“…10.1. The court has to consider two aspects : firstly, that the will is executed by the
testator, and secondly, that it was the last will executed by him;

10.2. It is not required to be proved with mathematical accuracy, but the test of
satisfaction of the prudent mind has to be applied. 10.3. A will is required to fulfil all
the formalities required under Section 63 of the Succession Act, that is to say:

(a) The testator shall sign or affix his mark to the will or it shall be signed by some
other person in his presence and by his direction and the said signature or affixation
shall show that it was intended to give effect to the writing as a will;

(b) It is mandatory to get it attested by two or more witnesses, though no particular
form of attestation is necessary;

(c) Each of the attesting witnesses must have seen the testator sign or affix his mark
to the will or has seen some other person sign the will, in the presence and by the
d i r e c t i o n   o f   t h e   t e s t a t o r ,   o r   h a s   r e c e i v e d   f r o m   t h e   t e s t a t o r   a   p e r s o n a l
acknowledgment of such signatures;

(d) Each of the attesting witnesses shall sign the will in the presence of the testator,
however, the presence of all witnesses at the same time is not required;

10.4. For the purpose of proving the execution of the will, at least one of the attesting witnesses, who
is alive, subject to the process of court, and capable of giving evidence, shall be examined; 10.5. The
attesting witness should speak not only about the testator’s signatures but also that each of the
witnesses had signed the will in the presence of the testator;

10.6. If one attesting witness can prove the execution of the will, the examination of other attesting
witnesses can be dispensed with; 10.7. Where one attesting witness examined to prove the will fails
to prove its due execution, then the other available attesting witness has to be called to supplement
his evidence;

10.8. Whenever there exists any suspicion as to the execution of the will, it is the responsibility of
the propounder to remove all legitimate suspicions before it can be accepted as the testator’s last
will. In such cases, the initial onus on the propounder becomes heavier; (2023) 9 SCC 734 (2021) 11
SCC 277 10.9. The test of judicial conscience has been evolved for dealing with those cases where the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/105871119/

5

Gopal Krishan vs Daulat Ram on 2 January, 2025

execution of the will is surrounded by suspicious circumstances. It requires to consider factors such
as awareness of the testator as to the content as well as the consequences, nature and effect of the
dispositions in the will; sound, certain and disposing state of mind and memory of the testator at the
time of execution; testator executed the will while acting on his own free will;

10.10. One who alleges fraud, fabrication, undue influence et cetera has to prove the same. However,
even in the absence of such allegations, if there are circumstances giving rise to doubt, then it
becomes the duty of the propounder to dispel such suspicious circumstances by giving a cogent and
convincing explanation;

10.11. Suspicious circumstances must be “real, germane and valid” and not merely “the fantasy of
the doubting mind [Shivakumar v. Sharanabasappa, (2021) 11 SCC 277] ”. Whether a particular
feature would qualify as “suspicious” would depend on the facts and circumstances of each case. Any
circumstance raising suspicion legitimate in nature would qualify as a suspicious circumstance, for
example, a shaky signature, a feeble mind, an unfair and unjust disposition of property, the
propounder himself taking a leading part in the making of the will under which he receives a
substantial benefit, etc.”

9. This case raises the question whether the third requirement u/s 63 of the Act stands met in the
present case particularly as to the contours of the meaning of the phrase ‘direction of the testator’.

10. The word ‘direction’, as discussed in the Cambridge Dictionary, can be employed in various
contexts – (a) giving instructions to someone to find a particular place or location; (b) looking to an
area or position where someone is placed; (c) a sense of direction i.e., the ability to find or locate a
particular place;

(d) control or instruction; and (e) information or orders telling somebody how or what to do.

11. The present case concerns (d) and/or (e) as above. The view taken by the High Court is that the
attesting witness, in his deposition, did not state that the act of affixing his thumb impression on the
Will subject matter of dispute was at the direction of the Testator and, therefore, the requirement
stipulated u/s 63 Iof the Act was not met.

12. The abovesaid conclusion of the High Court is based on the testimony of Janak Raj, who is
DW-1. His testimony reads as under:-

“1. That I know both the parties. I also knew Sanjhi Ram, Son of Shri Tulsi Ram, who
was a resident of our Village. He was residing at Gopal Krishan. Sanjhi Ram died
issueless. His wife is predeceased him. Gopal Krishan used to serve deceased Sanjhi
Ram and was looking after him. Shri Sanjhi Ram who was real uncle of Gopal
Krishan, while possessed of sound disposing mind, executed a valid Will on 7.1.2005
in favour of Gopal Krishan. I have seen the original WILL which bears my thumb
impression. The WILL is Ex.D.1. The same was scribed by the Deed Writer at the
instance of Shri Sanjhi Ram. He further scribing the same, read over and explained

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/105871119/

6

Gopal Krishan vs Daulat Ram on 2 January, 2025

the contents of the WILL Ex.D1. Sh. Sanjhi Ram after admitting the contents of the
WILL, appended his thumb impression in my presence and as well as in the presence
of other attesting witness Sh. Tarsem Lal and thereafter I and other attesting witness
put my thumb impression and signature respectively. On the basis of WILL Ex.D.1
Shri Gopal Krishan defendant is owner in possession of the land of the land of Shri
Sanjhi Ram. The Plaintiffs have got no right, title or interest in the land let by Shri
Sanjhi Ram. …” (emphasis supplied)

13. The language of Section 63(c)of the Act uses the word ‘OR’. It states that each Will shall be
attested by two or more witnesses who have seen the Testator sign or affix his mark on the Will OR
has seen some other persons sign the Will in the presence and by the direction of the Testator OR
has received a personal acknowledgment from the Testator of his signature or mark etc. What flows
therefrom is that the witnesses who have attested the Will ought to have seen the Testator sign or
attest his mark OR have seen some other persons sign the Will in the presence of and on the
direction of the Testator. The judgment relied on by the learned Single Judge in the impugned
judgment, i.e., Kanwaljit Kaur (supra) holds that the deposition of the attesting witness in the said
case had not deposed in accordance with Section 63(c) of the Act, where two persons had
undoubtedly attested the Will, but the aspect of the ‘direction of the testator’ was absent from such
deposition. In the considered view of this Court, the Learned Single Judge fell in error in arriving at
such a finding for the words used in the Section, which already stands extracted earlier, read -“or
has seen some other person sign the Will, in the presence and by the direction of the testator, or has
received from the testator a…”. That being the case, there is no reason why the ‘or’ employed
therein, should be read as ‘and’. After all, it is well settled that one should not read ‘and’ as ‘or’ or
vice-versa unless one is obliged to do so by discernible legislative intent. Justice G.P Singh’s treatise,
‘Principles of Statutory Interpretation’ tells us that the word “or” is normally disjunctive while the
word “and” is normally conjunctive. Further, it is equally well settled as a proposition of law that the
ordinary, grammatical meaning displayed by the words of the statute should be given effect to
unless the same leads to ambiguity, uncertainty or absurdity. None of these requirements, to read a
word is which is normally disjunctive, as conjunctive herein, are present.

14. In the present case the testimony of DW-1 is clear that he had seen the deceased affix his mark
on the Will. That alone would ensure compliance of Section 63(c). The part of the Section that
employs the term ‘direction’ would come into play only when the attestor to the Will would have to
see some other person signing the Will. Such signing would explicitly have to be in the presence and
upon the direction of the Testator.

15. The requirement of law while undoubtedly present, was not of concern in the instant dispute. On
that count, we find the High Court to have erred in law. As such the impugned judgment of the High
Court with the particulars as described in para 1 is set aside. The Judgment of the First Appellant
Court stand restored. Consequently, the Will of Sanjhi Ram is valid and so are the subsequent Sale
Deeds executed by Gopal Krishan.

Appeal is allowed in the aforesaid terms. Pending application(s) if any shall stand disposed of.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/105871119/

7

………………………J. (C.T. RAVIKUMAR) ………………………J. (SANJAY KAROL) New Delhi;

Gopal Krishan vs Daulat Ram on 2 January, 2025

January 2, 2025

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/105871119/

8

