Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24
March, 2023

Author: M. R. Shah

Bench: Sanjay Karol, C.T. Ravikumar, M. R. Shah

1

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 889 of 2007

Arup Bhuyan                                .. Appellant

Versus

State of Assam & Anr.                    .. Respondents

With

Review Petition (Criminal) No. 417/2011 In Criminal
Appeal No. 1383/2007

With

Review Petition (Criminal) No. 426/2011 In Criminal
Appeal No. 889/2007

With

Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 5971/2019

With

Signature Not Verified          Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 5964/2019
Digitally signed by
Neetu Sachdeva
Date: 2023.03.24
16:35:12 IST
Reason:                                            With

1

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

Criminal Appeal No. 1383/2007
(cid:12)                              2

With

SLP(Crl.)...CRLMP No. 16637/2014

With

Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 5643/2019

With

Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 6270/2019

JUDGMENT

M. R. Shah, J.

1. Present reference to the larger Bench is made against the judgment and order in the case of Arup
Bhuyan vs. Union of India, (2011) 3 SCC 377 as well as State of Kerala vs. Raneef, (2011) 1 SCC 784,
pursuant to the order passed by this Court dated 26.08.2014, reported as (2015) 12 SCC 702.
Background of the Reference

2. That the Division Bench of this Court in the case of Raneef (supra) whilst relying upon numerous
American decisions concerning freedom of speech and position on membership of banned
organizations rejected the doctrine of “guilt by association” and observed that mere membership of
a banned organization will not incriminate a person unless he resorts to violence or incites people to
violence and does an act intended to create disorder or disturbance of public peace by resort to
violence. In paragraphs 10 to 14 this Court in the case of Raneef (supra) observed and held as under:

“10.) As regards the allegation that the respondent belongs to the PFI, it is true that it
has been held in Redaul Husain Khan vs. National Investigation Agency 2010 (1) SCC
521 that merely because an organization has not been declared as an `unlawful
association' it cannot be said that the said organization could not have indulged in
terrorist activities. However, in our opinion the said decision is distinguishable as in
that case the accused was sending money to an extremist organization for purchasing
arms and ammunition. That is not the allegation in the present case.

The decision in State of Maharashtra vs. Dhanendra Shriram Bhurle 2009(11) SCC
541 is also distinguishable because good reasons have been given in the present case
by the High Court for granting bail to the respondent. In the present case there is no
evidence as yet to prove that the P.F.I. is a terrorist organization, and hence the
respondent cannot be penalized merely for belonging to the P.F.I. Moreover, even

2

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

assuming that the P.F.I. is an illegal organization, we have yet to consider whether all
members of the organization can be automatically held to be guilty.

11. In Scales vs. United States 367 U.S. 203 Mr. Justice Harlan of the U.S. Supreme
Court while dealing with the membership clause in the McCarran Act, 1950
distinguished between active `knowing' membership and passive, merely nominal
membership in a subversive organization, and observed :

"The clause does not make criminal all association with an organization which has
been shown to engage in illegal activity. A person may be foolish, deluded, or perhaps
mere optimistic, but he is not by this statute made a criminal. There must be clear
proof that the defendant specifically intends to accomplish the aims of the
organization by resort to violence."

12. In Elfbrandt vs. Russell 384 US 17-19 (1966) Justice Douglas of the U.S. Supreme Court speaking
for the majority observed :

"Those who join an organization but do not share its unlawful purpose and who do
not participate in its unlawful activities surely pose no threat, either as citizens or as
public employees. A law which applies to membership without the `specific intent' to
further the illegal aims of the organization infringes unnecessarily on protected
freedoms. It rests on the doctrine of `guilt by association' which has no place here."

13. In Joint Anti-Fascist Refugee Committee vs. McGrath 341 US 123 at 174 (1951) Mr. Justice
Douglas of the U.S. Supreme Court observed :

"In days of great tension when feelings run high, it is a temptation to take shortcuts
by borrowing from the totalitarian techniques of our opponents. But when we do, we
set in motion a subversive influence of our own design that destroys us from within."

14. We respectfully agree with the above decisions of the U.S. Supreme Court, and are of the opinion
that they apply in our country too. We are living in a democracy, and the above observations apply
to all democracies.” 2.1 That thereafter the Division Bench of this Court in another decision in the
case of Arup Bhuyan (supra) whist relying upon Raneef (supra) and relying upon the same
American doctrines which were earlier considered in the case of Raneef (supra) has observed in
paragraph 12 as under:

“We respectfully agree with the above decisions, and are of the opinion that they
apply to India too, as our fundamental rights are similar to the Bill of Rights in the
U.S. Constitution. In our opinion, Section 3(5) cannot be read literally otherwise it
will violate Articles 19 and 21 of the Constitution. It has to be read in the light of our
observations made above. Hence, mere membership of a banned organisation will
not make a person a criminal unless he resorts to violence or incites people to
violence or creates public disorder by violence or incitement to violence. Hence, the

3

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

conviction of the appellant under Section 3(5) of the TADA is also not sustainable.”
2.2 At this stage it is required to be noted that at the time when Raneef (supra) and
Arup Bhuyan (Supra) were decided neither Section 10(i) of the Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Act, 1967 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘UAPA Act, 1967’) was under
challenge and/or the constitutionality of the said provision was under challenge nor
even the Union of India was a party to the said proceedings and the Division Benches
of the Court in the aforesaid two decisions made observations on Section 10(a)(i) of
the UAPA Act, 1967 without giving any opportunity to the Union of India. Therefore,
the Union of India filed the applications seeking permission to file a review petition
on the ground that the interpretation made by this Court in the aforesaid two
decisions would be prejudicial to their interests and therefore, the Union of India had
a right to be heard. The State of Assam also preferred the review petitions.

2.3 Having regard to the important issue raised by the learned Solicitor General and
the Senior Counsel for the State of Assam, by order dated 26.08.2014 reported in
(2015) 12 SCC 702 the matter is referred to the larger Bench. While referring the
matter to the larger Bench this Court noted the submissions made by the learned
Solicitor General in paragraphs 4 to 7 and 10 to 11 as under:

“4.Mr. Ranjit Kumar, learned Solicitor General appearing for the Union of India, has
submitted that in the case of Arup Bhuyan vs. State of Assam, 2011 (3) SCC 377, this
Court has read down the provision to the detriment of the interest of the Union of
India when it was not a party before it. He has also invited our attention to the
decision in Sri Indra Das vs. State of Assam 2011 (3) SCC 380. In Arup Bhuyan's case
as well as in the case Sri Indra Das, the two-Judge Bench has referred to many
authorities of Supreme Court of United States of America and thereafter quoted a
passage from Kedar Nath vs. State of Bihar AIR 1962 SC 955 and relied on State of
Kerala vs. Raneef (2011) 1 SCC 784 and eventually opined thus:

“27. We may also consider the legal position, as it should emerge, assuming that the
main s. 124A is capable of being construed in the literal sense in which the Judicial
Committee of the Privy Council has construed it in the cases referred to above. On
that assumption, it is not open to this Court to construe the section is such a way as to
avoid the alleged unconstitutionality by limiting the application of the section in the
way in which the Federal Court intended to apply it ? In our opinion, there are
decisions of this Court which amply justify our taking that view of the legal position.
This Court, in the case of R.M.D. Chamarbaugwalla v. The Union of India (1) has
examined in detail the several decisions of this Court, as also of the Courts in America
and Australia. After examining those decisions, this Court came to the conclusion
that if the impugned provisions of a law come within the constitutional powers of the
legislature by adopting one view of the words of the impugned section or Act, the
Court will take that view of the matter and limit its application accordingly, in
preference to the view which would make it unconstitutional on another view of the
interpretation of the words in question.

4

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

In that case, the Court had to choose between a definition of the expression 'Prize
Competitions" as limited to those competitions which were of a gambling character
and those which were not. The Court chose the former interpretation which made the
rest of the provisions of the Act, Prize Competitions Act (XLII of 1955), with
particular reference to ss. 4 and 5 of the Act and Rules 11 and 12 framed thereunder,
valid. The Court held that the penalty attached only to those competitions which
involved the element of gambling and those competitions in which success depended
to a substantial degree on skill were held to be out of the purview of the Act.

The ratio decidendi in that case, in our opinion, applied to the case in hand in so far
as we propose to limit its operation only to such activities as come within the ambit of
the observations of the Federal Court, that is to say, activities involving incitement to
violence or intention or tendency to create public disorder or cause disturbance of
public peace.”

5. It is submitted by Mr. Ranjit Kumar that such reading down of a provision should
not have been done without impleading the Union of India as a party and moreover,
when the constitutional validity was not called in question. He has drawn our
attention to Section 10 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967. It reads as
follows:

“[10. Penalty for being member of an unlawful association, etc.- Where an association
is declared unlawful by a notification issued under section 3 which has become
effective under sub- section (3) of that section,-

(a) a person, who

(i) is and continues to be a member of such association; or

(ii) takes part in meetings of such association; or

(iii) contributes to, or receives or solicits any contribution for the purpose of, such
association; or

(iv) in any way assists the operations of such association, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, and shall also be liable to
fine; and

(b) a person, who is or continues to be a member of such association, or voluntarily
does an act aiding or promoting in any manner the objects of such association and in
either case is in possession of any unlicensed firearms, ammunition, explosive or
other instrument or substance capable of causing mass destruction and commits any
act resulting in loss of human life or grievous injury to any person or causes
significant damage to any property, (i) and if such act has resulted in the death of any

5

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

person, shall be punishable with death or imprisonment for life, and shall also be
liable to fine;

(ii) in any other case, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall
not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall
also be liable to fine.]”

6. The aforesaid provision was inserted by way of amendment with effect from
21/09/2004.

Relying upon the said provision, it is contended by him that if the view expressed in Arup Bhuyan
(supra) and Sri Indra Das (supra) is allowed to remain in the field various laws in other enactments
would be affected. It is further urged by him that the Court has erroneously referred to its earlier
judgment in Raneef's case wherein the basic fact was different, namely, the Social Democratic Party
of India (SDPI) was not a banned organization. The learned Solicitor General would impress upon
us that once an organization is banned, Section 10 of the 1967 Act would come into play. Learned
Solicitor General has also drawn our attention to certain paragraphs in Raneef's case wherein it has
been opined even assuming the PFI is an illegal organization, yet it remains to be considered
whether all the members of the Organization can be categorically held to be guilty. It is put forth by
him that the said judgment did not affect the provisions in other enactments inasmuch as the PFI
was not a banned Organization, but after the decisions in Arup Bhuyan (supra) and Sri Indra Das
(supra), the Trial Courts and the High Courts are relying on the said decisions by giving emphasis on
the facet of mens rea. The submission in essence, is that had the Union of India been impleaded as a
party it could have put forth its stand before the Court and then possibly such reading down of the
provision would not have been required.

7. Mr. Jaideep Gupta, learned senior counsel appearing for the State of Assam, supporting the stand
put forth by the Union of India has urged that if such an interpretation is allowed to stand the
terrorism would spread and it will be difficult on the part of the State to control the said menace. It
is further canvassed by him that the abuse of process of law would not affect the constitutional
validity and that to when it is not under assail.

xxx xxx xxx

10. The crux of the matter as submitted by Mr. Ranjit Kumar, learned Solicitor General for Union of
India, is that when any provision in Parliamentary legislation is read down, in the absence of Union
of India it is likely to cause enormous harm to the interest of the State as in many cases certain
provisions have been engrafted to protect the sovereignty and integrity of India.

11. The learned Solicitor General would contend that the authorities which have been placed reliance
upon in both the judgments by the two-Judge Bench are founded on Bill of Rights which is different
from Article 19 of the Constitution of India.

He has referred to Article 19(1)(c) and 19(4) of the Constitution.

6

Article 19(1)(c) reads as follows.

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

“19(1)(c) to form associations or unions;” The said article is further restricted by Article 19(4) which
is as follows:

(4) Nothing in sub-clause (c) of the said clause shall affect the operation of any
existing law in so far as it imposes, or prevent the State from making any law
imposing, in the interests of 4 [the sovereignty and integrity of India or] public order
or morality, reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by the said
sub-

clause.” Relying upon the same it is highlighted by the learned Solicitor General that the Court has
not kept this aspect in view while placing heavy reliance on the foreign authorities which are
fundamentally not applicable to the interpretative process of the provisions which have been
enacted in consonance with the provisions of the Constitution of India.

Regard being had to the important issue raised by the learned Solicitor General and Mr. Jaideep
Gupta, learned senior counsel for the State of Assam, we think it appropriate that the matter should
be considered by a larger Bench. Let the Registry place the papers before the Hon'ble the Chief
Justice of India for appropriate orders.” That is how the matter is listed before this Bench of three
judges.

2.4 The short issue before the Bench is whether the judgments in Raneef (supra) and Arup Bhuyan
(supra), have been correctly decided and whether “active membership” is required to be proven over
and above the membership of a banned organization under the UAPA, 1967. Another issue which is
required to be considered by this Bench is whether American decisions concerning freedom of
speech referred to in the case of Raneef (supra) to which this Court agreed could have been relied
upon while considering the right to freedom of speech available under the Constitution of India
more particularly Article 19(1)(c) and 19(4) of the Constitution of India? Another question which is
required to be considered is whether this Court was justified in reading down of a provision (Section
10(a)(i) of the UAPA Act, 1967) without impleading the Union of India as a party and more
particularly when the constitutional validity of the aforesaid provision was not called in question?

2.5 While appreciating the submissions on behalf of the respective parties on the aforesaid issues,
the relevant provisions of the UAPA, 1967 are required to be referred to which are as under:

“Section 2 – Definitions:

(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,--

(a) association means any combination or body of individuals;

(k) terrorist act has the meaning assigned to it in section 15, and the expressions
terrorism and terrorist shall be construed accordingly;

7

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

(l) terrorist gang means any association, other than terrorist organisation, whether
systematic or otherwise, which is concerned with, or involved in, terrorist act;

(m) terrorist organisation means an organisation listed in the 9[First Schedule] or an
organisation operating under the same name as an organisation so listed;

(o) unlawful activity, in relation to an individual or association, means any action
taken by such individual or association (whether by committing an act or by words,
either spoken or written, or by signs or by visible representation or otherwise),--

(i) which is intended, or supports any claim, to bring about, on any ground
whatsoever, the cession of a part of the territory of India or the secession of a part of
the territory of India from the Union, or which incites any individual or group of
individuals to bring about such cession or secession; or

(ii) which disclaims, questions, disrupts or is intended to disrupt the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of India; or

(iii) which causes or is intended to cause disaffection against India;

(p) unlawful association means any association,--

(i) which has for its object any unlawful activity, or which encourages or aids persons
to undertake any unlawful activity, or of which the members undertake such activity;

or

(ii) which has for its object any activity which is punishable under section 153A (45 of 1860) or
section 153B of the Indian Penal Code, or which encourages or aids persons to undertake any such
activity, or of which the members undertake any such activity:

Section 3 – Declaration of an association as unlawful (1) If the Central Government is
of opinion that any association is, or has become, an unlawful association, it may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, declare such association to be unlawful. (2) Every
such notification shall specify the grounds on which it is issued and such other
particulars as the Central Government may consider necessary:

Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall require the Central Government to
disclose any fact which it considers to be against the public interest to disclose.

(3) No such notification shall have effect until the Tribunal has, by an order made
under section 4, confirmed the declaration made therein and the order is published
in the Official Gazette:

8

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

Provided that if the Central Government is of opinion that circumstances exist which
render it necessary for that Government to declare an association to be unlawful with
immediate effect, it may, for reasons to be stated in writing, direct that the
notification shall, subject to any order that may be made under section 4, have effect
from the date of its publication in the Official Gazette. (4) Every such notification
shall, in addition to its publication in the Official Gazette, be published in not less
than one daily newspaper having circulation in the State in which the principal office,
if any, of the association affected is situated, and shall also be served on such
association in such manner as the Central Government may think fit and all or any of
the following modes may be followed in effecting such service, namely:—

(a) by affixing a copy of the notification to some conspicuous part of the office, if any,
of the association; or

(b) by serving a copy of the notification, where possible, on the principal
office-bearers, if any, of the association; or

(c) by proclaiming by beat of drum or by means of loudspeakers, the contents of the
notification in the area in which the activities of the association are ordinarily carried
on; or

(d) in such other manner as may be prescribed.

Section 4 – Reference to Tribunal -

(1) Where any association has been declared unlawful by a notification issued under
sub-

section (1) of section 3, the Central Government shall, within thirty days from the
date of the publication of the notification under the said sub-section, refer the
notification to the Tribunal for the purpose of adjudicating whether or not there is
sufficient cause for declaring the association unlawful.

(2) On receipt of a reference under sub-

section (1), the Tribunal shall call upon the association affected by notice in writing to show cause,
within thirty days from the date of the service of such notice, why the association should not be
declared unlawful.

(3) After considering the cause, if any, shown by the association or the office-bearers or members
thereof, the Tribunal shall hold an inquiry in the manner specified in section 9 and after calling for
such further information as it may consider necessary from the Central Government or from any
office-bearer or member of the association, it shall decide whether or not there is sufficient cause for
declaring the association to be unlawful and make, as expeditiously as possible and in any case

9

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

within a period of six months from the date of the issue of the notification under sub- section (1) of
section 3, such order as it may deem fit either confirming the declaration made in the notification or
cancelling the same.

(4) The order of the Tribunal made under sub- section (3) shall be published in the Official Gazette.

Section 5 – Tribunal -

(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute, as and when
necessary, a tribunal to be known as the "Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Tribunal" consisting of
one person, to be appointed by the Central Government:

Provided that no person shall be so appointed unless he is a Judge of a High Court.

(2) If, for any reason, a vacancy (other than a temporary absence) occurs in the office
of the presiding officer of the Tribunal, then, the Central Government shall appoint
another person in accordance with the provisions of this section to fill the vacancy
and the proceedings may be continued before the Tribunal from the stage at which
the vacancy is filled.

(3) The Central Government shall make available to the Tribunal such staff as may be
necessary for the discharge of its functions under this Act. (4) All expenses incurred
in connection with the Tribunal shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of
India.

(5) Subject to the provisions of section 9, the Tribunal shall have power to regulate its
own procedure in all matters arising out of the discharge of its functions including
the place or places at which it will hold its sittings.

(6) The Tribunal shall, for the purpose of making an inquiry under this Act, have the
same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5
of 1908), while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely:

(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness and examining him
on oath;

(b) the discovery and production of any document or other material object producible
as evidence;

(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits;

(d) the requisitioning of any public record from any court or office;

(e) the issuing of any commission for the examination of witnesses.

10

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

(7) Any proceeding before the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding
within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)
and the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195
and 1 [Chapter XXVI] of the 2[Code].

Section 6 – Period of operation and cancellation of notification -

(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), a notification issued under section 3 shall, if the
declaration made therein is confirmed by the Tribunal by an order made under section 4, remain in
force for a period of 1 [five years] from the date on which the notification becomes effective.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub- section (1), the Central Government may, either on
its own motion or on the application of any person aggrieved, at any time, cancel the notification
issued under section 3, whether or not the declaration made therein has been confirmed by the
Tribunal.”

3. Shri Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor General has also taken us to the background to the UAPA
and the enactment of Article 19(1) and 19(4) of the Constitution of India vide Constitution
(Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963. It is submitted that exception to the freedom to form
associations under Article 19(1) was inserted in the form of sovereignty and integrity of India in
Article 19(4), after the National Integration Council appointed a Committee on National Integration
and Regionalisation. The said committee was to look into the aspect of putting reasonable
restrictions in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India. It is submitted that pursuant to
the acceptance of the recommendations of the Committee, the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment)
Act, 1963 was enacted to impose, by law, reasonable restrictions in the interests of the sovereignty
and integrity of India. Article 19(1)(c) and 19(4) of the Constitution of India reads as follows:

“19.(1)(c) to form associations or unions;” The said is further restricted by Article
19(4) which is as follows:

19(4) Nothing in sub-clause (c) of the said clause shall affect the operation of any
existing law insofar as it imposes, or prevent the State from making any law
imposing, in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India or public order or
morality, reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by the said
sub-clause.” Relying upon the same it is highlighted by the learned Solicitor General
that the Court has not kept this aspect in view while placing heavy reliance on the
foreign authorities which are fundamentally not applicable to the interpretative
process of the provisions which have been enacted in consonance with the provisions
of the Constitution of India.” 3.1 It is submitted that in order to implement the
provision of the 1963 Act, the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Bill was introduced in
the Parliament. The main objective of the UAPA is to make powers available for
dealing with activities directed against the integrity and sovereignty of India. He has
taken us to the preamble and the objects and reasons for enactment of the UAPA. It is
submitted that to achieve the object and purpose for which the UAPA has been

11

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

enacted, Section 10(a)(i) provides that where an association is declared unlawful by a
notification issued under Section 3 which has become effective under sub-section (3)
of that Section, a person, who is and continues to be a member of such association
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years,
and shall also be liable to fine. It is submitted that therefore so long as Section
10(a)(i) stands a person who is or continues to be a member of such association shall
be liable to be punished. It is submitted that Section 10(a)(i) does not require any
further overt act and/or mens rea. It is submitted that mere membership of a
declared unlawful association, declared unlawful under Section 3 is sufficient to
warrant the prosecution and the conviction.

3.2 It is submitted that under the provisions of the UAPA, 1967 before an
organization/association is declared as unlawful under Section 3 of the UAPA the
procedure as required under the UAPA namely Section 3 of the UAPA is required to
b e   f o l l o w e d .   I t   i s   s u b m i t t e d   t h a t   e v e n   t h e r e a f t e r   a n d   a f t e r   a n y
association/organization is declared as unlawful under Section 3 of the UAPA, such
association which has been declared unlawful by a Notification issued under
sub-section (1) of Section 3, within 30 days from the date of the publication of the
notification, the Central Government is required to refer to the Tribunal for the
purpose of adjudicating whether or not, there is sufficient cause for declaring the
association unlawful. It is submitted that as per Section 4(2) on receipt of a reference
under sub-

section (1) of 4, the Tribunal shall thereafter call upon the association affected by notice in writing to
show cause within 30 days from the date of the service of such notice, why the association be not
declared unlawful? It is submitted that thereafter and after considering the cause, if any, shown by
the association or the office-bearers or members thereof, the Tribunal is required to hold an inquiry
in the manner specified in Section 9 and after calling for such further information as it may consider
necessary from the Central Government or from office-bearer or member of the association, the
Tribunal shall decide whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the association to be
unlawful and thereafter may pass such order as it may deem fit either confirming the declaration
made in the notification or cancelling the same. It is submitted that the order of the Tribunal made
under sub-section (3) shall have to be published in the Official Gazette.

3.3 Taking us to the relevant provisions of UAPA on declaration of any organization/association as
“unlawful” namely Sections 3 to 6, learned Solicitor General has submitted that from a perusal of the
aforesaid provisions/sections, it is clear that the declaration of an organization as an “unlawful
organization” is not on the basis of an executive diktat. It is submitted that such designation is
actually a product of a robust adversarial process wherein ample opportunity is given to the
organization to appeal to the better senses of a judicially trained mind in order to justify its aims,
objectives and activities being legal and not “unlawful” within the constitutional setup. It is
submitted that the same must have a bearing whilst deciding any question of criminalization of
“mere membership”.

12

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

4. Now so far as the correctness of the observations made by this Court in the case of Raneef (supra)
and Arup Bhuyan (supra) that while considering the offences under Sections 10(a)(i) the
prosecution has to prove the “active membership” of any person accused of being a member of a
banned organization, it is submitted that in the case of Arup Bhuyan (supra) this Court has just
followed the observations made in the earlier decision in the case of Raneef (supra) in which this
Court just accepted and followed the American decisions referred to on the freedom of speech
applicable in America and considering the American doctrine on freedom of speech. It is submitted
that as such this Court ought not to have straight way followed and/or accepted the American
doctrine on freedom of speech without taking into consideration the Constitutional provisions so far
as the India is concerned, more particularly Article 19(1)(c) and 19(4) of the Constitution. It is
submitted that this Court in the case of Babulal Parate vs. State of Maharashtra, (1961) 3 SCR 423
has specifically rejected the importing of the American doctrine on freedom of speech and
specifically rejected the said importing in the context of ‘determining criminality’ by way of two
Constitution Bench judgments which have not even been considered by the learned Benches hearing
the case in Raneef (supra) and Arup Bhuyan (supra). The learned Solicitor General has heavily
relied upon paragraphs 23 to 28 of the decision in the case of Babulal (supra) and paragraphs 16 &
17 of the decision in the case of Madhu Limaye vs. Sub-Divisional Magistrate, (1970) 3 SCC 746. 4.1
Learned Solicitor General has also relied upon the decisions of this Court in the case of Supdt.,
Central Prison vs. Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia, (1960) 2 SCR 821 (paragraphs 9 to 11) and in the case of
Ramlila Maidan Incident, In re, (2012) 5 SCC 1 on the reliance to be placed on American
constitutional position in context of public order and free speech. It is submitted that in the
aforesaid it is specifically observed that the American doctrine adumbrated in Schenck case cannot
be imported or applied. It is observed that under our Constitution, this right - freedom of speech is
not an absolute right but is subject to the restrictions. It is submitted that it is further observed that
thus the position under our Constitution is different. It is observed by this Court in the aforesaid
decisions that fundamental right enshrined in the Constitution itself being made subject to
reasonable restrictions, the laws so enacted to specify certain restrictions on the right to freedom of
speech and expression have to be construed meaningfully and with the constitutional object in
mind. It is submitted that it is further observed that thus there is a marked distinction in the
language of law, its possible interpretation and application under the Indian and the US Laws. 4.2 It
is further submitted by the learned Solicitor General that on numerous occasions this Court declined
to import the American doctrine of such subjects. Reliance is placed on the decisions of this Court in
the case of Joseph Kuruvilla Vellukunnel vs. Reserve Bank of India, 1962 Supp (3) SCR 632 (para 50
& 75); M.C. Mehta vs. Union of India (Shriram – Oleum Gas), (1987) 1 SCC 395 (para 29); Ashoka
Kumar Thakur vs. Union of India (2008) 6 SCC 1 (para 188 to 190) and Pathumma vs. State of
Kerala, (1978) 2 SCC 1 (para 23).

4.3 Making above submissions and relying upon the above decisions, it is vehemently submitted by
Shri Mehta, learned Solicitor General that therefore the American doctrine of “clear and present
danger” [Schenck vs. United States, 249 U.S. 47 (1919)] and “imminent lawless action”
[Brandenburg vs. Ohio, 395 U.S. 444 (1969)] are alien to Indian constitutional law.

4.5 Making above submissions, it is submitted that the observations made by this Court in Raneef
(supra) and Arup Bhuyan (supra) following and/or relying upon the American doctrines on freedom

13

of speech may be overruled and the statutory position be reaffirmed.

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

5. Now so far as reading down Section 3(5) of Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act,
1987, which is pari materia to Section 10(a)(i) of UAPA Act, 1967 and reading down the said
provision to the extent by observing that mere membership of a banned organization will not make a
person guilty unless he resorts to violence or incites people to violence or creates public disorder by
violence or incitement to violence and that mere membership of a banned organization will not
incriminate a person is concerned, it is vehemently submitted by Shri Tushar Mehta, learned
Solicitor General that as such in absence of challenge to the relevant provisions, more particularly
Section 10(a)(i) of the UAPA, 1967, such a reading down was not permissible. It is submitted that as
such in the case of Raneef (supra), which has been subsequently followed in the cases of Arup
Bhuyan (supra) and Indra Das v. State of Assam, (2011) 3 SCC 380, this Court was considering the
bail application and the constitutional validity of Section 10(a)(i) of the UAPA Act was not under
challenge.

5.1 Learned Solicitor General has relied upon the decision of this Court in the case of Subramanian
Swamy & Others v. Raju through Member, Juvenile Justice Board & Another, reported in (2014) 8
SCC 390 on as to when the power of reading down of a provision can be exercised. Reliance is placed
on paragraphs 59 to 62 of the said judgment. It is submitted that therefore when language in Section
10(a)(i) of the UAPA Act is very clear and unambiguous and looking to the object and purpose for
which UAPA Act was enacted and taking into consideration the plain and literal meaning of a statute
and in the absence of any constitutional challenge, it was impermissible for this Court to read down
the statute. It is submitted that there was no occasion to “read down” Section 10 of the UAPA Act in
absence of a constitutional challenge.

6. Shri Vinay Navare, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the State of Assam, while
adopting the submissions made by Shri Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor General, has in addition
submitted that under the scheme of a statute (UAPA) every effort is made to ensure that every
member of the association is made aware of the fact that such association is declared as unlawful.

6.1 It is further submitted that the language employed in Section 10 is very significant in the present
context. It provides that “where an association is declared as unlawful by notification under Section
3 which has become effective under sub-section (3) of that Section.” It is submitted that therefore it
is only after notification under Section 3 has become effective under sub-section (3), that the latter
part of that Section applies. It is submitted that language of Section 10(a)(i) is very cautiously
worded – ‘who is and continues to be a member of such association’. It is submitted that so if a
person ‘has been’ a member but does not ‘continue to be’ a member after declaration, that does not
attract mischief under Section 10. The intention in the Section is that not only is he a member on the
day when the association is declared unlawful but he continues to be a member. It is submitted that
therefore a person who is a member or wishes to be a member is well aware of the fact that such an
association is declared unlawful and if he still wishes to continue being a part of such an unlawful
association it shows a clear and conscious intention on his part and Section 10 of the UAPA Act
penalises this act of mere membership with such unlawful association. 6.2 It is further submitted
that Section 38 of the UAPA Act, 1967 provides that a person who associates himself or professes to

14

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

be associated with a terrorist organization with intention to further its activities commits an offence
relating to the membership of a terrorist organization. It is submitted that therefore it is seen that in
case of a terrorist organization mere membership is not sufficient but there has to be an act with
intention to further the activities of the terrorist organization which is not the case under Section 10
with an unlawful association.

6.3 It is submitted that there is a clear distinction between the provisions under Section 10 which
punish mere membership of an unlawful association and Section 38 which do not punish passive
membership with terrorist organization. It is submitted that the reason is that Section 10 has
already undergone the rigours of Section 3 but Section 38 has not undergone the rigours of Section 3
and it is a delegated legislation involving inclusion of a name of an organisation in the schedule. It is
submitted that even if you are a member, it gives an opportunity in Section 38 that the terrorist
organization was not a terrorist organization at the time when you became a member and he is not
taking part. 6.4 It is submitted that the United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA) has been declared
to be an unlawful association from time to time.

Making above submissions and relying upon the above decisions, Shri Tushar Mehta, learned
Solicitor General and Shri Vinay Navare, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the State of
Assam have prayed to hold that the observations/decisions of this Court in the cases of Raneef
(supra), Arup Bhuyan (supra) and Indra Das (supra) taking the view that mere membership of a
banned organization will not incriminate a person unless he resorts to violence or incites people to
violence or does an act intending to create disorder or disturbance of public peace by resort to
violence is not a good law, in view of the specific provision under Section 10(a)(i) of the UAPA Act,
1967, the constitutionality of which is not under challenge and even otherwise on merits also looking
to the object and purpose of enacting the UAPA Act, 1967.

7. Shri Sanjay Parikh, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the applicant – People’s Union for
Democratic Rights has heavily relied upon the subsequent decision of this Court in the case of Indra
Das (supra). It is submitted that in the said decision, after following the decisions of this Court in
the cases of Raneef (supra) and Arup Bhuyan (supra), this Court has rightly interpreted Section 3(5)
of TADA Act, 1987 and Section 10(a)(i) of the UAPA Act, 1967 which is in consonance with Articles
14, 19 and 21 of the Constitution. It is submitted that in the case of Indra Das (supra), this Court has
observed and held as under:

“a. statutory provisions cannot be read in isolation, but have to be read in consonance
with the fundamental rights guaranteed by our Constitution.

b. The Constitution is the highest law of the land and no statute can violate it. If there
is a statute which appears to violate it we can either declare it unconstitutional or we
can read it down to make it constitutional c. Had there been no Constitution having
fundamental rights in it then of course a plain and literal meaning could be given to
Section 3(5) of TADA or Section 10 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act. But
since there is a Constitution in our country providing for democracy and fundamental
rights we cannot give these statutory provisions such a meaning as that would make

15

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

them unconstitutional.” 7.1 It is submitted that in the case of Indra Das (supra), this
Court has interpreted the relevant provisions of TADA and UAPA to bring them in
conformity with the Constitution.

7.2 It is further submitted that this Court has on several occasions interpreted
provisions to bring them in consonance with the Constitution and even by reading
down to save the provisions from unconstitutionality. It is submitted that in the case
of People’s Union for Civil Liberties v. Union of India, (2004) 9 SCC 580 (paragraphs
48 & 49), this Court has read “mens rea” into the statute to save it from
unconstitutionality.

7.3 It is submitted that in the case of State of Gujarat v.

Shyamlal Mohanlal Choksi, 1965 (2) SCR 457, this Court read down Section 94 of the Cr.P.C. to
exclude persons accused from its ambit. It is submitted that Shyamlal Mohanlal Choksi (supra) was
a special leave petition from a High Court decision and the Union of India was not a party to those
proceedings.

7.4 On the submission made on behalf of the Union of India that without hearing the Union of India,
this Court ought not to have and/or could not have read down Section 10(a)(i) of the UAPA Act,
1967 or Section 3(5) of TADA Act, 1987, Shri Sanjay Parikh, learned Senior Counsel has relied upon
the decision of this Court in the case of Sanjeev Coke Manufacturing Company v. M/s Bharat
Cooking Coal Limited, reported in (1983) 1 SCC 147 (paragraph 25). It is submitted that in the said
decision, it is observed and held by this Court that “no one may speak for the Parliament and
Parliament is never before the Court.” It is further observed that “After Parliament has said what it
intends to say, only the Court may say what the Parliament meant to say, none else.” It is further
observed that “once a statute leaves Parliament House, the Court’s is the only authentic voice which
may echo (interpret) the Parliament and the Court will do the same with reference to the language of
the statute and other permissible aids.” It is submitted that while reading down Section 10(a)(i) of
the UAPA Act and Section 3(5) of the TADA Act, this Court has interpreted the statutory provisions
in light of Articles 14, 19 and 21 of the Constitution. It is submitted that judgments under reference
correctly hold that “mere membership of a banned organization will not make a person a criminal
unless he resorts to violence or incites people to violence or creates public disorder by violence or
incitement to violence.” 7.5 Now so far as the submission made by Shri Tushar Mehta, learned
Solicitor General that while deciding Raneef (supra) and Arup Bhuyan (supra), this court ought not
to have relied upon the US Supreme Court judgments, Shri Sanjay Parikh, learned Senior Counsel
has submitted that in the case of Shreya Singhal v. Union of India, (2015) 5 SCC 1, this Court has
held that the legal position in India is not different. He has relied upon the observations made in
paragraph 41 made in the case of Sherya Singhal (supra). 7.6 It is submitted that the decision of this
Court in the case of Shreya Singhal (supra) has been recently relied upon and considered by one of
the Hon’ble Judge of the Constitution Bench in the case of Kaushal Kishor v. State of Uttar Pradesh
and Others, 2023 SCC OnLine SC 6, while concurring on the question that the restrictions under
Article 19(2) are exhaustive.

16

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

7.7 It is further submitted by Shri Sanjay Parikh, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the
applicant that Shreya Singhal (supra) is the culmination of an unbroken line of Indian precedent
stipulating that speech or association can be prevented or punished only if, (cid:134) Speech or association
is ‘intended’ or has the ‘tendency’ to disturb ‘public order’, ‘sovereignty and integrity of India’,
‘security of the state’, or one of the other permitted ground of restrictions under Article 19; and (cid:134)
The connection between the speech or association and the ‘intended’ or likely effect on ‘public
order’, ‘sovereignty and integrity of India’ or ‘security of the state’ is “proximate” not “far- fetched,
hypothetical or problematical or too remote in the chain of its relation.” 7.8 Shri Parikh, learned
Senior Counsel has relied upon the observations made by the Federal Court in the case of Niharendu
Dutt Majumdar v. The King Emperor 1942 F.C.R. 38 taking the view that “the acts or words
complained of must, either incite to disorder or must be such as to satisfy reasonable men that that
is their intention or tendency.” It is submitted that the said decision has been approved and adopted
by this Court in the case of Kedar Nath v. State of Bihar, AIR 1962 SC 955. He has relied upon the
observations made in paragraph 26 of Kedar Nath (supra). 7.9 It is further submitted that in the
case of State of Bihar v. Shailabala Devi, AIR 1952 SC 329, this Court asserted that it was not
sufficient for law restricting freedom of speech and expression to be under one of the permitted
heads of restriction enumerated under Article 19(2), but must also have a proximate link to it. The
Patna High Court had found that a pamphlet whose central theme was “to bring about a bloody
revolution and change completely the present order of things”, fell foul of a provision targeting
“words or signs or visible representations which incite, or encourage, or tend to incite to or
encourage the commission of any offence of murder or any cognizable offence involving violence.” It
is submitted that this Court however found that for rhetoric of the kind used in the pamphlet to be
justifiably restricted, the State would have to establish that it was addressed to an excited mob or
other such exceptional circumstance. 7.10 Shri Sanjay Parikh, learned Senior Counsel has also
heavily relied upon the observations made in paragraph 45 in the case of S. Rangarajan v. P.
Jagjivan Ram and others, (1989) 2 SCC 574, which read as under:

“45. …. There does indeed have to be a compromise between the interest of freedom
of expression and special interests. But we cannot simply balance the two interests as
if they are of equal weight. Our commitment of freedom of expression demands that
it cannot be suppressed unless the situations created by allowing the freedom are
pressing and the community interest is endangered. The anticipated danger should
not be remote, conjectural or far- fetched. It should have proximate and direct nexus
with the expression. The expression of thought should be intrinsically dangerous to
the public interest. In other words, the expression should be inseparably locked up
with the action contemplated like the equivalent of a “spark in a powder keg”.

7.11 It is further submitted that in the case of O.K. Ghosh v.

E.X. Joseph, AIR 1963 812, this Court was considering the scope of the term ‘public order’ in Clause
(4) of Article 19, that allows for reasonable restrictions on the right to Freedom of Association. It is
submitted that this Court held that “the words ‘public order’ occurs even in clause (2), which refers,
inter alia, to security of the State and public order. There can be no doubt that the said words must
have the same meaning in both clauses (2) and (4).” It is further observed that “…a restriction can be

17

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

said to be in the interests of public order only if the connection between the restriction and the
public order is proximate and direct. Indirect or far-fetched or unreal connection between the
restriction and public order would not fall within the purview of the expression “in the interests of
public order.” 7.12 It is further submitted that in the case of Balwant Singh v. State of Punjab, (1995)
3 SCC 214, it is observed and held by this Court that only where the written or spoken words have
the tendency or intention of creating public disorder or disturbance of law and order or affect public
tranquility, that the law needs to step in to prevent such an activity. It is submitted that it is further
observed that the intention to cause disorder or incite people to violence is the sine qua non of the
offence under Section 153-A of the IPC and the prosecution has to prove the existence of mens rea in
order to succeed.

7.13 It is further submitted that in the case of Kartar Singh v. State of Punjab, (1994) 3 SCC 569, this
Court held that:

i) mens rea is an essential ingredient of a crime;

ii) vague provisions can implicate innocent persons in offences; and

iii) mens rea must be read into Section 2(i)(a) of TADA It is submitted that the
reasoning in Kartar Singh (supra) will also apply to Section 10(a)(i) of the UAPA Act,
1967.

It is further submitted that in fact, even at the Constituent Assembly debates, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar
clarified that “…it is wrong to say that fundamental rights in America are absolute. The difference
between the position under the American Constitution and the Draft Constitution is one of form and
not of substance. That the fundamental rights in America are not absolute rights is beyond dispute.
In support of every exception to the fundamental rights set out in the Draft Constitution, one can
refer to at least one judgment of the United States Supreme Court. What the Draft Constitution has
done is that instead of formulating fundamental rights in absolute terms and depending upon our
Supreme Court to come to the rescue of Parliament by inventing the doctrine of police power, it
permits the State directly to impose limitations upon the fundamental rights. There is really no
difference in the result. What one does directly the other does indirectly. In both cases, the
fundamental rights are not absolute.” 7.14 It is submitted that the submissions made on behalf of
the Union of India by the Solicitor General are mostly on non- applicability of American cases and
they do not deal with the applicability of the principle evolved in American cases and their
acceptance by the Indian Supreme Court.

8. It is further submitted that even otherwise the provisions of Section 10(a)(i) of the UAPA Act and
Section 3(5) of the TADA Act are vague and overbroad and will have a chilling effect and therefore
this Court in the aforesaid three decisions have rightly read down the said provisions to bring them
in consonance with Articles 14, 19 and 21 of the Constitution of India.

8.1 It is further submitted by Shri Sanjay Parikh, learned Senior Counsel that in the recent decision
of this Court in the case of Thawaha Fasal v. Union of India, 2021 SCC OnLine SC 1000, this Court

18

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

has observed and held that “mere association with a terrorist organization is not sufficient to attract
Section 38 and mere support given to a terrorist organization is not sufficient to attract Section 39.”
It is submitted that it is further observed that “association and the support have to be with intention
of furthering the activities of a terrorist organization.” 8.2 It is further submitted that even if there
can be restrictions under Article 19(2), in that case also, the restrictions should be reasonable and
shall stood the test of reasonableness or proportionality.

Making above submissions and relying upon the aforesaid decisions, it is prayed to answer the
reference accordingly and not to disturb the view taken by this Court in the cases of Raneef (supra);
Arup Bhuyan (supra) and Indra Das (supra).

9. In rejoinder to the submissions made by Shri Sanjay Parikh, learned Senior Counsel appearing on
behalf of the applicant/intervener Shri Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor General has submitted that
so far as the submissions made by Shri Sanjay Parikh, learned Senior Counsel on reasonability and
proportionality, it is submitted that a detailed adversarial judicial process prior to declaration of
organization as banned organization is required to be undertaken under Sections 3 and 4 of the
UAPA, 1967. It is submitted that the said judicial adversarial process ensures inbuilt reasonability
and proportionality and ensures that such provisions are just, fair and reasonable. 9.1 Now so far as
the submission made by Shri Parikh, learned senior counsel on mens rea element and reliance
placed upon the judgments in criminal law which have held mens rea an essential ingredient of
crime, it is submitted by Shri Mehta, learned Solicitor General that the question of mens rea may
depend on the facts and circumstances of each case and would have to be adjudicated during trial. It
is submitted that the judgments in Raneef (supra), Arup Bhuyan (supra) and Indra Das (supra) as
such do not deal with the concept of mens rea and neither do the judgments in America on which
the reliance has been placed. 9.2 Now so far as the reliance placed upon the decisions relating to IPC
and more particularly the decisions of this Court in the case of Kedar Nath Singh (supra), Balwant
Singh (supra) and Bidal (supra), it is submitted that the said reliance may not be appropriate as the
offences under the IPC are standalone offences and are applied for a far wider canvass than the
offence of membership of banned organization under the UAPA and TADA. It is submitted that the
banning of an organization under the UAPA takes place after a detailed adversarial judicial process
which is given wider publicity, thereby ensuring reasonableness, limited application and availability
of information with regard to the inherently legal nature of such banned organization. It is
submitted that the same is absent in IPC offences which can be applied by any police officer
investigating any offence, without there being the presence of any banned organization or the
procedure preceding the banning of such organization. It is submitted that therefore there is vast
differences between UAPA and IPC offences. It is submitted that in the present case the Parliament
in its wisdom and taking into consideration the sovereignty of India has thought it fit to enact the
UAPA and provide under Section 10(a)(i) that mere member of the banned organization itself is an
offence. 9.3 Now so far as the submission of Shri Praikh, learned Senior Counsel on vagueness and
possibility of misuse of Section 10(a)(i), it is submitted that as observed and held by this Court in
catena of decisions vagueness and possibility of misuse cannot be a ground for reading down a
declaration of unconstitutionality. It is submitted that possibility of abuse/misuse of a law would not
be a relevant consideration while considering the constitutionality of a provision.

19

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

Reliance is placed on the decisions of this Court in the case of Kedar Nath Singh vs. State of Bihar,
AIR 1962 SC 955; Kesavananda Bharti vs. State of Kerala, (1973) 4 SCC 225; T.N. Education Deptt.
Ministerial and General Subordinate Services Assn. vs. State of Tamil Nadu, (1980) 3 SCC 97 and
Mafatlal Industrial Ltd. vs. Union of India, (1997) 5 SCC 536. It is submitted that in the aforesaid
decisions it is held that merely because power may sometimes be abused, it is no ground for denying
the existence of power.

9.4 Now so far as the reliance placed upon the decision of Thawaha Fasal vs. Union of India, (2021)
SCC Online SC 1000 by Shri Parikh, learned Senior Counsel, it is vehemently submitted by Shri
Mehta, learned Solicitor General that the said decision shall not be applicable while considering the
offence under Section 10(a)(i) of UAPA, 1967. It is submitted that in the said judgment this Court
was dealing with the offence under Section 38 of UAPA, 1967 and was not dealing with the
provisions concerning membership. Sections 38 and 39 of the UAPA, 1967 are worded completely
differently as compared to the provisions concerning criminalization of membership of a banned
organization. It is submitted that therefore any observations made while considering the different
provision/offence may not be stricto sensu applicable while considering Section 10(a)(i) of the
UAPA, 1967.

Making above submissions, it is prayed to declare that the observations made by this Court in the
case of Raneef (supra), Arup Bhuyan (supra) and Indra Das (supra) are not a good law taking the
view that mere membership of a banned organization will not make a person a guilty unless he
resorts to violence or incites people to violence or creates public disorder by violence or incitement
to violence.

10. Heard Shri Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor General appearing on behalf of Union of India, Shri
Vinay Navare, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the State of Assam and Shri Sanjay Parikh,
learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant/intervener.

10.1 At the outset, it is required to be noted that pursuant to the order passed by this Court reported
in the case of Arup Bhuyan vs. State of Assam, (2015) 12 SCC 702, the present reference is before the
larger Bench. The present reference to the larger Bench is made on the request made on behalf of
the Union of India and the State of Assam doubting the correctness of the decisions of this Court in
the case of Raneef (supra) and Arup Bhuyan (supra) taking the view on reading down Section
10(a)(i) that mere membership of a banned organization will not make a person a criminal/guilty
unless he resorts to violence or incites people to violence or creates public disorder by violence or
incitement to violence. 10.2 Therefore, this Court in the present reference is required to consider the
correctness of the decisions of this Court in Raneef (supra), Arup Bhuyan (supra) and Indra Das
Singh (supra) to the extent as above.

10.3 Section 10 of the UAPA, 1967 reads as under:

“Section 10 in The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 1[10. Penalty for being
member of an unlawful association, etc.—Where an association is declared unlawful
by a notification issued under section 3 which has become effective under sub-section

20

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

(3) of that section,—

(a) a person, who—

(i) is and continues to be a member of such association; or

(ii) takes part in meetings of such association; or

(iii) contributes to, or receives or solicits any contri- bution for the purpose of, such
association; or

(iv) in any way assists the operations of such association, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, and shall also be liable to
fine; and

(b) a person, who is or continues to be a member of such association, or voluntarily
does an act aiding or promoting in any manner the objects of such association and in
either case is in possession of any unlicensed firearms, ammunition, explosive or
other instrument or substance capable of causing mass destruction and commits any
act resulting in loss of human life or grievous injury to any person or causes
significant damage to any property,—

(i) and if such act has resulted in the death of any person, shall be punishable with
death or imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine;

(ii) in any other case, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall
not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall
also be liable to fine.]” 10.4 Having gone through the decision of this Court in the case
of Raneef (supra), it appears and cannot be disputed that in the said case this Court
was considering the bail application. The constitutional validity of Section 10 more
particularly Section 10(a)(i) of the UAPA, 1967 was not under challenge before this
Court. It is also required to be noted that even the Union of India was not a party
and/or the Union of India was not even heard while deciding the case of Raneef
(supra). Despite the above, this Court while deciding the bail application has made
certain observations that mere membership of a banned organization will not make a
person a criminal and/or mere membership of a banned organization cannot be an
offence. In the case of Raneef (supra) this Court has heavily relied upon and followed
the American Supreme Court decisions which were dealing with the relevant
provisions of the American Laws and/or the laws prevailing in the America. If the
entire judgment in the case of Raneef (supra) is seen except following the American
Supreme Court decisions in the case of Scales vs. United States [6 L Ed 2d 782];
Elfbrandt vs. Russell [16 L Ed 2d 321] and Joint Anti-Fascist Refugee Committee vs.
McGrath, [95 L Ed 817], there does not appear to be any further discussion on the
constitutional validity and the validity of Section 10(a)(i) of UAPA which specifically

21

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

provides that if a person was and continues to be a member of the banned
organization, he can be said to have committed an offence and he can be punished.
Therefore, as such the observations made by this Court in the case of Raneef (supra)
are to be treated having confined to the bail matter only. At this stage, it is required to
be noted that as such in paragraph 8 this Court in the case of Raneef (supra) has
specifically observed that “we are presently only considering the bail matter and are
not deciding whether the respondent is guilty or not”.

10.5 Now so far as the decision of this Court in the case of Arup Bhuyan vs. State of Assam, (2011) 3
SCC 377, taking the view that mere membership of a banned organization will not incriminate a
person unless he resorts to violence or incites people to violence and does an act intended to create
disorder or disturbance of public peace by resort to violence……., is concerned it is required to be
noted that in the said decision this Court has just followed the decision in the case of Raneef (supra).
In the said decision this Court has also considered some other American Judgments of the US
Supreme Court (para 10 & 11).

10.6 From the judgment and order passed by this Court in the case of Arup Bhuyan (Supra), it
appears that after referring to the decisions of the US Supreme Court in paras 10 & 11 thereafter this
Court had read down Section 3(5) of TADA and has observed that mere membership of a banned
organization will not incriminate a person unless he resorts to violence or incites people to violence
and does an act intended to create disorder or disturbance of public peace by resort to violence.

10.7 It is required to be noted that even while deciding Arup Bhuyan (supra) neither the
constitutional validity of Section 3(5) of the TADA nor the Union of India was heard. Even in both
the aforesaid decisions this Court had not taken into consideration Article 19(1)(c) and Article 19(4)
of the Constitution of India.

10.8 In the case of Indra Das (supra) this Court has just followed the earlier decision in the case of
Raneef (supra) and Arup Bhuyan (supra).

11 In light of the aforesaid factual aspects let us now consider the correctness of the decisions of this
Court in the case of Raneef (supra), Arup Bhuyan (supra) and Indra Das (supra).

11.1 Now so far as the reading down of Section 10(a)(i) of the UAPA, 1967 by this Court in the case of
Arup Bhuyan (supra) is concerned, at the outset it is required to be noted that such reading down of
the provision of a statute could not have been made without hearing the Union of India and/or
without giving any opportunity to the Union of India. 11.2 When any provision of Parliamentary
legislation is read down in the absence of Union of India it is likely to cause enormous harm to the
interest of the State. If the opportunity would have been given to the Union of India to put forward
its case on the provisions of Section 10(a)(i) of the UAPA, 1967, the Union of India would have made
submissions in favour of Section 10(a)(i) of the UAPA including the object and purpose for
enactment of such a provision and even the object and purpose of UAPA. The submission made by
Shri Parikh, learned Senior Counsel relying upon the decision of this Court in the case of Sanjeev
Coke (supra) that it is ultimately for the Court to interpret and read down the provision to save any

22

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

provision from declaring as unconstitutional is concerned, it is true that it is ultimately for the Court
to interpret the law and/or particular statute. However, the question is not the power of the Courts.
The question is whether can it be done without hearing the Union of India?

11.3 Even otherwise in absence of any challenge to the constitutional validity of Section 10(a)(i) of
the UAPA there was no question of reading down of the said provision by this Court. Therefore, in
absence of any challenge to the constitutional validity of Section 10(a)(i) of UAPA, 1967 there was no
occasion for this Court to read down the said provision.

11.4 Even otherwise as observed and held by this Court in the case of Subramanian Swamy and
others vs. Raju through Member, Juvenile Justice Board and Anr., (2014) 8 SCC 390 reading down
the provision of a statute cannot be resorted to when the meaning of a provision is plain and
unambiguous and the legislative intent is clear. This Court has thereafter laid down the fundamental
principle of “reading down doctrine” as under:

“Courts must read the legislation literally in the first instance. If on such reading and
understanding the vice of unconstitutionality is attracted, the courts must explore
whether there has been an unintended legislative omission. If such an intendment
can be reasonably implied without undertaking what, unmistakably, would be a
legislative exercise, the Act may be read down to save it from unconstitutionality. At
the cost of repetition, it is observed that reading down a particular statute even to
save it from unconstitutionality is not permissible unless and until the constitutional
validity of such provision is under challenge and the opportunity is given to the
Union of India to defend a particular parliamentary statute”.

11.5 In view of the above in all the aforesaid three decisions, this Court ought not to
have read down Section 10(a)(i) of the UAPA, 1967 more particularly when neither
the constitutional validity of Section 10(a)(i) of the UAPA, 1967 was under challenge
nor the Union of India was heard.

12. As observed hereinabove and even it can be seen from the decisions of this Court
in the case of Arup Bhuyan (Supra) and Raneef (supra) that while deciding the
abovesaid cases this Court has followed the US Supreme Court decisions on freedom
of speech and on mere membership without any criminality and/or overt act and
mere membership be said to have committed an offence or not.

Therefore, the next question which is posed for consideration before this Court is whether this Court
was justified/right in following the US Supreme Court judgments which as such were on
interpretation and/or considering the laws of United States.

12.1 How far the decisions of US Supreme Court on “freedom of speech and/or the public order” can
be made applicable vis-à-vis the laws in India, few decisions of this Court on applicability of the US
Supreme Court decisions vis-à-vis the laws applicable in India are required to be referred to and
considered.

23

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

12.2 In the case of Babulal Parate vs. State of Maharashtra, (1961) 3 SCR 423, it is observed in
paragraphs 23 to 27 as under:

“23. The argument that the test of determining criminality in advance is
unreasonable, is apparently founded upon the doctrine adumbrated in Scheneck case
[Scheneck v. U.S., 249, US 47] that previous restraints on the exercise of fundamental
rights are permissible only if there be a clear and present danger. It seems to us,
however, that the American doctrine cannot be imported under our Constitution
because the fundamental rights guaranteed under Article 19(1) of the Constitution are
not absolute rights but, as pointed out in State of Madras v. V.G. Row [(1952) 1 SCC
410 : 1952 SCR 597] are subject to the restrictions placed in the subsequent clauses of
Article 19.

There is nothing in the American Constitution corresponding to clauses (2) to (6) of Article 19 of our
Constitution. The Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution provides, among other things,
that “no State shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of
citizens of the United States; nor shall any State deprive any person of life, liberty, or property,
without due process of law; ….”.

24. The framework of our Constitution is different from that of the Constitution of the United States.
Then again, the Supreme Court of the United States has held that the privileges and immunities
conferred by the Constitution are subject to social control by resort to the doctrine of police power.
It is in the light of this background that the test laid down in Scheneck case [Scheneck v. U.S., 249,
US 47] has to be understood.

25. The language of Section 144 is somewhat different. The test laid down in the section is not
merely “likelihood” or “tendency”. The section says that the Magistrate must be satisfied that
immediate prevention of particular acts is necessary to counteract danger to public safety etc. The
power conferred by the section is exercisable not only where present danger exists but is exercisable
also when there is an apprehension of danger.

26. Apart from this it is worthy of note that in Scheneck case [Scheneck v. U.S., 249, US 47] the
Supreme Court was concerned with the right of freedom of speech and it observed:

“It well may be that the prohibition of law abridging the freedom of speech is not
confined to previous restraints, although to prevent them may have been the main
purpose…. We admit that in many places and in ordinary times the defendants, in
saying all that was said in the circular, would have been within their constitutional
rights. But the character of every act depends upon the circumstances in which it is
done.… The most stringent protection of free speech would not protect a man in
falsely shouting fire in a theatre, and causing a panic. It does not even protect a man
from an injunction against uttering words that may have all the effect of force…. The
question in every case is whether the words used are used in such circumstances and
are of such a nature as to create a clear and present danger that they will bring about

24

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

the substantive evils that Congress has a right to prevent. It is a question of proximity
and degree.

27. Whatever may be the position in the United States it seems to us clear that anticipatory action of
the kind permissible under Section 144 is not impermissible under clauses (2) and (3) of Article

19. Both in clause (2) (as amended in 1951) and in clause (3), power is given to the legislature to
make laws placing reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the rights conferred by these clauses in
the interest, among other things, of public order. Public order has to be maintained in advance in
order to ensure it and, therefore, it is competent to a legislature to pass a law permitting an
appropriate authority to take anticipatory action or place anticipatory restrictions upon particular
kinds of acts in an emergency for the purpose of maintaining public order. We must, therefore,
reject the contention.” 12.3 In the case of Madhu Limaye vs. Sub-Divisional Magistrate, (1970) 3
SCC 746, while reconsidering and affirming the judgment of Babulal Parate (supra), this Court
considered in a combination of seven Hon’ble Judges, speaking through Mr. Justice Hidayatullah,
J., has observed and held in paragraphs 16 & 17 as under:

“16. We may here observe that the overlap of public order and public tranquillity is
only partial. The terms are not always synonymous. The latter is a much wider
expression and takes in many things which cannot be described as public disorder.
The words “public order” and “public tranquillity” overlap to a certain extent but
there are matters which disturb public tranquillity without being a disturbance of
public order. A person playing loud music in his own house in the middle of the night
may disturb public tranquillity, but he is not causing public disorder. “Public order”
no doubt also requires absence of disturbance of a state of serenity in society but it
goes further. It means, what the Frunch designate order publique, defined as an
absence of insurrection, riot turbulence, or crimes of violence. The expression “public
order” includes absence of all acts which are a danger to the security of the State and
also acts which are comprehended by the expression “order publique” explained
above but not acts which disturb only the serenity of others.

17. The English and American precedents and legislation are not of such help. The
Public Order Act, 1936 was passed because in 1936 different political organisations
marched in uniforms causing riots. In America the First Amendment freedoms have
no such qualifications as in India and the rulings are apt to be misapplied to our
Constitution.” 12.4 Thereafter in the case of Supdt., Central Prison vs. Dr. Ram
Manohar Lohia, (1960) 2 SCR 821, this Court had taken note of the difference in the
American Law and the Indian Law more particularly the restrictions under Article
19(2).

12.5 Thereafter in the case of Ramlila Maidan Incident, In re, (2012) 5 SCC 1, it is
observed and held in paragraphs 7 to 11 on applicability of the American doctrine/US
Supreme Court decisions as under:

25

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

“7. In contradistinction to the above approach of the US Supreme Court, the Indian
Constitution spells out the right to freedom of speech and expression under Article
19(1)(a). It also provides the right to assemble peacefully and without arms to every
citizen of the country under Article 19(1)(b). However, these rights are not free from
any restrictions and are not absolute in their terms and application. Articles 19(2)
and 19(3), respectively, control the freedoms available to a citizen. Article 19(2)
empowers the State to impose reasonable restrictions on exercise of the right to
freedom of speech and expression in the interest of the factors stated in the said
clause. Similarly, Article 19(3) enables the State to make any law imposing reasonable
restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred, again in the interest of the factors
stated therein.

8. In face of this constitutional mandate, the American doctrine adumbrated in
Schenck case [63 L Ed 470 : 249 US 47 (1919)] cannot be imported and applied.
Under our Constitution, this right is not an absolute right but is subject to the
abovenoticed restrictions. Thus, the position under our Constitution is different.

9. In Constitutional Law of India by H.M. Seervai (4th Edn.), Vol. 1, the author has
noticed that the provisions of the two Constitutions as to freedom of speech and
expression are essentially different. The difference being accentuated by the
provisions of the Indian Constitution for preventive detention which have no
counterpart in the US Constitution.

Reasonable restriction contemplated under the Indian Constitution brings the matter in the domain
of the court as the question of reasonableness is a question primarily for the court to decide.
(Babulal Parate v. State of Maharashtra [AIR 1961 SC 884 :

(1961) 2 Cri LJ 16 : (1961) 3 SCR 423] )

10. The fundamental right enshrined in the Constitution itself being made subject to
reasonable restrictions, the laws so enacted to specify certain restrictions on the right
to freedom of speech and expression have to be construed meaningfully and with the
constitutional object in mind. For instance, the right to freedom of speech and
expression is not violated by a law which requires that the name of the printer and
publisher and the place of printing and publication should be printed legibly on every
book or paper.

11. Thus, there is a marked distinction in the language of law, its possible
interpretation and application under the Indian and the US laws. It is significant to
note that the freedom of speech is the bulwark of a democratic Government. This
freedom is essential for proper functioning of the democratic process. The freedom of
speech and expression is regarded as the first condition of liberty. It occupies a
preferred position in the hierarchy of liberties, giving succour and protection to all
other liberties.

26

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

It has been truly said that it is the mother of all other liberties. Freedom of speech plays a crucial
role in the formation of public opinion on social, political and economic matters. It has been
described as a “basic human right”, “a natural right” and the like. With the development of law in
India, the right to freedom of speech and expression has taken within its ambit the right to receive
information as well as the right of press.” 12.6 In the case of Joseph Kuruvilla Vellukunnel vs.
Reserve Bank of India, 1962 Supp (3) SCR 632, it is observed in para 75 that the aid of American
concepts, laws and precedents in the interpretation of our laws is not always without its dangers and
they have therefore to be relied upon with some caution if not, with hesitation because of the
difference in the nature of those laws and of the institutions to which they apply.

12.7 In the case of State of Bihar vs. Union of India, (1970) 1 SCC 67, it is observed and held in para
13 as under:

“Our attention was drawn to some provisions of the American Constitution and of the
Constitution Act of Australia and several decisions bearing on the interpretation of
provision which are somewhat similar to Art. 131. But as the similarity is only limited,
we do not propose to examine either the provisions referred to or the decisions to
which our attention was drawn. In interpreting our Constitution we must not be
guided by decisions which do not bear upon provisions identical with those in our
Constitution.” 12.8 In the case of Ashok Kumar Thakur vs. Union of India, (2008) 6
SCC 1, it is observed in para 165 as under:

“165. At the outset, it must be stated that the decisions of the United States Supreme
Court were not applied in the Indian context as it was felt that the structure of the
provisions under the two Constitutions and the social conditions as well as other
factors are widely different in both the countries. Reference may be made to Bhikaji
Narain Dhakras & Ors. Vs. The State of Madhya Pradesh & Anr.56 and A.S. Krishna
Vs. State of Madras57 wherein this Court specifically held that the due process clause
in the Constitution of the United States of America is not applicable to India. While
considering the scope and applicability of Article 19(1)(g) in Kameshwar Prasad and
Others Vs. State of Bihar and Another, it was observed – “As regards these decisions
of the American Courts, it should be borne in mind that though the First Amendment
to the Constitution of the United States reading “Congress shall make no law
….abridging the freedom of speech….” appears to confer no power on the Congress to
impose any restriction on the exercise of the guaranteed right, still it has always been
understood that the freedom guaranteed is subject to the police power – the scope of
which however has not been defined with precision or uniformly.” 12.9 In the similar
case of Kesavananda Bharati case, (1973) 4 SCC 225, it is noticed by this Court that
there are structural differences in the Constitution of India and the Constitution of
the United States of America.

13. Applying the law laid down by this Court in the aforesaid decisions to the facts of
the case on hand and considering the different position of laws in US and in our
country more particularly faced with Articles 19(1)(c) and 19(4) of the Constitution of

27

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

India under which the right to freedom of speech is subject to reasonable restrictions
and is not an absolute right and the constitution permits the Parliament to frame the
laws taking into consideration the public order and/or the sovereignty of India,
without noticing the differences in American Laws and the Indian laws, this Court in
the case of Arup Bhuyan (supra) and Raneep (supra) has erred in straightway and
directly following the US Supreme Court decisions and that too without adverting to
the differences and the position of laws in India.

13.1 In the aforesaid two decisions without noticing the differences of the US Supreme Court
(referred to in the said decisions) this Court has just followed the American decisions to which we
are not agreeable. This Court ought to have considered the differences in the American laws and the
Indian laws more particularly the provisions in the Indian Constitution. By the aforesaid we do not
say for a moment that in a given case the US Supreme Court decisions may not be taken into
consideration and/or may not be a guidance. Before following the American decisions, the Indian
Courts are required to consider the difference in the nature of the laws applicable in the respective
countries. 13.2 As observed and held by this Court in the case of Joseph Kuruvilla Vellukunnel
(supra), the aid of American concepts, laws and precedents in the interpretation to which laws is not
always without its dangers and they have therefore to be relied upon with some caution if not with
hesitation because of the difference in the nature of those laws and the institutions to which they
apply.

14. Now the next question which is posed for consideration before this Court is whether Section
10(a)(i) is required to be read down so as to save the said provision from being declared
unconstitutional and is required to be read down as had been done in the case of Arup Bhuyan
(supra) and Raneep (supra) that mere membership of a banned organization will not incriminate a
person unless he resorts to violence or incites people to violence and does an act intended to create
disorder or disturbance of public peace by resort to violence meaning thereby over and above the
membership of a banned organization there must be a mens rea required to be established and
proved and/or there must be a further overt act? While deciding this issue elaborate submissions
have been made by Shri Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor General, Shri Vinay Navare, learned Senior
Counsel appearing for the State of Assam and Shri Sanjay Parikh, learned Senior Counsel appearing
on behalf of the appellant/intervener.

14.1 While considering the aforesaid issue relevant provisions of the Constitution of India and the
UAPA, 1967 are required to be referred to which are as under:

“19. Protection of certain rights regarding freedom of speech, etc.—(1) All citizens
shall have the right—

(c) to form associations or unions [or co-

operative societies];

28

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

[(2) Nothing in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) shall affect the operation of any existing law, or prevent
the State from making any law, in so far as such law imposes reasonable restrictions on the exercise
of the right conferred by the said sub- clause in the interests of [the sovereignty and integrity of
India,] the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order, decency or
morality or in relation to contempt of court, defamation or incitement to an offence.] (4) Nothing in
sub-clause (c) of the said clause shall affect the operation of any existing law in so far as it imposes,
or prevent the State from making any law imposing, in the interests of [the sovereignty and integrity
of India or] public order or morality, reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by
the said sub-clause.” Relevant provisions of UAPA of 1967 are as under:

2. Definitions.—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “association” means any combination or body of individuals;

[(ec) “person” includes—

(i) an individual,

(ii) a company,

(iii) a firm,

(iv) an organisation or an association of persons or a body of individuals, whether incorporated or
not,

(v) every artificial juridical person, not falling within any of the preceding sub-clauses, and

(vi) any agency, office or branch owned or controlled by any person falling within any of the
preceding sub- clauses;]

(k) “terrorist act” has the meaning assigned to it in Section 15, and the expressions “terrorism” and
“terrorist” shall be construed accordingly;

(l) “terrorist gang” means any association, other than terrorist organisation, whether systematic or
otherwise, which is concerned with, or involved in, terrorist act;

(m) “terrorist organisation” means an organisation listed in the [First Schedule] or an organisation
operating under the same name as an organisation so listed;

(p) “unlawful association” means any association,—

(i) which has for its object any unlawful activity, or which encourages or aids persons to undertake
any unlawful activity, or of which the members undertake such activity; or

29

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

(ii) which has for its object any activity which is punishable under Section 153-A or Section 153-B of
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), or which encourages or aids persons to undertake any such
activity, or of which the members undertake any such activity:

Provided that nothing contained in sub-clause (ii) shall apply to the State of Jammu
and Kashmir;

3. Declaration of an association as unlawful.— (1) If the Central Government is of
opinion that any association is, or has become, an unlawful association, it may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, declare such association to be unlawful.

(2) Every such notification shall specify the grounds on which it is issued and such other particulars
as the Central Government may consider necessary:

Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall require the Central Government to
disclose any fact which it considers to be against the public interest to disclose.

(3) No such notification shall have effect until the Tribunal has, by an order made
under Section 4, confirmed the declaration made therein and the order is published
in the Official Gazette:

Provided that if the Central Government is of opinion that circumstances exist which
render it necessary for that Government to declare an association to be unlawful with
immediate effect, it may, for reasons to be stated in writing, direct that the
notification shall, subject to any order that may be made under Section 4, have effect
from the date of its publication in the Official Gazette. (4) Every such notification
shall, in addition to its publication in the Official Gazette, be published in not less
than one daily newspaper having circulation in the State in which the principal office,
if any, of the association affected is situated, and shall also be served on such
association in such manner as the Central Government may think fit and all or any of
the following modes may be followed in effecting such service, namely:

(a) by affixing a copy of the notification to some conspicuous part of the office, if any,
of the association; or

(b) by serving a copy of the notification, where possible, on the principal
office-bearers, if any, of the association; or

(c) by proclaiming by beat of drum or by means of loudspeakers, the contents of the
notification in the area in which the activities of the association are ordinarily carried
on; or

(d) in such other manner as may be prescribed.

30

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

4. Reference to Tribunal.—(1) Where any association has been declared unlawful by a notification
issued under sub-section (1) of Section 3, the Central Government shall, within thirty days from the
date of the publication of the notification under the said sub-section, refer the notification to the
Tribunal for the purpose of adjudicating whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the
association unlawful.

(2) On receipt of a reference under sub-section (1), the Tribunal shall call upon the association
affected by notice in writing to show cause, within thirty days from the date of the service of such
notice, why the association should not be declared unlawful. (3) After considering the cause, if any,
shown by the association or the office-bearers or members thereof, the Tribunal shall hold an
inquiry in the manner specified in Section 9 and after calling for such further information as it may
consider necessary from the Central Government or from any office- bearer or member of the
association, it shall decide whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the association to be
unlawful and make, as expeditiously as possible and in any case within a period of six months from
the date of the issue of the notification under sub-section (1) of Section 3, such order as it may deem
fit either confirming the declaration made in the notification or cancelling the same.

(4) The order of the Tribunal made under sub- section (3) shall be published in the Official Gazette.

8. Power to notify places for the purpose of an unlawful association.—(1) Where an association has
been declared unlawful by a notification issued under Section 3 which has become effective under
sub- section (3) of that section, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
notify any place which in its opinion is used for the purpose of such unlawful association.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, “place” includes a house or building, or part
thereof, or a tent or vessel.

(2) On the issue of a notification under sub-section (1), the District Magistrate within the local limits
of whose jurisdiction such notified place is situate or any officer authorised by him in writing in this
behalf shall make a list of all movable properties (other than wearing-apparel, cooking vessels, beds
and beddings, tools of artisans, implements of husbandry, cattle, grain and foodstuffs and such
other articles as he considers to be of a trivial nature) found in the notified place in the presence of
two respectable witnesses.

(3) If, in the opinion of the District Magistrate, any articles specified in the list are or may be used
for the purpose of the unlawful association, he may make an order prohibiting any person from
using the articles save in accordance with the written orders of the District Magistrate.

(4) The District Magistrate may thereupon make an order that no person who at the date of the
notification was not a resident in the notified place shall, without the permission of the District
Magistrate, enter, or be on or in, the notified place:

Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to any near relative of any
person who was a resident in the notified place at the date of the notification.

31

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

(5) Where in pursuance of sub-section (4), any person is granted permission to enter,
or to be on or in, the notified place, that person shall, while acting under such
permission, comply with such orders for regulating his conduct as may be given by
the District Magistrate.

(6) Any police officer, not below the rank of a sub-

inspector, or any other person authorised in this behalf by the Central Government may search any
person entering, or seeking to enter, or being on or in, the notified place and may detain any such
person for the purpose of searching him:

Provided that no female shall be searched in pursuance of this sub-section except by
a female. (7) If any person is in the notified place in contravention of an order made
under sub-section (4), then, without prejudice to any other proceedings which may
be taken against him, he may be removed therefrom by any officer or by any other
person authorised in this behalf by the Central Government.

(8) Any person aggrieved by a notification issued in respect of a place under
sub-section (1) or by an order made under sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) may,
within thirty days from the date of the notification or order, as the case may be, make
an application to the Court of the District Judge within the local limits of whose
jurisdiction such notified place is situate—

(a) for declaration that the place has not been used for the purpose of the unlawful
association; or

(b) for setting aside the order made under sub-section (3) or sub-section (4), and on
receipt of the application the Court of the District Judge shall, after giving the parties
an opportunity of being heard, decide the question.

[10. Penalty for being member of an unlawful association, etc.—Where an association is declared
unlawful by a notification issued under Section 3 which has become effective under sub-section (3)
of that section,—

(a) a person, who—

(i) is and continues to be a member of such association; or

(ii) takes part in meetings of such association; or

(iii) contributes to, or receives or solicits any contribution for the purpose of, such association; or

(iv) in any way assists the operations of such association, shall be punishable with imprisonment for
a term which may extend to two years, and shall also be liable to fine; and

32

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

(b) a person, who is or continues to be a member of such association, or voluntarily does an act
aiding or promoting in any manner the objects of such association and in either case is in possession
of any unlicensed firearms, ammunition, explosive or other instrument or substance capable of
causing mass destruction and commits any act resulting in loss of human life or grievous injury to
any person or causes significant damage to any property,—

(i) and if such act has resulted in the death of any person, shall be punishable with death or
imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine;

(ii) in any other case, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.]

13. Punishment for unlawful activities.—(1) Whoever—

(a) takes part in or commits, or

(b) advocates, abets, advises or incites the commission of, any unlawful activity, shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.

(2) Whoever, in any way, assists any unlawful activity of any association, declared unlawful under
Section 3, after the notification by which it has been so declared has become effective under
sub-section (3) of that section, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to five years, or with fine, or with both.

(3) Nothing in this section shall apply to any treaty, agreement or convention entered into between
the Government of India and the Government of any other country or to any negotiations therefor
carried on by any person authorised in this behalf by the Government of India.

38. Offence relating to membership of a terrorist organisation.—(1) A person, who associates
himself, or professes to be associated, with a terrorist organisation with intention to further its
activities, commits an offence relating to membership of a terrorist organisation:

Provided that this sub-section shall not apply where the person charged is able to
prove—

(a) that the organisation was not declared as a terrorist organisation at the time when
he became a member or began to profess to be a member; and

(b) that he has not taken part in the activities of the organisation at any time during
its inclusion in the [First Schedule] as a terrorist organisation. (2) A person, who
commits the offence relating to membership of a terrorist organisation under sub-

section (1), shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years, or with fine,
or with both.

33

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

39. Offence relating to support given to a terrorist organisation.—(1) A person commits the offence
relating to support given for a terrorist organisation,—

(a) who, with intention to further the activity of a terrorist organisation,—

(i) invites support for the terrorist organisation, and

(ii) the support is not or is not restricted to provide money or other property within the meaning of
Section 40; or

(b) who, with intention to further the activity of a terrorist organisation, arranges, manages or
assists in arranging or managing a meeting which, he knows, is —

(i) to support the terrorist organisation, or

(ii) to further the activity of the terrorist organisation, or

(iii) to be addressed by a person who associates or professes to be associated with the terrorist
organisation; or

(c) who, with intention to further the activity of a terrorist organisation, addresses a meeting for the
purpose of encouraging support for the terrorist organisation or to further its activity. (2) A person,
who commits the offence relating to support given to a terrorist organisation under sub- section (1)
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years, or with fine, or with
both.” Thus, the rights guaranteed under Article 19(1)(a) (Right to freedom of speech and
expression) and under Article 19(1)

(c) (Right to form association or unions) are not absolute rights, but are subject to reasonable
restrictions as per Article 19(2) and 19(4) of the Constitution of India. Article 19 (2) (3) & (4) have
been amended vide the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963 and the words “sovereignty
and integrity of India” have been inserted. Therefore, as per Article 19(2)(3) & (4) nothing in clause
(a), (b) and (c) of clause 1 of Article 19 shall affect the operation of any existing law or prevent the
State from making any law in so far as such law imposes reasonable restrictions on the exercises of
the right conferred by the said sub-clauses in the interests of sovereignty and integrity of India, the
security of State…… As per Article 19(4) nothing in sub-clause (c) (Right to form Associations or
Unions) shall affect the operation of any existing law in so far as it imposes, or prevent the State
from making any law imposing, in the interests of sovereignty and integrity of India or public order
or morality, reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by the said sub clause. At
this stage the statement of objects and reasons for amending Article 19(2)(3) & (4) are required to be
referred to and considered.

The statements of objects and reasons appended to the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Bill,
1963 which was enacted as the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963 reads as under:

34

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

“STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS The Committee on National
Integration and Regionalism appointed by the National Integration Council
recommended that article 19 of the Constitution be so amended that adequate powers
become available for the preservation and maintenance of the integrity, and
sovereignty of the Union. The Committee were further of the view that every
candidate for the membership of a State Legislature or Parliament, and every
aspirant to, and incumbent of, public office should pledge himself to uphold the
Constitution and to preserve the integrity and sovereignty of the Union and that
forms of oath in the Third Schedule to the Constitution should be suitably amended
for the purpose. It is proposed to give effect to these recommendations by amending
clauses (2), (3) and (4) of article 19 for enabling the State to make any law imposing
reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the rights conferred by sub-clauses (a), (b)
and (c) of clause (1) of that article in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of
India.” 14.2 The UAPA, 1967 has been enacted in exercise of powers conferred under
Article 19(2) & (4) of the Constitution of India. At this stage, it is required to be noted
that exceptions to the freedom to form associations under Article 19(1) was inserted
in the form of sovereignty and integrity of India under Article 19(4), after the
National Integration Council (NIC) appointed a Committee on National Integration
and Regionalisation. The said Committee was to look into the aspect of putting
reasonable restrictions in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India.
Pursuant to the acceptance of the recommendations of the said Committee, the
Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963 came to be enacted to impose by law,
reasonable restrictions in the interests of sovereignty and integrity of India. In order
to implement the provisions of 1963 Act, the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Bill was
introduced in the Parliament. The main objective of the UAPA is to make powers
available for dealing with activities directed against the integrity and sovereignty of
India. It is also required to be noted that pursuant to the recommendation of the
Committee on National Integration and Regionalisation appointed by the National
Integration Council Act on whose recommendation the Constitution (Sixteenth
Amendment) Act, 1963 was enacted, UAPA has been enacted. It appears that
National Integration Council appointed a Committee on National Integration and
Regionalisation to look into, inter alia, the aspect of putting reasonable restrictions in
the interests of sovereignty and integrity of India and thereafter the UAPA has been
enacted.

Therefore, the UAPA has been enacted to make powers available for dealing with the activities
directed against integrity and sovereignty of India.

14.3 Now let us consider the Preamble of the UAPA, 1967. As per Preamble, UAPA has been enacted
to provide for the more effective prevention of certain unlawful activities of individuals and
associations and dealing with terrorist activities and for matters connected therewith. Therefore the
aim and object of enactment of UAPA is also to provide for more effective prevention of certain
unlawful activities. That is why and to achieve the said object and purpose of effective prevention of
certain unlawful activities the Parliament in its wisdom has provided that where an association is

35

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

declared unlawful by a notification issued under Section 3, a person, who is and continues to be a
member of such association shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
2 years, and shall also be liable to fine. Therefore, the Parliament in its wisdom had thought it fit
that once an association is declared unlawful after following due procedure as required under
Section 3 and subject to the approval by the Tribunal still a person continues to be a member of such
association is liable to be punished/penalized.

14.4 At this stage it is required to be noted that before an association is declared unlawful, the
procedure as required under Section 3 of the Act is required to be followed/undertaken. As per
Section 3(1) if the Central Government is of the opinion that any association is, or has become an
unlawful association, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare such association to be
unlawful. As per Section 3(2) every such notification shall specify the grounds on which it is issued
and such other particulars as the Central Government may consider necessary….subject to the right
of the Central Government not to disclose any fact which it considers to be against the public
interest to disclose. Section 3(3) provides that no such notification shall have effect until the
Tribunal has, by an order made under Section 4, confirmed the declaration made therein and the
order is published in the Official Gazette. It also confers power upon the Central Government to
declare an association to be unlawful with immediate effect if the Central Government is of the
opinion that circumstances exist which render it necessary to declare an association to be unlawful
with immediate effect, however subject to the reasons to be stated in writing and subject to any
order that may be made under Section 4. As per Section 4 every such notification shall in addition to
its publication in the Official Gazette be published in not less than one daily newspaper having
circulation in the State in which the principal office, if any, of the association affected is situated,
and shall be served on such association in such a manner as the Central Government may think fit.
As per Section 4 where any association has been declared unlawful by a notification issued under
sub-section (1) of Section 3, the Central Government is required, within thirty days from the date of
the publication of the notification, refer the notification to the Tribunal for the purpose of
adjudicating whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the association unlawful. As per
Section 4(2) on receipt of a reference the Tribunal shall call upon the association affected by notice
in writing to show cause, why the association should not be declared unlawful. Thereafter the
Tribunal is required to hold an inquiry in the manner specified in Section 9 and after calling for such
further information as it may consider necessary from the Central Government or from any
office-bearer or member of the association, it shall decide whether or not there is sufficient cause for
declaring the association to be unlawful and make, as expeditiously as possible and in any case
within a period of six months from the date of the issue of the notification under sub-section (1) of
Section 3, such order as it may deem fit either confirming the declaration made in the notification or
cancelling the same.

14.5 Thus from the aforesaid it can be seen that before any organization is declared unlawful a
detailed procedure is required to be followed including the wide publicity and even the right to a
member of such association to represent before the Tribunal. As observed hereinabove the
notification issued by the Central Government declaring a particular association unlawful, the same
is subject to inquiry and approval by the Tribunal as per Section 4. Once that is done and despite
that a person who is a member of such unlawful association continues to be a member of such

36

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

unlawful association then he has to face the consequences and is subjected to the penal provisions as
provided under Section 10 more particularly Section 10(a)(i) of the UAPA, 1967.

14.6 At this stage it is required to be noted that a particular association is declared unlawful only
after the Central Government is satisfied that such association is indulging to unlawful activity and
the same is against sovereignty and integrity of India. ‘Unlawful activity’ is defined under Section
2(o) and ‘unlawful association’ is defined under Section 2(p). Thus, thereafter a person who is the
member of such unlawful association cannot be permitted to say that still he may continue to be
associated with and/or continue to be a member of such unlawful association despite such an
association is declared unlawful on the ground of its unlawful activities which is found to be against
the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India. At the cost of repetition, it is observed that the
object and purpose of the enactment of UAPA is to provide for more effective prevention of certain
unlawful activities. To punish such a person who is continued as a member of such unlawful
association which is declared unlawful due to unlawful activities can be said to be in furtherance of
providing for effective prevention of the unlawful activities. Therefore, as such Section 10(a)(i)
which provides that where an association is declared unlawful by a notification issued under Section
3 which has become effective under sub-section 3 of that Section, a person who is and continues to
be a member of such association shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to 2 years and shall also be liable to fine, can be said to be absolutely in consonance with
Article 19(1)(2) & (4) of the Constitution of India and can be said to be in furtherance of the object
and purpose for which the UAPA has been enacted.

15. Now so far as the submission of Shri Parikh, learned Senior Counsel on mens rea element and
the reliance placed upon the judgments referred to hereinabove on mens rea and in support of his
submissions that mere membership of a person of such unlawful association alone cannot be a
ground to punish such person including the decision of Kedar Nath (supra) and other decisions are
concerned, at the outset it is required to be noted that the said decisions shall not be applicable
while considering the provisions of UAPA. The offences under IPC and offences under the UAPA
both are different. As observed hereinabove in the present case an association is declared unlawful
after following due procedure as required under Section 3 and subject to the approval by the
Tribunal under Section 4 and after giving an opportunity to such association, the office bearers of
the association and even the member of the association.

15.1 Now so far as the reliance placed upon the decision of this Court in Kedar Nath Singh (supra) by
Shri Parikh, learned Senior Counsel is concerned, at the outset it is required to be noted that the
said decision was pre – Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963. Post Kedar Nath Singh
(supra) on the recommendation of the National Integration Council, Article 19(2) and 19(4) which
operate as exception to freedom of speech and freedom of association respectively, have been
amended to specifically include an exception as to “sovereignty and integrity of India”. Therefore,
the same will have a material bearing on any question as to the application of Articles 19 & 21 in the
context of UAPA. Thus, UAPA is to be interpreted in congruence with the amendment of the
Constitution in 1963 including “sovereignty and integrity of India” as an exception to Article 19.

37

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

16. Now so far as the submission made by Shri Parikh, learned Senior Counsel on the vagueness and
possibility of misuse of Section 10(i)(a) is concerned, at the outset it is required to be noted that as
per catena of decisions of this Court mere possibility of misuse cannot be a ground and/or relevant
consideration while considering the constitutionality of a provision. As per the settled position of
law any action which is the result of abuse/misuse of any law is subject to challenge. But on the
possibility of abuse/misuse of law otherwise constitutionally valid legislation cannot be declared
unconstitutional.

16.1 Now so far as the submission on vagueness of Section 10(a)(i) is concerned, as observed
hereinabove an association is declared unlawful after complying with all the requirements under
Sections 3 & 4 of the UAPA, 1967 as discussed hereinabove. A person who is a member of such an
unlawful association is as such aware of the declaration of such association as unlawful and despite
the same if he still continues to be the member of such unlawful association which is indulging into
the unlawful activities and acting against the sovereignty and integrity of India, his intention is very
clear that he still wants to associate with such an association which is indulging into ‘unlawful
activities’ and acting against the interests of sovereignty and integrity of India. The language used in
the Section 10(1)(i) and the procedure to be followed under Sections 3 & 4 of the Act, before any
association is declared as unlawful are very clear. There is no vagueness at all as sought to be
contended by Shri Sanjay Parikh, learned Senior Counsel. Therefore, Section 10(a)(i) does not suffer
from any vagueness and/or on the ground unreasonable and/or disproportionate.

17. Now so far as the submission made by Shri Parikh, learned Senior Counsel on chilling effect
doctrine is concerned, it is required to be noted that a person knowing full well that an association of
which he is the member is declared as unlawful association due to its unlawful activities and acting
against the interests of sovereignty and integrity of India and still he continues to be a member of
such unlawful association thereafter such person cannot be permitted to submit on chilling effect.
The consequences are provided under the Act itself. Such a person is made to understand and/or
known that to continue with the membership of such unlawful association itself is an offence.
Despite such knowledge still he continues then is liable to be punished more particularly so long as
Section 10(a)(i) stands and is not declared unconstitutional.

17.1 At this stage it is required to be noted that as per Section 10(a)(i) a person cannot be punished
merely because he was the member of such unlawful association. The language including Section 10
is very significant. It provides that “wherein an association is declared unlawful” by notification
under Section 3 which has become effective under sub-Section 3 of that Section. So, it is only after
the Notification under Section 3 has become effective under sub- section 3, that the latter part of
that Section applies. The language of Section 10(a)(i) is also very cautiously worded “who is and
continues to be a member of such association”. Therefore, on true interpretation, if a person has
been a member but does not continue to be a member after declaration, that does not attract
mischief of Section 10. The intention seems to be that not only was he a member on the day when
the association is declared unlawful but he continues to be a member. The intention is very clear
that not only on the given date but even after that you continue to be a member of that association
which is declared as unlawful association due to unlawful activities which is found to be against the
interests of sovereignty and integrity of India. Therefore, once an association is declared unlawful of

38

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

whom the concerned person was the member wishes to continue as a member despite the fact that
he is well aware of the fact that such an association is declared unlawful and if he still wishes to
continue being a part of such unlawful association it shows a conscious decision on his part and
therefore liable to be penalized for such an act of continuation of his membership with such
unlawful association. Therefore, thereafter he may not make grievance of chilling effect.

18. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above we hold that the view taken by this Court in
the cases of State of Kerala vs. Raneef, (2011) 1 SCC 784; Arup Bhuyan vs. Union of India, (2011) 3
SCC 377 and Sri Indra Das vs. State of Assam 2011 (3) SCC 380 taking the view that under Section
3(5) of Terrorists and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987 and Section 10(a)(i) of the
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 mere membership of a banned organization will not
incriminate a person unless he resorts to violence or incites people to violence and does an act
intended to create disorder or disturbance of public peace by resort to violence and reading down
the said provisions to mean that over and above the membership of a banned organization there
must be an overt act and/or further criminal activities and adding the element of mens rea are held
to be not a good law. It is observed and held that when an association is declared unlawful by
notification issued under Section 3 which has become effective of sub-section 3 of that Section, a
person who is and continues to be a member of such association is liable to be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, and shall also be liable to fine under
Section 10(a)(i) of the UAPA, 1967.

Any other decisions of the High Court taking a contrary view are held to be not a good law and are
specifically overruled by this Judgment.

Reference is answered accordingly. Consequently, the Review applications filed by the Union of
India and the State of Assam are hereby allowed.

Now the main appeals/SLPs be placed before the concerned Bench for taking of such matters after
obtaining the appropriate order from Hon’ble the Chief Justice.

…………………………………J. (M. R. SHAH) …………………………………J. (C.T. RAVIKUMAR)
.………………………………J. (SANJAY KAROL) New Delhi, March 24, 2023 REPORTABLE IN THE
SUPREME COURT OF INDIA CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION CRL. APPEAL NO. 889 OF
2007 WITH REVIEW PETITION (CRL.) NO. 417 OF 2011 IN CRL. A. REVIEW PETITION (CRL.)
NO. 426 OF 2011 IN CRL. A. SLP (CRL.) 5971/2019 SLP (CRL.) 5964/2019 SLP (CRL.) … CRLMP
NO.16637/2014 ARUP BHUYAN .…. APPELLANT VERSUS STATE OF ASSAM .…. RESPONDENT
JUDGMENT SANJAY KAROL, J.

Reference made to this Court....................................................................3 Reference made to this
Court....................................................................3 General Development of Article 19 of the Indian
Constitution...................5 General Development of Article 19 of the Indian Constitution...................5
Specifically, Development of Article 19(1)(c)...........................................13 Specifically, Development
of Article 19(1)(c)...........................................13 Distinction between Indian and American
C o n s t i t u t i o n . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 6   D i s t i n c t i o n   b e t w e e n   I n d i a n   a n d   A m e r i c a n

39

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

Constitution............................16 Background, import and relevance of decisions of Supreme Court of
United States relied on in Arup Bhuyan....................................................28 Background, import and
r e l e v a n c e   o f   d e c i s i o n s   o f   S u p r e m e   C o u r t   o f   U n i t e d   S t a t e s   r e l i e d   o n   i n   A r u p
Bhuyan....................................................28 Background, import and relevance of decisions of
Supreme Court of United States relied on in Indra Das.........................................................33
Background, import and relevance of decisions of Supreme Court of United States relied on in Indra
D a s . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 3
C o n c l u s i o n s . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4 2
Conclusions.............................................................................................. 42 I have perused the erudite
opinion proposed by my esteemed colleague Hon’ble M.R. Shah, J., with which I concur. It is my
further endeavour to trace the development of law on the issue in India and the application of the
decisions rendered by the Courts in the United States of America, thereto. My conclusions are as
follows:

Reference made to this Court

1. The present Review Petition arises out of Order of this Court dated 26.08.2014 in
Arup Bhuyan v. State of Assam1 (hereafter referred to as Reference Order). The
operative part of the order is reproduced as under:

“10. The crux of the matter as submitted by Mr Ranjit Kumar, learned Solicitor
General for the Union of India, is that when any provision in Parliamentary
legislation is read down, in the absence of the Union of India it is likely to cause
enormous harm to the interest of the State as in many cases certain provisions have
been engrafted to protect the sovereignty and integrity of India.

11. The learned Solicitor General would contend that the authorities which have been
placed reliance upon in both the judgments [Arup Bhuyan v. State of Assam, (2011) 3
SCC 377 : (2011) 1 SCC (Cri) 855], [Indra Das v. State of Assam, (2011) 3 SCC 380 :
(2011) 1 SCC (Cri) 1150] by the two-Judge Bench are founded on Bill of Rights which
is different from Article 19 of the Constitution of India.

He has referred to Articles 19(1)(c) and 19(4) of the Constitution. Article 19(1)(c) reads as follows :

“19. (1)(c) to form associations or unions;” The said article is further restricted by
Article 19(4) which is as follows:

1 (2015) 12 SCC 702 “19. (4) Nothing in sub-clause (c) of the said clause shall affect
the operation of any existing law insofar as it imposes, or prevent the State from
making any law imposing, in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India or
public order or morality, reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred
by the said sub-clause.” Relying upon the same it is highlighted by the learned
Solicitor General that the Court has not kept this aspect in view while placing heavy
reliance on the foreign authorities which are fundamentally not applicable to the

40

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

interpretative process of the provisions which have been enacted in consonance with
the provisions of the Constitution of India.

12. Regard being had to the important issue raised by the learned Solicitor General
and Mr. Jaideep Gupta, learned Senior Counsel, for the State of Assam, we think it
appropriate that the matter should be considered by a larger bench. Let the registry
place the papers before the Hon’ble Chief Justice of India for appropriate orders.”

2. Therefore, the issue which arises for consideration is, whether the Hon’ble Division
Bench in Arup Bhuyan v. State of Assam2 and similarly in Sri Indra Das v. State of
Assam 3 (two- 2 (2011) 3 SCC 377 3 (2011) 3 SCC 380 Judge Bench) (hereafter
referred to as ‘Arup Bhuyan’ and ‘Indra Das’, respectively) was correct in placing
reliance on American decisions stating that the decisions apply to India too, “as our
fundamental rights are similar to the Bill of Rights in the US Constitution” to read
down S.3(5) of Terrorist and Disruptive Activities Prevention Act, 1987/S.10 of
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (hereafter referred to as UAPA) ? 4
General Development of Article 19 of the Indian Constitution

3. It is important, at the outset, to reproduce Article 19 of the Indian Constitution
which reads as follows:

“19(1) All citizens shall have the right—

(a) to freedom of speech and expression;

(b) to assemble peaceably and without arms;

4 Arup Bhuyan, Paragraph 12.

(c) to form associations or unions;

(d) to move freely throughout the territory of India;

(e) to reside and settle in any part of the territory of India;

(g) to practise any profession, or to carry on any occupation, trade or business.

(2) Nothing in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) shall affect the operation of any existing law, or prevent
the State from making any law, in so far as such law imposes reasonable restrictions on the exercise
of the right conferred by the said sub-clause in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of
India,] the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order, decency or
morality, or in relation to contempt of court, defamation or incitement to an offence. (3) Nothing in
sub-clause (b) of the said clause shall affect the operation of any existing law in so far as it imposes,
or prevent the State from making any law imposing, in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity

41

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

of India or public order, reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by the said
sub-clause.

(4) Nothing in sub-clause (c) of the said clause shall affect the operation of any existing law in so far
as it imposes, or prevent the State from making any law imposing, in the interests of the sovereignty
and integrity of India or public order or morality, reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right
conferred by the said sub-clause…”

4. At the time of the enactment of the Indian Constitution, as submitted by the Union of India,
Article 19 did not contain ‘reasonable restrictions’. The words ‘reasonable restrictions’ within Article
19(2) were introduced by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, which stated in its object
and reasons that within the first fifteen months of the working of the Constitution certain difficulties
were experienced, particularly, in regard to the chapter on Fundamental Rights and to address those
issues the State was empowered to impose reasonable restrictions in the interest of general public.

5. This was followed by the Constitution (Sixteenth) Amendment Act, 1963, wherein the State was
empowered to impose reasonable restrictions on the freedoms conferred under Article 19,
particularly on the ground of protection of interests of “sovereignty” and “integrity” of India. In its
object and reasons, it was stated that this Amendment is upon the recommendation of the
Committee on National Integration and Regionalism appointed by the National Integration Council
for preservation and maintenance of the integrity and sovereignty of the Union of India.

6. The interpretation of Article 19 and application of reasonable restrictions therein has been
summarized by this Court in Dharam Dutt v. Union of India5 (two-Judge Bench) in the following
terms:

“35. The scheme of Article 19 shows that a group of rights are listed as clauses (a) to
(g) and are recognized as fundamental rights conferred on citizens. All the rights do
not stand on a common pedestal but have varying dimensions and underlying
philosophies. This is clear from the drafting of clauses (2) to (6) of Article 19. The
framers of the Constitution could have made a common draft of restrictions which
were permissible to be imposed on the operation of the fundamental rights listed in
clause (1), but that has not been done. The common thread that runs throughout
clauses (2) to (6) is that the operation of any existing law or the enactment by the
State of any law which imposes reasonable restrictions to achieve certain objects, is 5
(2004) 1 SCC 712 saved; however, the quality and content of such law would be
different by reference to each of sub-clauses (a) to (g) of clause (1) of Article 19 as can
be tabulated hereunder:

Article 19 Clause (1) Clauses (2) to (6) Nature of right Permissible restrictions By
existing law or by law made by the State imposing reasonable restrictions in the
interests of

42

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

(a) Freedom of (i) the sovereignty and speech and integrity of India expression (ii)
the security of the State

(iii) friendly relations with foreign States

(iv) public order, decency or morality

(v) in relation to contempt of court, defamation or incitement to an offence

(b) right to (i) the sovereignty and assemble integrity of India peaceably and (ii)
public order without arms

(c) right to form (i) the sovereignty and associations or integrity of India unions (ii)
public order or morality

(d) and (e) right to (i) the general public move freely and/or (ii) the protection of the
to reside and settle interests of Scheduled throughout the Tribes territory of India

(g) right to practise The general public and in any profession, or particular any law
relating to to carry on any (i) the professional or occupation, trade technical
qualifications or business necessary for practising of any profession or carrying on of
any occupation, trade or business

(ii) the carrying on by the State, or by a corporation owned or controlled by the State,
of any trade, business, industry or service, whether to the exclusion, complete or
partial, of citizens or otherwise.

36. Article 19 confers fundamental rights on citizens. The rights conferred by Article 19(1) are not
available to and cannot be claimed by any person who is not and cannot be a citizen of India. A
statutory right — as distinguished from a fundamental right — conferred on persons or citizens is
capable of being deprived of or taken away by legislation. The fundamental rights cannot be taken
away by any legislation; a legislation can only impose reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the
right. Out of the several rights enumerated in clause (1) of Article 19, the right at sub-clause (a) is
not merely a right of speech and expression but a right to freedom of speech and expression. The
enumeration of other rights is not by reference to freedom. In the words of the then Chief Justice
Patanjali Sastri in State of W.B. v. Subodh Gopal Bose [AIR 1954 SC 92 : 1954 SCR 587] these rights
are great and basic rights which are recognized and guaranteed as the natural rights, inherent in the
status of a citizen of a free country. Yet, there cannot be any liberty absolute in nature and
uncontrolled in operation so as to confer a right wholly free from any restraint. Had there been no
restraints, the rights and freedoms may tend to become the synonyms of anarchy and disorder. The
founding fathers of the Constitution, therefore, conditioned the enumerated rights and freedoms
reasonably and such reasonable restrictions are found to be enumerated in clauses (2) to (6) of
Article

43

19...” (Emphasis supplied)

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

7. While considering the reasonableness of the restrictions imposed under Article 19(2) to 19(6), a
Constitution Bench of this Court in State of Madras v. VG Row6 (five-Judge Bench) observed as
under:

“22. This Court had occasion in Khare case [N.B. Khare v. State of Delhi, 1950 SCR
519 : 1950 SCC 522] to define the scope of the judicial review under clause (5) of
Article 19 where the phrase “imposing reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the
right” also occurs, and four out of the five Judges participating in the decision
expressed the view (the other Judge leaving the question open) that both the
substantive and the procedural aspects of the impugned restrictive law should be
examined from the 6 1952 SCR 597 point of view of reasonableness; that is to say, the
Court should consider not only factors such as the duration and the extent of the
restrictions, but also the circumstances under which and the manner in which their
imposition has been authorised.

23. It is important in this context to bear in mind that the test of reasonableness, wherever
prescribed, should be applied to each individual statute impugned, and no abstract standard, or
general pattern of reasonableness can be laid down as applicable to all cases. The nature of the right
alleged to have been infringed, the underlying purpose of the restrictions imposed, the extent and
urgency of the evil sought to be remedied thereby, the disproportion of the imposition, the
prevailing conditions at the time, should all enter into the judicial verdict.....” (Emphasis supplied)

8. Furthermore, laws restricting freedoms under Article 19, must be under one of the permitted
heads of restrictions and must have a proximate link to it. [See: State of Bihar v. Shailabala Devi7
(five-Judge Bench); O.K. Ghosh and Anr. v. E.X. 7 AIR 1952 SC 329 Joseph8 (five-Judge Bench) and
Shreya Singhal v. Union of India9 (two-Judge Bench)]

9. This development of Article 19 has been encapsulated by a Constitution Bench of this Court in
Kaushal Kishor v. State of U.P. & Ors.10 (five-Judge Bench). Justice V. Ramasubramanian has
reiterated that the restrictions under Article 19(2) have been included after detailed deliberations.
Furthermore, after the amendments to the Constitution that have been discussed herein above, the
restrictions “save and enable the State” to make laws restricting freedoms under the enumerated
heads, such as, sovereignty and integrity of India, security of the State and incitement to an offence.
11 Specifically, Development of Article 19(1)(c)

10. Article 19(1)(c) guarantees to all citizens the right to form associations which are subject to
reasonable restrictions under Article 19(4). These 8 AIR 1963 SC 812 9 (2015) 5 SCC 1 10 2023 SCC
Online 6 11 Paragraphs 29 - 31.

reasonable restrictions are not limited to formation of the association but extends to effective
functioning of the association relating to lawful objectives. [A.P. Dairy Development Corpn.
Federation v. B. Narasimha Reddy12 (two-Judge Bench)]

44

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

11. A Constitution Bench of this Court in Raghubar Dayal Jai Prakash v. Union of India13
(five-Judge Bench), made specific reference to restrictions imposed by statutes, vis-a-vis Article 19
(1)(c) and observed as under:

“11. ... An application for the recognition of the association for the purpose of
functioning under the enactment is a voluntary act on the part of the association and
if the statute imposes conditions subject to which alone recognition could be
accorded or continued, it is a little difficult to see how the freedom to form the
association in affected unless, of course, that freedom implies or involves a
guaranteed right to recognition also....”.

12 (2011) 9 SCC 286 13 AIR 1962 SC 263

12. Furthermore, this Court, while considering the constitutional validity of the
Indian Council of World Affairs Ordinance 2001, in Dharam Dutt (supra), while
tracing the settled legal position, reiterated that restrictions can be imposed on the
right conferred by Article 19(1)(c). It was observed that this right can be subjected to
those restrictions which satisfy the test of Article 19(4) of the Constitution.

13. While adjudicating a case involving the UAPA, in Jamaat-E-Islami Hind v. Union
of India14 (three-Judge Bench), with respect to restrictions that may be imposed on
such a right under Article 19(4) as also the requirements of natural justice, it was
observed as under:

“20. ... The scheme under this Act requiring adjudication of the controversy in this 14
(1995) 1 SCC 428 manner makes it implicit that the minimum requirement of natural
justice must be satisfied, to make the adjudication meaningful. No doubt, the
requirement of natural justice in a case of this kind must be tailored to safeguard
public interest which must always outweigh every lesser interest. This is also evident
from the fact that the proviso to sub-section (2) of Section 3 of the Act itself permits
the Central Government to withhold the disclosure of facts which it considers to be
against the public interest to disclose. Similarly, Rule 3(2) and the proviso to Rule 5
of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Rules, 1968 also permit non-disclosure of
confidential documents and information which the Government considers against the
public interest to disclose.” “26. An authorised restriction saved by Article 19(4) on
the freedom conferred by Article 19(1)(c) of the Constitution has to be reasonable.”
(Emphasis supplied) Distinction between Indian and American Constitution

14. In view of the above discussion, one now proceeds to consider the First
Amendment of the American Constitution which is extracted as under:

“Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting
the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the
right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the Government for a

45

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

redress of grievances.”

15. The contradistinction between the rights created by the First Amendment of the
American Constitution and Article 19 of the Indian Constitution is the power given to
the State to make laws reasonably restricting such freedoms in India.

Conversely, in the United States of America, restrictions have been imposed by the Judiciary in
instances, as relied upon in Arup Bhuyan and Indra Das, however no such explicit power is available
with the Legislature.

16. This distinction has been enunciated by this Court as well. In Babulal Parate v. State of
Maharashtra15, as submitted by the Union of India, a Constitution Bench of this Court (five-Judge
Bench) while upholding the constitutional validity of 15 (1961) 3 SCR 423 Section 144, Cr.P.C. has
held that whatever may be the position in the United States, the anticipatory action under S.144,
Cr.P.C. is permissible under clauses (2) and (3) of Article 19, which allow the legislature to make
laws placing reasonable restrictions on the rights conferred by these clauses of Article 19.
Importantly, this Court further observed there is nothing in the American Constitution
corresponding to clauses (2) to (6) of Article 19 of the Indian Constitution. It was further observed
that the framework of the Indian Constitution is different from the American Constitution.

17. The above distinction in Babulal Parate (supra), was reaffirmed by another Constitution Bench in
Madhu Limaye v. Sub-Divisional Magistrate16 (seven-Judge Bench), wherein this Court while
dealing with the constitutionality of S.144 of the Cr.P.C. and the scope of restrictions that can be
imposed, 16 (1970) 3 SCC 746 observed that in America, the First Amendment freedoms have no
qualifications, as in India and the American rulings are apt to be misapplied to our Constitution. 17

18. Furthermore, in Indian Express Newspapers (Bombay) Pvt. Ltd. and Others v. Union of India
and Others 18 (three- Judge Bench), through the pen of E.S Venkatramaiah J., (as his Lordship then
was), observed that:

“44. While examining the constitutionality of a law which is alleged to contravene
Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution, we cannot, no doubt, be solely guided by the
decisions of the Supreme Court of the United States of America. But in order to
understand the basic principles of freedom of speech and expression and the need for
that in a democratic country, we may take them into consideration. The pattern of
Article 19(1)(a) and of Article 19(1)(g) of our Constitution is different from the pattern
of the First Amendment to the American Constitution which is in absolute terms. The
rights guaranteed under Article 19(1)(a) and Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution are to
be read along with clauses (2) and (6) of Article 19, which carve out areas in respect
of which valid legislation can be made.” 17 Paragraph 17 and 28.

18 (1985) 1 SCC 641

46

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

19. In Union of India v. Naveen Jindal and Another19 (three-Judge Bench) this
Court, while discussing the issue of a citizen's right to fly the National Flag, on the
issue of Right to freedom of Speech and Expression, noted the distinction between
the Constitution of India and that of the United States of America. Such a distinction
being that in the USA, the First Amendment gives an absolute right to a citizen of free
expression, but under Article 19(1)(a), no absolute right is conferred. It only provides
for a qualified right, which is subject to regulatory measures contained in clause 2 of
Article 19. 20 This distinction between the Bill of Rights contained in the American
Constitution and the fundamental rights provided for in the Indian Constitution was
also noted in Superintendent, Central Prison v. Dr. Ram

19 (2004) 2 SCC 510 20 Paragraph 77.

Manohar Lohia21 (five-Judge Bench); Pathumma v. State of Kerala22 (seven-Judge Bench); M.C.
Mehta v. Union of India23 (Shriram – Oleum Gas) (five-Judge Bench); Ashok Kumar Thakur v.
Union of India24 (two-Judge Bench) and Jayendra Vishnu Thakur v. State of Maharashtra25 (two-
Judge Bench).

20. In Ramlila Maidan Incident, In re, (2012) 5 SCC 1 (two-Judge Bench), as submitted by the
Union of India, while discussing the Right to Freedom of Speech and Expression under Article 19,
refused to apply the US case of Schneck v. United States26, which propounded the doctrine of clear
and present danger, stating that it cannot be imported and applied in India.27 Further, holding that,
the right to freedom of speech and expression in India is subject to 21 (1960) 2 SCR 821 22 (1978) 2
SCC 1 23 (1987) 1 SCC 395 24 (2008) 6 SCC 1 25 (2009) 7 SCC 104 26 249 US 47 (1919) 27
Paragraph 8.

reasonable restrictions and therefore, there is a marked distinction in the language of law, its
application and interpretation under the Indian and the US laws.28

21. Shreya Singhal (supra), this Court speaking through R.F. Nariman, J. highlighted on the
differences between the US First Amendment and Freedom of Speech and Expression under Article
19(1)(a) read with Article 19(2) in the following words:

“15. It is significant to notice first the differences between the US First Amendment
and Article 19(1)

(a) read with Article 19(2). The first important difference is the absoluteness of the
US First Amendment—Congress shall make no law which abridges the freedom of
speech. Second, whereas the US First Amendment speaks of freedom of speech and
of the press, without any reference to “expression”, Article 19(1)(a) speaks of freedom
of speech and expression without any reference to “the press”. Third, under the US
Constitution, speech may be abridged, whereas under our Constitution, reasonable
restrictions may be imposed. Fourth, under our Constitution such restrictions have to
be in the interest of eight designated subject-matters— that is, any law seeking to

47

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

impose a restriction on the freedom of speech can only pass muster if it is
proximately related to any of the eight subject-

matters set out in Article 19(2).” 28 Paragraph 9 - 11.

17. So far as the second apparent difference is concerned, the American Supreme Court has included
“expression” as part of freedom of speech and this Court has included “the press” as being covered
under Article 19(1)(a), so that, as a matter of judicial interpretation, both the US and India protect
the freedom of speech and expression as well as press freedom. Insofar as abridgement and
reasonable restrictions are concerned, both the US Supreme Court and this Court have held that a
restriction in order to be reasonable must be narrowly tailored or narrowly interpreted so as to
abridge or restrict only what is absolutely necessary. It is only when it comes to the eight
subject-matters that there is a vast difference. In the US, if there is a compelling necessity to achieve
an important governmental or societal goal, a law abridging freedom of speech may pass muster.
But in India, such law cannot pass muster if it is in the interest of the general public. Such law has to
be covered by one of the eight subject-matters set out under Article 19(2). If it does not, and is
outside the pale of Article 19(2), Indian courts will strike down such law.”

18. American judgments have great persuasive value on the content of freedom of speech and
expression and the tests laid down for its infringement. It is only when it comes to subserving the
general public interest that there is a world of difference.” (Emphasis Supplied)

22. The abovementioned decision in Shreya Singhal (supra), has been followed recently in Kaushal
Kishor (supra) by Justice B.V. Nagarathna in her erudite concurring opinion while analyzing the
freedom of speech and expression under Article 19.29

23. The distinction as noted by this Court in various decisions between the American Constitution,
specifically the First Amendment therein and Article 19 of the Indian Constitution have been noted
hereinabove.

24. There have been, however, cases where this Court has, taken into consideration, judgments of
the Supreme Court of the United States of America. For instance, the Constitution Bench in Express
Newspapers (Pvt.) Limited and Another v. Union of India and Others 30 (five-Judge Bench)
wherein the constitutionality of the Working Journalists (Conditions of Service) and Miscellaneous
Provisions Act, 1955 was in question.

Justice N.H. Bhagwati writing for the Court, observed, that 29 Paragraph 202(iii) & 203.

30 (1959) SCR 12 since Article 19(1)(a) of our Constitution is based on the First Amendment of the
American Constitution, it would be “legitimate and proper” to refer to the decisions of the Supreme
Court of the United States “in order to appreciate the true nature, scope and extent of this right”.
This observation comes in addition to and despite having taken note of the warnings issued in State
of Travancore – Cochin and Others v. Bombay Co. Ltd 31 (five-Judge Bench) and State of Bombay v.
R.M.D. Chamarbaugwala32 (five-Judge Bench). This was, however, after having duly recognized the

48

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

“paucity of authority in India on the nature, scope and extent of this fundamental right of freedom
of speech and expression enshrined under article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution”, at that point in time.

25. This observation of Justice N.H. Bhagwati has been further followed in Reliance Petrochemicals
Ltd. v. Proprietors of Indian Express Newspapers, Bombay Pvt. 31 1952 SCR 1112 32 1957 SCR 874
Ltd. and Ors.33 (two-Judge Bench) wherein the effect of Article 19 on the freedom of press was in
question. 34 The court while making reference to US and UK decisions in Nebraska Press
Association v. Hugh Stuart 35, John D. Pennekamo v. State of Florida36 and Attorney General v.
British Broadcasting Corporation37, held that there was no reason for the injunction in question, to
continue. 38

26. In R.K. Garg v. Union of India39 (five-Judge Bench), a Constitution Bench, placed reliance on
the Supreme Court of United States decisions in Morey v. Doud40 and Secy. of Agriculture v.
Central Roig Refining Co. 41 to hold that the courts cannot be converted into tribunals for relief
from inequalities in economic legislations.42 33 (1988) 4 SCC 592 34 Paragraph 10.

35 427 US 539 36 (1945) 90 L Ed 331 37 (1979) 3 All ER 45 38 Paragraph 20 - 22, 38.

39 (1981) 4 SCC 675 40 354 US 457 (1957) 41 338 US 604 (1949) 42 Paragraph 8.

27. An observation by Lord Denning in Ghani v. Jones43 quoted with approval in Maneka Gandhi v.
Union of India44 (seven-Judge Bench), is worth reproducing herein. It reads, “a man’s liberty of
movement is regarded so highly by the law of England that it is not to be hindered or prevented
except on surest grounds”. It is then, by extension, without a shadow of doubt, a sure ground for the
restriction of liberty, in the present case of association, if the legislature, after following procedure
established by law, found appropriate reasons to restrict such right, in particular, with banned
organizations.

28. The purpose of delving into both nature of decisions, where judgments of the United States
Supreme Court have and have not been relied on, is to demonstrate that in certain cases reference to
those judgments is justified. Such reference though, needless to say, has to be appreciated in the
light of our own constitutional, legislative as well as judicial, historic perspective. They 43 (1970) 1
QB 693 44 (1978) 1 SCC 248 cannot, as was done in the Arup Bhuyan and Indra Das referred to this
bench, form the sole basis for the conclusion arrived at.

29. In the aforesaid backdrop, in order to answer the reference, it is essential to appreciate the
decisions relied upon in the two decisions, namely, Arup Bhuyan and Indra Das. It is only
subsequent to having appreciated these decisions that we may examine effectively, their application
to the scenario before us.

Background, import and relevance of decisions of Supreme Court of United States relied on in Arup
Bhuyan

49

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

30. In Arup Bhayan, the learned bench of two judges placed reliance on American decisions in
Elfbrandt v. Russel45, Clarence Brandenberg v. State of Ohio46 and United States v. Eugene Frank
Robel47 wherein the doctrine of ‘guilt by association’ has been rejected. The court observed that the
abovementioned judgments apply to India too, since the 45 384 U.S. 17 (1966) 46 395 U.S. 444
(1969) 47 389 U.S. 258 (1967) fundamental rights in India are similar to the Bill of Rights in the U.S.
Constitution. Furthermore, this court while setting aside the conviction of the appellant under
S.3(5) TADA observed:

“12. In our opinion, Section 3(5) cannot be read literally otherwise it will violate
Articles 19 and 21 of the Constitution. It has to be read in the light of our observations
made above. Hence, mere membership of a banned organisation will not make a
person a criminal unless he resorts to violence or incites people to violence or creates
public disorder by violence or incitement to violence.”

31. Reliance was placed on the decision of this court in State of Kerela v. Raneef48
(two-Judge Bench), wherein Justice Katju, while upholding the order granting bail to
the Respondent, placed reliance on US Supreme Court decisions such as Elfbrandt
(supra) which has rejected the doctrine of “guilt of association”.

32. In Elfbrandt (supra), the constitutionality of the Arizona Act was in question
which required all state employees to take oath. Under the oath, an employee is
subject to

48 (2011) 1 SCC 784 prosecution for perjury and discharge from office if he "knowingly and willfully
becomes or remains a member of the communist party of the United States or its successors or any
of its subordinate organizations'' or "any other organization" having for "one of its purposes", the
overthrow of the state government, where the employee had knowledge of such unlawful purpose. It
was held that those who join an organization but do not share its unlawful purposes and who do not
participate in its unlawful activities surely pose no threat. This Act threatens the cherished freedom
of association protected by the First Amendment, made applicable to the States through the
Fourteenth Amendment.

33. In Clarence Brandenberg v. State of Ohio49, the Appellant was convicted under the Ohio
Criminal Syndicalism statute for:

(i) ‘advocating … the duty, necessity, or propriety of crime, sabotage, violence, or
unlawful methods of 49 395 U.S. 444 (1969) terrorism as a means of accomplishing
industrial or political reform' and

(ii) for 'voluntarily assembling with any society, group, or assemblage of persons
formed to teach or advocate the doctrines of criminal syndicalism.’ The Supreme
Court of the United States of America, while reversing the conviction, held that
Ohio's Criminal Syndicalism Act cannot be sustained. The Act punishes persons who
'advocate or teach the duty, necessity, or propriety' of violence 'as a means of

50

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

accomplishing industrial or political reform'; or who publish or circulate or display
any book or paper containing such advocacy; or who 'justify' the commission of
violent acts 'with intent to exemplify, spread or advocate the propriety of the
doctrines of criminal syndicalism'; or who 'voluntarily assemble' with a group formed
'to teach or advocate the doctrines of criminal syndicalism.' Neither the indictment
nor the trial judge's instructions to the jury in any way refined the statute's bald
definition of the crime in terms of mere advocacy not distinguished from incitement
to imminent lawless action. Furthermore, it held that the Constitutional guarantees
of free speech and free press do not permit a State to forbid or proscribe advocacy of
the use of force or of law violation except where such advocacy is directed to inciting
or producing imminent lawless action and is likely to incite or produce such action.

34. In United States v. Eugene Frank Robel50, the constitutionality of S. 5(a)(1)(D) of the Subversive
Activities Control Act of 1950, was drawn into question before the Supreme Court of the United
States of America. S.5(a)(1)(D) of the Act provided that, when a Communist-action organization is
under a final order to register, it shall be unlawful for any member of the organization 'to engage in
any employment in any defense facility.' In this case, the appellee was 50 389 U.S. 258 (1967)
indicted since he was a member of the Communist Party and was employed at Todd Shipyards
Corporation, which was designated as a ‘defense facility.’ The Court declared S.5(a)(1)(D) as
unconstitutional and held that:

“It is precisely because that statute sweeps indiscriminately across all types of
association with Communist-action groups, without regard to the quality and degree
of membership, that it runs afoul of the First Amendment.” Background, import and
relevance of decisions of Supreme Court of United States relied on in Indra Das

35. In Indra Das, the learned bench of two Judges relied on and followed its earlier
judgment in Arup Bhuyan and while similarly relying on the American decisions
discussed henceforth, it was held that S.3(5) of TADA/S.10 of UAPA have to be read
down to bring them in consonance with the Constitution.

36. Reliance was placed on Elfbrandt (supra), as discussed above.

37. The learned division bench relied on Scales v.

United States51, to make a distinction between an active and a passive member of an organization.
In this case, the Petitioner’s conviction under the Smith Act came in review before the Supreme
Court of the United States of America. This act, made a felony “the acquisition or holding of knowing
membership in any organization which advocates the overthrow of the Government of the United
States by force of violence.” Further, the Court, while overruling the Petitioner’s constitutional
challenge observed that:

“The clause does not make criminal all association with an organization which has
been shown to engage in illegal advocacy. There must be clear proof that a defendant

51

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

"specifically intends to accomplish the aims of the organization by resort to violence."

Thus, the member for whom the organization is a vehicle for the advancement of
legitimate aims and policies does not fall within the ban of the statute:

he lacks the requisite specific intent ‘to bring about the overthrow of the government
as speedily as circumstances would permit.’ Such a person may

51 367 US 203 (1960) be foolish, deluded, or perhaps merely optimistic, but he is not by this statute
made a criminal.”

38. In Noto v. United States52, the Petitioner was convicted of violating the membership clause of
the Smith Act, which makes a felony the acquisition or holding of membership in any organization
which advocates the overthrow of the Government of the United States by force or violence, knowing
the purpose thereof. The Supreme Court observed that There must be some substantial direct or
circumstantial evidence of a call to violence now or in the future which is both sufficiently strong
and sufficiently pervasive to lend color to the otherwise ambiguous theoretical material regarding
Communist Party teaching. In this backdrop, it was held that the conviction of the Petitioner is
being reversed because the Government has failed to produce evidence the Court believes sufficient
to prove that the Communist Party presently advocates the overthrow of the Government by force.

39. Reliance was placed on the dissenting opinion of Justice Hugo Black in Communist Party v.
Subversive Activities 52 367 US 290 (1960) Control Board53. In this case, the registration of the
Communist Party of the United States since it was a "Communist action organization," under the
Subversive Activities Control Act of 1950 was brought into question. Justice Hugo Black observed
that: “I do not believe that it can be too often repeated that the freedoms of speech, press, petition
and assembly guaranteed by the First Amendment must be accorded to the ideas we hate or sooner
or later they will be denied to the ideas we cherish. The first banning of an association because it
advocates hated ideas -- whether that association be called a political party or not -- marks a fateful
moment in the history of a free country. That moment seems to have arrived for this country.”

40. In Joint Anti-Fascist Refugee Committee v. McGrath54, the Petitioner organisations were
included by the Attorney General as Communist, without hearing and furnished by him to the
Loyalty Review Board of the United States Civil Service Commission. The court, while recognising
53 367 US 1 (1961) 54 341 US 123, 174 (1951) that the Attorney General had no power to do so,
remanded the matter back to the district court. It was observed that:

“In days of great tension, when feelings run high, it is a temptation to take shortcuts
by borrowing from the totalitarian techniques of our opponents. But when we do, we
set in motion a subversive influence of our own design that destroys us from within.”

41. In Keyishian v. Board of Regents of New York55, the Supreme Court of the United
States of America, struck down a law which authorized the board of regents to
prepare a list of subversive organizations and to deny jobs to teachers belonging to

52

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

those organizations. The law made membership in the Communist Party prima facie
evidence for disqualification from employment. Mr. Justice Brennan, speaking for
the Court held that, penalizing mere knowing membership, without a specific intent
to further the unlawful aims of an organization, is not a constitutionally adequate
basis for exclusion from such positions as those held by appellants.

55 385 US 589 1966

42. In Yates v. U.S.56, the Petitioners were members of the Communist Party in California and were
indicted under the Smith Act, charging them with conspiring (1) to advocate and teach the duty and
necessity of overthrowing the Government of the United States by force and violence, and (2) to
organize, as the Communist Party of the United States, a society of persons who so advocate and
teach, all with the intent of causing the overthrow of the Government by force. While reversing the
conviction of the Petitioners, the Supreme Court observed that the district court failed to distinguish
between advocacy of forcible overthrow and advocacy of action, by holding that advocacy of violent
action at some future time was enough.

43. Reliance was placed on Clarence Brandenberg (supra), as discussed above.

44. In Whitney v. California57, the question which arose was whether the petitioner, who joined and
assisted in the organization of a Communist Labor Party contravening the 56 354 US 298 (1957) 57
274 US 357 (1926) California Criminal Syndicalism Act, did so with knowledge of its unlawful
character and purpose. The Supreme Court of the United States of America, while upholding the
constitutionality of the abovementioned act, observed that the freedom of speech which is secured
by the Constitution does not confer an absolute right to speak, without responsibility. Furthermore,
although the rights of free speech and assembly are fundamental, they are not, in their nature,
absolute. In Indra Das, reliance was placed on the concurring opinion of Mr. Justice Brandeis
wherein he observed that fear of serious injury cannot alone justify suppression of free speech and
assembly. It is the function of speech to free men from the bondage of irrational fears. To justify
suppression of free speech, there must be reasonable ground to fear that serious evil will result if
free speech is practiced. There must be reasonable ground to believe that the danger apprehended is
imminent. There must be reasonable ground to believe that the evil to be prevented is a serious one.

45. Reliance was placed on the dissenting opinion of Mr. Justice Holmes in Gitlow v. New York58.
In this case, the appellant was a member of the Left-Wing Section of the Socialist Party. He was
indicted for advocating the overthrow and upending of the organized government. The majority
opinion reiterated that it is a fundamental principle, long established, that the freedom of speech
and of the press which is secured by the Constitution does not confer an absolute right to speak or
publish, without responsibility. a State may punish utterances endangering the foundations of
organized government and threatening its overthrow by unlawful means. These imperil its own
existence as a constitutional State. Freedom of speech and press does not protect disturbances to the
public peace or the attempt to subvert the government. The constitutionality of the statute and
conviction of the appellant was upheld. Justice Holmes observed that:

53

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

58 268 US 652 (1925) “It is manifest that there was no present danger of an attempt
to overthrow the government by force on the part of the admittedly small minority
who shared the defendant's views. It is said that this manifesto was more than a
theory, that it was an incitement. Every idea is an incitement.

If the publication of this document had been laid as an attempt to induce an uprising against
government at once, and not at some indefinite time in the future, it would have presented a
different question. …. but the indictment alleges the publication, and nothing more.”

46. In Terminiello v. Chicago59, the Petitioner was charged with violation of an ordinance
forbidding any "breach of the peace". While reversing his conviction, the Supreme Court of the
United States of America held that a function of free speech under our system of government is to
invite dispute. It may indeed best serve its high purpose when it induces a condition of unrest,
creates dissatisfaction with conditions as they are, or even stirs people to anger. The Court observed
that “..speech is often provocative and challenging.” 59 337 US 1 (1948)

47. In De Jonge v. Oregon60, the Appellant was charged on the basis that he assisted in the conduct
of a meeting which was called under the auspices of the Communist Party, an organization
advocating criminal syndicalism. The Supreme Court of the United States of America while
considering the Criminal Syndicalism Law of Oregon held that “none of our decisions goes to the
length of sustaining such a curtailment of the right of free speech and assembly as the Oregon
statute demands in its present application.” Reliance was placed on the abovementioned decisions
in Gitlow (supra) and Whitney (supra).

Conclusions

48. The abovementioned decisions are in contradistinction to the scenario in question in India. The
American decisions primarily involve indictment on the basis of membership of political
organizations or incidents of free speech advocating overthrow of the government. However, under
Indian law, it is 60 299 US 353 (1936) not membership of political organizations etc. or free speech
or criticism of the government that is sought to be banned, it is only those organizations which aim
to compromise the sovereignty and integrity of India and have been notified to be such and
unlawful, whose membership is prohibited. This is in furtherance of the objective of the UAPA,
which has been enacted to provide for the more effective prevention of certain unlawful activities of
individuals and associations and dealing with terrorist activities and for matters connected
therewith. The distinction, therefore, is clear.

49. Furthermore, the UAPA provides for a system of checks & balances and public notification for
any association being declared unlawful:

(cid:134) S.3 of the Act, states that the Central Government must publish a notification
declaring an unlawful association in the Official Gazette and Daily Newspaper in the
State in which the principal office of the association affected is situated. Furthermore,
the Association must be notified by affixing a copy on its office or by serving its office

54

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

bearers or by means of loudspeakers.

(cid:134) Under S.4 of the Act, any notification under S.3 of the Act, shall be adjudicated
upon by the Tribunal for the purpose of whether or not there is sufficient cause for
declaring the association unlawful. In this adjudication, the association is given an
opportunity to be heard. S.5 provides for setting up this UAPA Tribunal, to which no
person shall be appointed unless he is a Judge of a High Court.

(cid:134) Under S.10 of the Act, which may be termed as the genesis if the present
controversy to be adjudicated upon, in my understanding is forthcoming in its
meaning. “Is and continues to be” implies that a person, even after the organization
being so notified as unlawful, is and continues to be a member, would attract penalty
under the said section. The use of the conjunction “and'' means that both of the
abovementioned conditions have to be satisfied.

[Hyderabad Asbestos Cement Products and Anr. v.

Union of India and Ors.61, (three-Judge Bench)] It is important to reiterate, that the
above observations have been made in light of and for application to the present
reference.

50. Importantly, Shreya Singhal (supra) captures the situation in regards the use of judgments of
the Supreme Court of the United States of America aptly to say that those judgments are of “great
persuasive value” but it also notes that there is “a world of difference” between the American and
Indian scenario, so far as, subserving public interest is concerned. It is this difference which seemed
to have escaped 61 (2000) 1 SCC 426 the learned division bench’s attention in Arup Bhyan and
Indra Das.

51. As recorded by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, issues in the functioning and
implementation of such rights were being faced right from the start and so the law- making
authority, in order to ensure smooth functioning of law. This Court cannot be oblivious to such fact.
The vast, varied and scholarly jurisprudence developed by this court has been in view of these
clauses within Article 19. Now, at this juncture, seven decades thence, in my view a stand of
whichever court, cannot be allowed to stand if it is in ignorance of constitutional provisions. I may
hasten to add that neither I, or this bench, nor any other court would hold otherwise to state that
influences or even borrowing from other constitutions has not taken place in the formation of our
constitution, but, it is equally and ever so more important to note, that the development thereof has
been done in specific context of the situations and conditions prevalent in India.

52. In light of the above, I may conclude that placing reliance therefore, on decisions rendered in a
distinct scenario as well as a demonstrably different constitutional position, that too almost
singularly, especially in cases which involve considerations of national security and sovereignty, was
not justified.

55

Arup Bhuyan vs The State Of Assam Home Department on 24 March, 2023

53. The reference is answered in the above terms.

………………….J. (Sanjay Karol) Place: New Delhi;

Date: 24th March, 2023.

56