Baini Prasad (D) Thr. Lrs. vs Durga Devi on 2 February, 2023

Baini Prasad (D) Thr. Lrs. vs Durga Devi on 2 February, 2023

Author: C.T. Ravikumar

Bench: Ajay Rastogi, C.T. Ravikumar

Reportable

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

Civil Appeal No.6182-6183 of 2009

Baini Prasad (D) Thr. LRs.
…Appellants
Versus
Durga Devi
…Respondents

JUDGMENT

C.T. RAVIKUMAR, J.

1. The respondent in R.S.A. No.276 of 1996 who was the defendant in Civil Suit No. 70 of 1988 on
the file of Subordinate Judge’s Court, Kullu in Himachal Pradesh, is the original appellant in these
appeals by special leave. Subsequent to his death the legal heirs got themselves impleaded as
appellants 1(a) to 1(g). The former appeal is directed against the judgment and final order in R.S.A.
No.276 of 1996 dated 27.12.2007 and the later appeal is directed against the order dated 27.03.2008
in Civil Review Petition No.4 of 2008, in the said Second Appeal, passed by the High Court of
Himachal Pradesh at Shimla. The respondent herein (plaintiff) filed Civil Suit No.70 of 1988 for
possession of land measuring 11 Biswancies comprised in Khasra No. 994/1-A/1 as per Talima by
demolition of the structure put up thereon in Phati Dhalpur, Kothi Maharaja, Tehsil and District
Kullu and for permanent prohibitory injunction restraining the defendant (the appellant herein)
from interfering on disputed land and other land appurtenant to it, owned by her. The suit was
decreed and upon holding the respondent herein/plaintiff as the owner of the encroached land
handing over the same after demolition of the structures put up there was ordered. The original
appellant/defendant took up the matter in appeal. As per the judgment in Civil Appeal No.9 of 1992,

1

Baini Prasad (D) Thr. Lrs. vs Durga Devi on 2 February, 2023

the findings on ownership and the question of encroachment were confirmed. Nonetheless, the First
Appellate Court modified the judgment and decree holding that the plaintiff/respondent herein is
not entitled to recovery possession of 11 Biswancies of land after demolition of the structures put up
thereon based on the principles of acquiescence. Consequently, she was found entitled to a decree of
compensation at the market value prevalent at the time of filing of the suit in lieu of that relief and
the compensation therefor was assessed at Rs.5500/-. Over and above the said amount, the
respondent herein (the plaintiff) was held entitled to recover interest at the rate of 12 % per annum
from the date of filing of the suit till realization. RSA No.276 of 1996 was filed challenging the
modification of the judgment and decree of the Trial Court to above extent by the respondent
herein. As per the impugned judgment dated 27.12.2007, the High Court allowed the Second Appeal
and set aside the judgment and decree of the First Appellate Court for compensation to the
respondent in lieu of recovery of possession and the judgment and decree of the Trial Court dated
18.01.1992 for demolition and handing over of the possession of the encroached land was restored.
The review petition being; Civil Review Petition No.4 of 2008 filed by the appellant herein in the
said Second Appeal was dismissed by the High Court as per order dated 27.03.2008. Hence, these
appeals.

2. Heard, Ms. Kiran Suri, learned Senior Counsel for the appellants and Mr. Rajesh Srivastava,
learned counsel for the respondent.

3. The succinct narration of facts as above would make it abundantly clear that there are concurrent
findings of the Trial Court, the First Appellate Court as also the High Court on the questions of
ownership over the land in question viz., land measuring 11 Biswancies, as described above and its
encroachment by the original appellant. In the said circumstances, we find absolutely no reason to
revisit the factual findings on the questions of ownership and encroachment based on the settled
judicial principle well-established by precedents that concurrent finding of fact does not call for
interference in an appeal under Article 136 of the Constitution of India in the absence of any valid
ground for interference. (See the decisions in Janak Dulari Devi and Anr. v. Kapildeo Rai and Anr. 1,
1 (2011) 6 SCC 555 Ram Prakash Sharma v. Babulal2 and Ghisalal v. Dhapubai3).

4. RSA No.276 of 1996 was filed by the respondent herein/plaintiff, rightly, against the setting aside
of the judgment and decree of the trial Court for demolition and handing over the possession of land
measuring 11 Biswancies in Khasra No.994/1-A/1 and holding and decreeing that in lieu of the same
she is entitled to a decree of compensation at the market value prevalent at the time of filing of the
suit and interest at the rate of 12 % per annum on the assessed amount of Rs.5500/- from the date of
filing of the suit till its realization. In this context, it is pertinent to note that as against the judgment
of the First Appellate Court confirming the findings on ownership and encroachment against him
and further ordering payment of compensation after rejecting his denial of encroachment, the
original appellant had neither filed an independent appeal nor a cross appeal.

5. In short, for the foregoing reasons, the scope of consideration in these appeals is to be confined to
the 2 (2011) 6 SCC 449 3 (2011) 2 SCC 298 question whether the reversal by the High Court of the
modification effected by the First Appellate Court warrants interference in exercise of power under
Article 136 of the Constitution of India.

2

Baini Prasad (D) Thr. Lrs. vs Durga Devi on 2 February, 2023

6. According to the appellants, the respondent herein did not object and resort to civil remedy
against the construction effected on the land in dispute within a reasonable time and, therefore, she
is estopped from claiming recovery of the land in question after demolition of the structure raised
thereon. True, that the original appellant had also raised a contention that he had effected the
construction on the bona fide belief that he was effecting construction on his own land and
therefore, the construction raised by him on the land in question is protected under Section 51 of the
Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (hereinafter, ‘the TP Act’). This was pressed into service by the
appellants.

7. At the very outset we may say that we are of the considered view that the contention of the
appellants founded on Section 51 of the TP Act is totally misplaced and misconceived. This position
would be revealed if ground ‘b’ raised in these appeals is juxtaposed to ground ‘d’. Noticeably, the
appellants assail the reversal of the modification of the judgment and decree passed by the First
Appellate Court and attempting to sustain the modification based on contentions founded on the
principle of estoppel and relying upon Section 51 of the TP Act. Conceptually, the underlying
principles in Section 51, TP Act and the principle of estoppel under Section 115 of the Indian
Evidence Act, 1872 are converse and cannot co-exist. Section 51 of the TP Act reads thus: -

“51. Improvements made by bona fide holders under defective titles.—When the
transferee of immoveable property makes any improvement on the property,
believing in good faith that he is absolutely entitled thereto, and he is subsequently
evicted there from by any person having a better title, the transferee has a right to
require the person causing the eviction either to have the value of the improvement
estimated and paid or secured to the transferee, or to sell his interest in the property
to the transferee at the then market value thereof irrespective of the value of such
improvement. The amount to be paid or secured in respect of such improvement
shall be the estimated value thereof at the time of the eviction. When, under the
circumstances aforesaid, the transferee has planted or sown on the property crops
which are growing when he is evicted therefrom, he is entitled to such crops and to
free ingress and egress to gather and carry them.”

8. A perusal of Section 51, TP Act would reveal that even after the pre-requisites for the
enforceability of equity enacted in it are satisfied, the right to election for one of the two alternatives
provided under that Section would still rest with the person evicting. In other words, he may elect
either to pay the value of improvements made by the defendant who satisfies a description of
“transferee” for the purpose of this Section and take the land or sell out his interests in the land to
the transferee at the market value of the property, irrespective of the value of such improvements.

9. Section 51, TP Act is a general provision dealing with improvements effected by a transferee to the
transferred property in the manner specifically provided thereunder. Thus, a bare perusal of Section
51, TP Act would reveal that in order to acquire the ‘right to require’ in the manner provided
thereunder one should be a ‘transferee’ within the meaning of the TP Act and for the purpose of the
said section. In short, Section 51 applies in terms to a transferee who makes improvements in good
faith on a property believing himself to be its absolute owner. In this context, the seemingly,

3

Baini Prasad (D) Thr. Lrs. vs Durga Devi on 2 February, 2023

paradoxical statements in grounds ‘b’ and ‘d’ raised in the appeals are worthy to refer and they read
thus:-

Grounds ‘b’ and ‘d’ in the appeals read as under:-

‘b’. "That the Hon’ble High Court has committed a serious error in holding that
estoppel, waiver is averments in written statement specifically state all the facts
leading to estoppel. The petitioner has specifically pleaded in his written statement as
under: -

“The defendant constructed the house on the land along with land in dispute with
verandah and completed it in the month of September, 1986. At the time, neither the
plaintiff nor her husband who was living at Raghunathpur adjoining the land of the
defendant raised any objection."

That plea of estoppel is clearly made out from the pleadings of the parties, their
conduct, oral as well as documentary evidence. The said plea has been raised to put to
trial and therefore, the plea of estoppel being the issue of law cannot be raised at any
time.

‘d’. That the petitioner was under bona fide belief that he has constructed on its own
land and the construction raised by the petitioner is protected by virtue of Section 51
of TP Act. The petitioner has acted under the bona fide defective title and therefore
has been fighting the litigation since last 20 years on the belief that he has
constructed on his own land but ultimately after holding several demarcations, one of
the witnesses found the trespass to an extent of 9 biswasies whereas the other found
it 11 biswasies. However, admittedly the area involved is very small and the
encroachment is not intentional and therefore, Section 51 of TP Act will apply to the
facts and circumstances of the case.”

10. The original appellant has failed to establish that he is a “transferee” within the meaning of the
TP Act and for the purpose of Section 51, TP Act. In order to attract the Section the occupant of the
land must have held possession under colour of title, his possession must not have been by mere
possession of another but adverse to the title of the true owner and he must be under the bone fide
belief that he has secured good title to the property in question and is the owner thereof. In short,
Section 51 gives only statutory recognition to the above three things. At the same time, in the case on
hand, the concurrent findings of the courts below is that the respondent herein is the owner of the
land in question and the original appellants had encroached upon it and effected construction. The
appellants herein have failed to establish the above mentioned three things. The evidence on record
would also go to show that even the construction was effected in deviation of the approved plan.

11. In the light of the concurrent findings on the questions of ownership and encroachment, as noted
above, it can only be held that it was after encroaching upon the land in question and ignoring the
absence of any title that he made structures thereon at his own risk. Once it is so found, the original

4

Baini Prasad (D) Thr. Lrs. vs Durga Devi on 2 February, 2023

appellant cannot be treated as a ‘transferee’ within the meaning of the TP Act and for the purpose of
Section 51, TP Act. Therefore, we have no hesitation to hold that the appellants are not entitled to
rely on the provision under Section 51, TP Act to seek for restoration of the modification made by
the First Appellate Court with respect to demolition and possession. The appellants, rightly, did not
take up the plea of adverse possession and in the circumstances, being not a transferee for the
purpose of Section 51 TP Act, he cannot legally require the respondent either to pay the value of
improvements and take back the land or to sell out the land to him at the market value of the
property, irrespective of the value of the improvements.

12. Now, what remains to be considered is whether the appellant herein/defendant has pleaded and
proved his plea of estoppel. The appellants would contend that non- framing of the question of
estoppel as an issue is not fatal in the facts and circumstances as also in view of the evidence
available on record, in the case on hand. To buttress the contention, the appellants rely on the
decision of this Court in Nedunuri Kameswaramma v. Sampati Subba Rao4. The relevant recital in
the paragraph 5 of the said decision reads thus:-

“5. …No doubt, no issue was framed, and the one, which was framed, could have been
more elaborate; but since the parties went to trial fully knowing the rival case and led
all the evidence not only in support of their contentions but in refutation of those of
the other side, it cannot be said that the absence of an issue was fatal to the case, or
that there was that mistrial which vitiates proceedings. We are, therefore, of opinion
that the suit could not be dismissed on this 4 AIR 1963 SC 884 narrow ground, and
also that there is no need for a remit, as the evidence which has been led in the case is
sufficient to reach the right conclusion.” The position of law revealed from the
afore-extracted recital from the said decision cannot be disputed. In fact, for the very
same reason despite the non-framing of the issue of estoppel we are inclined to
consider the contentions founded on the principle of estoppel. We may hasten to add
that indubitably the position is that to invoke the concept of estoppel the defendant
has to specifically plead each and every act or omission, as the case may be, that
constitutes representation from the plaintiff. Before delving into the said question it
is only appropriate to refer to the enunciation of the settled position in respect of the
concept of estoppel.

12.1 In the decision in R.S. Madanappa v.

Chandramma5, this court considered the object of estoppel. It was held that its object is to prevent
fraud and secure justice between the parties by promotion of honesty and good faith. It was
therefore, further held that when one party makes a representation to the other 5 AIR 1965 SC 1812
about a fact he would not be shut out by the rule of estoppel if that other person knew the true state
of facts and must consequently not have been misled by the misrepresentation.

12.2 In the decision in Pratima Chowdhury v. Kalpana Mukherjee6, while considering Section 115 of
the Evidence Act, this Court held that four salient conditions are to be satisfied before invoking the
rule of estoppel. Firstly, one party should make a factual representation to the other party. Secondly,

5

Baini Prasad (D) Thr. Lrs. vs Durga Devi on 2 February, 2023

the other party should accept and rely upon the aforesaid factual representation. Thirdly, having
relied on the aforesaid factual representation, the second party should alter his position. Fourthly,
the instant altering a position, should be such, that it would be iniquitous to require him to revert
back to the original position. After holding so, it was further held that the doctrine of estoppel would
apply only when, based on a representation by the first party, the second party alters his position, in
such manner, that it would be unfair to restore the initial position.

6 AIR 2014 SC 1304 12.3 In the decision in B.L. Shreedhar v. K.M. Munnireddy7, this Court held
that when rights are invoked estoppel may with equal justification be described both as a rule of
evidence and as a rule creating or defeating rights. The appellant relies on this decision, more
particularly paragraph 30 of the said decision and it reads thus :-

“30. If a man either by words or by conduct has intimated that he consents to an act
which has been done and that he will not offer any opposition to it, although it could
not have been lawfully done without his consent, and he thereby induces others to do
that which they otherwise might have abstained from, he cannot question the legality
of the act he had sanctioned to the prejudice of those who have so given faith to his
words or to the fair inference to be drawn from his conduct.” It is to be noted that in
the said decision this Court clarified that a legal status expressly denied by a statute
could not be conferred on the basis of estoppel.

13. The appellant has also relied on the decision of this Court in Chairman, State Bank of India &
Anr. v. M.J. 7 AIR 2003 SC 578 James8, more particularly, paragraph 39 which read thus:-

“39. Before proceeding further, it is important to clarify distinction between
“acquiescence” and “delay and laches”. Doctrine of acquiescence is an equitable
doctrine which applies when a party having a right stands by and sees another
dealing in a manner inconsistent with that right, while the act is in progress and after
violation is completed, which conduct reflects his assent or accord. He cannot
afterwards complain. In literal sense, the term acquiescence means silent assent, tacit
consent, concurrence, or acceptance, which denotes conduct that is evidence of an
intention of a party to abandon an equitable right and also to denote conduct from
which another party will be justified in inferring such an intention. Acquiescence can
be either direct with full knowledge and express approbation, or indirect where a
person having the right to set aside the action stands by and sees another dealing in a
manner inconsistent with that right and in spite of the infringement takes no action
mirroring acceptance. However, acquiescence will not apply if lapse of time is of no
importance or consequence.” The position expounded as above certainly request
consideration with reference to the facts of this case. In that regard we will have to
consider whether there was acquiescence on part of the respondent and if so, whether

8 (2022) 2 SCC 301 lapse of time, if any, is of no importance or consequence, with reference to the
factual position, in view of the exposition thereunder ‘that acquiescence would not apply if lapse of
time is of no importance or consequence’.

6

Baini Prasad (D) Thr. Lrs. vs Durga Devi on 2 February, 2023

14. What is crystal clear from the enunciation of law in catena of cases is that the equity will follow
the law and it would tilt in favour of law and further that to claim equity the party must explain
previous conduct.

15. Besides, bearing in mind, the enunciation of law on the principle of estoppel we will have to take
note of certain crucial aspects borne out of the records in the case. The case of the original appellant
is that he had carried out the construction of the varandah in the land in dispute as part of his
residential house in the year 1986 bona fidely believing it to be his own land before the acquirement
of land in question by the respondent. This contention is incoherent with that of acquiescence viz.,
the contention claims to be embedded in ground ‘b’ that the respondent remained silent and
thereby, made a representation persuading him to alter his position and to go ahead with the
construction in the land in question. Actually, the original appellant took up the contention
thereunder that neither the plaintiff (respondent herein) nor her husband who were living at
Raghunathpur adjoining his land raised any objection during the construction. Obviously, this
contention was taken up jesuitically as what is stated in the preceding sentence is that he
constructed house on the land along with land in dispute with verandah and completed it in the
month of September, 1986; whereas, admittedly, the respondent herein purchased the land only in
the year 1987. But the evidence on record, dealt with by the Courts below, would reveal that the
respondent herein had objected to the carrying out of the construction by the original appellant in
the land in question. It is evident from the record that the respondent sent telegraphic notice Ex.
PW-18/A dated 22.09.1987 to the original appellant for stopping construction thereon. It is also on
record that she made a complaint before the Deputy Commissioner through her husband under Ex.
PW-12/A on 10.12.1987 which ultimately resulted in a report pursuant to an inspection by PW-12,
the then Tehsildar, Kullu of the suit land on 12.01.1988. The suit was instituted thereafter on
11.05.1988.

16. Contextually, it is relevant to note that the trial court took note of the factual position that
despite raising the specific contention that he had affected the construction of his residential house
along with varandah in the year 1986, the appellant herein had not produced the completion
certificate of building including the construction on the land in question from the local body to
establish the asserted fact.

17. We are of the considered view that when the First Appellate Court also took note of the issuance
of Ext. PW- 18/A dated 22.09.1987 and also the submission of Ext. PW-12/A dated 10.12.1987 it
should have taken into account the following facts which are explicit from the records and duly
considered by the Trial Court. Firstly, being the party propounding the application of the principle
of acquiescence it was the burden of the original appellant to establish the fact that the respondent
herein had acquiesced in the infringement of his legal right and still stood by and allowed the
construction. In that regard, it should have taken into account the fact that despite asserting that the
construction on the land in question was carried out while carrying out the construction of the
residential building on his own land in the year 1986 as per the approved plan he had failed to
establish the same by producing the completion certificate from the local authority. Secondly, if that
contention is taken as true, he could not have taken up the contention of acquiescence on the
respondent as it was also his case that the respondent had purchased the land in question only in the

7

Baini Prasad (D) Thr. Lrs. vs Durga Devi on 2 February, 2023

year 1987. Thirdly, the oral evidence and the documentary evidence on behalf of the respondent
would reveal the factum of raising objection on “carrying out the construction, in the absence of any
title over the same, at least a defective title, the original appellant could not have claimed bona fides
on his action in carrying on the construction. In the said circumstances, the mere delay in instituting
the suit, especially when it was filed well within the period of limitation prescribed, should not have
been held as amounting to acquiescence. As noticed hereinbefore, the respondent herein after
sending telegraphic message on 22.09.1987 approached the Deputy Commissioner and ultimately
obtained report revealing encroachment on the part of the original appellant on 10.12.1987 and
then, brought the suit on 11.05.1988. How can it be said, in the circumstances, that the respondent
has not immediately taken proceedings against the original appellant and therefore, she should ever
be debarred from asserting her right for recovery of possession of her land from the encroacher even
after establishing her title over the encroached land in a suit instituted well within the prescribed
period of limitation.

18. In the situation and circumstances expatiated above it is only apposite to refer to the decision in
Abdul Kader v. Upendra9. It was held therein that in the case of acquiescence the representations
are to be inferred from silence, but mere silence, mere inaction could not be construed to be a
representation and in order to be a representation it must be inaction or silence in circumstances
which require a duty to speak and therefore, amounting to fraud or deception. 9 40 C.W.N 1370

19. There can be no doubt with respect to the position that estoppel is a principle founded on equity
and as held by the court in Madanappa’s case (supra) its object is only to prevent and secure justice
between the parties. In the proven circumstances that the original appellant was not having title
over the property, that the respondent herein is the owner of the land in question, that the
concurrent finding is that the original appellant was the encroacher and further that objection was
raised by the respondent herein against the construction she should not have shut out by the rule of
acquiescence or by the rule of estoppel for having made a representation to make the original
appellant to believe that she had consented for the construction.

20. The entire circumstances revealed from the evidence on record unerringly point to the fact that
the appellant had encroached upon land belonging to the respondent and without bona fides
effected constructions which is verandah which is extension of residential building. The object of
estoppel, as held in Madanappa’s case, would be defeated if the said illegality is recognized and
allowance is granted therefor. In the contextual situation, a decision of a learned Single Judge of
High Court of Andhra Pradesh in N.C. Subbayya v. Pattan Abdulla Khan10 extracted in agreement
in the decision by the learned Single Judge of High Court of Madras in the decision in Bodi Reddy v.
Appu Goundan11, is worthy to be looked into. In the decision the learned Single Judge of the High
Court of Andhra Pradesh after posing a question “has the court an absolute discretion to award
damages instead of a mandatory injunction where there is a trespass by the defendant on the
plaintiff’s land?” held thus:-

“To say the building erected in such circumstances should not be directed to be
removed and only damages could be awarded would, in my opinion, be ineffective, to
sanction a condemnation of the plaintiff’s property and an appropriation of it for the

8

Baini Prasad (D) Thr. Lrs. vs Durga Devi on 2 February, 2023

defendant’s use…. To confine the relief to compensation in such a case is tantamount
to allowing a trespasser to purchase another man’s property against that man’s will.
No man should be compelled to sell his property against his will at a valuation and no
person should be encouraged to do 10 (1956) 69 LW (Andhra) 52 11 (1971) ILR 2
Madras 155 a wrongful act or commit a trespass relying on the length of his purse and
his ability to pay damages for it.

To say that a small strip of building site could thus be appropriated by a trespasser would be to
admit a rule of law which can be applied limitlessly. In cases of trespass, the Court should ordinarily
grant an injunction directing the defendant to remove the encroachment and restore possession of
the vacant site to the plaintiff. Neither serious inconvenience to the defendant—trespasser nor the
absence of serious injury to the plaintiff is a ground for depriving the latter for his legal right to the
property.”

21. True that the learned Single Judge further held that if the plaintiff is guilty of laches amounting
to acquiescence or has knowingly permitted the defendant to make the construction and made him
to incur heavy expenditure without protest or objection, mandatory injunction could be declined
and damages could be given. As held by the learned Single Judge we are of the considered view that
in a case where the owner of the land filed suit for recovery of possession of his land from the
encroacher and once he establishes his title, merely because some structures are erected by the
opposite party ignoring the objection, that too without any bona fide belief, denying the relief of
recovery of possession would tantamount to allowing a trespasser/encroacher to purchase another
man’s property against that man’s will. In Bodi Reddy’s decision (supra) the learned Judge held that
in a suit for recovery of possession filed within the period of limitation provided under Limitation
Act, the doctrine of laches or acquiescence has no place to defeat the right of the plaintiff to obtain
the relief on his establishing his title. We may hold that in such a situation in the absence of any
misrepresentation by an act or omission, the mere fact after making objection the plaintiff took
some reasonable time to approach the Court for recovery of possession cannot, at any stretch of
imagination, be a reason to deny him the relief him of recovery of possession of the encroached land
on his establishing his title over it.

22. Considering all the aforesaid circumstances, we do not find any flaw, legal error, perversity or
patent illegality in the findings on the substantial questions of law by the High Court ultimately, in
favour of the respondent herein and in setting aside the judgment and decree of the First Appellate
Court and also in restoring the judgment and decree of the Trial Court.

23. Resultantly the appellants are bound to fail and the appeals are accordingly dismissed.

24. There is no order as to cost.

……………………, J.

(B.R. Gavai) ……………………, J.

9

Baini Prasad (D) Thr. Lrs. vs Durga Devi on 2 February, 2023

(C.T. Ravikumar) New Delhi;

February 02, 2023.

10