Basavaraj vs Padmavathi on 5 January, 2023

Basavaraj vs Padmavathi on 5 January, 2023

Author: M. R. Shah

Bench: B.V. Nagarathna, M. R. Shah

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 8962-8963 OF 2022
(@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NOS. 6122-6123 OF 2022)

Basavaraj                                                           ...Appellant(S)

Versus

Padmavathi & Anr.                                                 ...Respondent(S)

JUDGMENT

M. R. Shah, J.

1. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with impugned judgment(s) and order(s) dated 27.11.2020 and
06.12.2021 passed by the High Court of Karnataka at Kalaburagi Bench in Regular First Appeal
(RFA) No. 5033/2011 and Review Petition (RP) No. 200036/2021 respectively, by which, the High
Court has allowed the said appeal preferred by respondents herein – original defendants and has
quashed and set aside the judgment and decree passed by the learned Trial Court decreeing the suit
for specific performance, the original plaintiff has preferred the present appeals.

2. The facts leading to the present appeals in a nutshell are as under: -

2.1 That respondent No. 1 herein – original defendant No. 1 executed an agreement to
sell dated 13.03.2007 in favour of the appellant herein – original plaintiff – buyer
agreeing to sell the land in question on or before 31.07.2007 for a sale consideration
of Rs. 12,74,000/-. Rs. 3 lakhs were paid as earnest money. The receipt was issued by
respondent No. 1 for the same. That thereafter, as respondent No. 1 – seller did not
execute the sale deed, the appellant got issued a legal notice dated 20.11.2007 asking
the respondent(s) to receive the balance sale consideration and execute the sale deed.
The seller replied to the legal notice vide reply dated 03.12.2007 denying the
execution of agreement to sell. That thereafter, the appellant – buyer filed the suit for
specific performance on 14.02.2008 vide O.S. No. 17/2008. The original defendants
– sellers filed their written statement and opposed the suit. The defendants denied

1

Basavaraj vs Padmavathi on 5 January, 2023

the execution of agreement to sell. It was also the case of the defendants in the
written statement that the plaintiff was not ready to perform his part of the contract.
Therefore, the defendants denied readiness and willingness on the part of the
plaintiff – buyer to perform his part of the contract. 2.2 Both the parties led evidence
before the Trial Court. The plaintiff led evidence by examining witnesses, on his
readiness and willingness to perform his part of the contract. It was brought on
record that plaintiff went with cash to the seller but the seller did not accept the
same.

That thereafter, on appreciation of evidence the learned Trial Court decreed the suit for specific
performance vide judgment and decree dated 30.09.2011. The learned Trial Court believed the case
of the plaintiff – buyer as to the execution of agreement to sell. The learned Trial Court also believed
the plaintiff’s case as to the payment of earnest money of Rs. 3 lakhs to the seller. The learned Trial
Court also held that the plaintiff – buyer was ready and willing to perform his part of the contract.
That pursuant to the judgment and decree passed by the learned Trial Court, the buyer – original
plaintiff deposited an amount of Rs. 9,74,000/- before the learned Trial Court which is still reported
to be lying with the Trial Court. 2.3 Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the judgment and decree
passed by the learned Trial Court, respondents herein – sellers preferred the appeal before the High
Court. By the impugned judgment and order the High Court has allowed the said appeal and has set
aside the judgment and decree passed by the learned Trial Court, mainly on the ground that the
plaintiff was not ready and willing to perform his part of the contract. The impugned judgment and
order passed by the High Court is the subject matter of present appeals.

2.4 The appellant also filed a review petition which came to be dismissed by the High Court, and the
judgment passed in the review petition is also the subject matter of one of the appeals.

3. Shri K. Parmeshwar, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant has vehemently
submitted that in the facts and circumstances of the case, the Hon’ble High Court has materially
erred in reversing the findings of the Trial Court on readiness and willingness of the appellant. 3.1 It
is submitted that on appreciation of entire evidence on record the learned Trial Court recorded
findings as to readiness and willingness of the appellant, in favour of the appellant, and such
findings were not required to be interfered with by the High Court.

3.2 It is further submitted that all through, out and right from the very beginning, the appellant –
buyer was ready and willing to perform his part of the contract. He has prayed that the following
aspects emerging from the evidence on record be considered, while considering the issue as to
readiness and willingness on the part of the appellant to perform his part of the agreement dated
13.03.2007: -

(i) That the appellant specifically averred in the plaint that he is ready and willing to
perform the agreement dated 13.03.2007;

(ii) That in the suit notice dated 20.11.2007 the plaintiff specifically averred that he is
ready and willing to pay the balance sale consideration;

2

Basavaraj vs Padmavathi on 5 January, 2023

(iii) The plaintiff in his evidence stated that he is ready and willing to perform the
agreement. In the deposition it was further stated that he approached the defendant
– seller in the month of June, 2007 and again in July, 2007 with the balance sale
consideration. That there is no cross-examination in this regard;

(iv) The plaintiff examined PW2 and PW3, the attestors to the agreement to sell, who
specifically stated that in June, 2007, the plaintiff approached the defendants and
asked them to take the balance sale consideration in cash. That there is no cross-

examination in this regard;

(v) That the DW-1 – first defendant admitted in her cross-examination that she executed the
agreement and that she was the owner of the said property;

(vi) That she had affixed her signatures on the agreement and that she received Rs. 3 lakhs;

(vii) That the appellant had deposited the balance consideration of Rs. 9,74,000/- before the learned
Trial Court on 31.10.2011.

3.3 Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant – buyer has further submitted that as such
the defendant took a dishonest stand before the learned Trial Court and denied the execution of the
agreement. It is further submitted that in the written statement, the specific stand taken by the
defendants was that no agreement to sell was executed between the parties. It is contended that
however, defendant No. 1 subsequently admitted that Rs. 3 lakhs were received by her, and a receipt
dated 13.03.2007 was issued in that regard.

3.4 It is further contended that even the seller – defendant No. 1 took contradictory and dishonest
pleas. She initially denied the execution of the agreement, then denied that it was an agreement to
sell but only an agreement in respect of a loan transaction.

3.5 It is next contended by learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant that as such there
are concurrent findings recorded by the learned Trial Court as well as the High Court on execution
of the agreement to sell by defendant No. 1 and to the effect that Rs. 3 lakhs were paid by the buyer
by way of earnest money and that the agreement to sell was not in respect of security and/or a loan
transaction but it was for an outright sale. 3.6 Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant
has heavily relied upon the decision of this Court in the case of Indira Kaur and Ors. Vs. Sheo Lal
Kapoor; (1988) 2 SCC 488 (para 8, 9 and 10) and the subsequent decision of this Court in the case of
Beemaneni Maha Lakshmi Vs. Gangumalla Appa Rao; (2019) 6 SCC 233 (para 14) on the aspect of
readiness and willingness on the part of the buyer. It is submitted that in the case of Indira Kaur
(supra) it was held that no adverse inference can be drawn against the plaintiff as to whether he had
the means to pay the balance consideration on the grounds of non- production of passbook,
accounts or other documentary evidence.

3

Basavaraj vs Padmavathi on 5 January, 2023

3.7 It is submitted that in the case of Beemaneni Maha Lakshmi (supra) it was observed and held by
this Court that failure on the part of the vendee to “demonstrate” that he was having sufficient
money with him to pay the balance sale consideration by the date of his evidence is not of much of
consequence.

3.8 It is further submitted that in the case of Ramrati Kuer Vs. Dwarika Prasad Singh; (1967) 1 SCR
153 (para 9), it was observed and held by this Court that in the absence of a specific prayer asking for
the party to produce accounts and their subsequent failure to do so, no adverse inference could be
drawn.

3.9 Making the above submissions and relying upon the afore-

cited decisions, it is submitted that the High Court has materially erred in reversing the findings of
the Trial Court on readiness and willingness on the part of appellant.

Therefore, it is prayed that the present appeals be allowed and the impugned judgments bet set
aside.

4. Present appeals are vehemently opposed by Shri Shailesh Madiyal, learned counsel appearing on
behalf of the seller - respondents – original defendants.

4.1 Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents – seller submitted that cogent reasons
have been assigned by the High Court while reversing the judgment and decree passed by the
learned Trial Court and reversing the findings as to the readiness and willingness on the part of the
appellant.

4.2 It is further submitted that the appellant – original plaintiff has not demonstrated and/or led
any evidence that he had sufficient means/funds/cash to pay the balance sale consideration. It is
submitted that in absence of such evidence the High Court has rightly held that the buyer – original
plaintiff has failed to establish and prove readiness and willingness on his part to perform the
agreement dated 13.03.2007.

4.3 It is submitted that in the written statement itself it was the specific case on behalf of the
defendants that the plaintiff was not ready and willing to perform his part of the agreement.

4.4 Learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondents – original defendants, has relied upon the
decision of this Court in the case of J.P. Builders and Anr. Vs. A. Ramadas and Anr.; (2011) 1 SCC
429 as well as the recent decision of this Court in the case of U.N. Krishnamurthy Vs. A.M.
Krishnamurthy; 2022 SCC OnLine SC 840 in support of his prayer to dismiss the present appeals.

5. We have heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respective parties at length.

6. At the outset, it is required to be noted that the learned Trial Court, on appreciation of evidence
on record, specifically recorded findings on readiness and willingness on the part of the plaintiff to

4

Basavaraj vs Padmavathi on 5 January, 2023

perform his part of the agreement. The findings recorded on readiness and willingness on the part of
the plaintiff were on appreciation of the entire evidence on record. In the legal notice which was
issued on 20.11.2007, the plaintiff asked the defendant to receive the balance amount and execute
the sale deed. In reply to the legal notice, the defendant denied the execution of agreement to sell
itself. That thereafter, the plaintiff filed the suit for specific performance in which it was specifically
averred that he was ready and willing to perform the agreement dated 13.03.2007. In his deposition,
the plaintiff specifically stated that he was ready and willing to perform his obligations under the
agreement. He further stated that he approached the defendant in the month of June, 2007 and
again in July, 2007 with the balance sale consideration. There is no cross-examination in this
regard. The plaintiff also examined two witnesses, PW-2 and PW-3, who were attestors to
agreement to sell dated 13.03.2007, who specifically stated that in July, 2007, the plaintiff
approached the defendants and asked them to accept the balance sale consideration in cash, to that
also there is no cross-examination. The receipt of Rs. 3 lakhs by way of earnest money, has been
held to be proved by both the courts below. Within a period of one month from passing of the
decree, the plaintiff deposited the balance sale consideration i.e., Rs. 9,74,000/- before the learned
Trial Court. Considering the aforesaid facts and circumstances of the case, it is observed that the
High Court has materially erred in reversing the decree by reversing the findings of the Trial Court
on readiness and willingness of the appellant.

6.1 From the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court, it appears that the reasoning
given by the High Court is that the plaintiff has not proved that he had the cash and/or amount
and/or sufficient funds/means to pay the balance sale consideration, as no passbook and/or bank
accounts was produced. In the case of Ramrati Kuer (supra) which has been specifically considered
by this Court in the case of Indira Kaur (supra), it was observed and held as under: -

“Fourthly, it is urged that the respondents did not produce any accounts even though
their case was that accounts were maintained and that Basekhi Singh used to give
maintenance allowance to the widows who were messing separately. It is urged that
adverse inference should be drawn from the fact accounts were not produced by the
respondents and that if they had been produced that would have shown payment not
of maintenance allowance but of half share of the income to the widows by virtue of
their right to the property. Itis true that Dwarika Prasad Singh said that his father
used to keep accounts. But no attempt was made on behalf of the appellant to ask the
court to order Dwarika Prasad Singh to produce the accounts. An adverse inference
could only have been drawn against the plaintiffs-respondents if the appellant had
asked the court to order them to produce accounts and they had failed to produce
them after admitting that Basekhi Singh used to keep accounts. But no such prayer
was made to the court, and in the circumstances no adverse inference could be drawn
from the non-production of accounts. But it is urged that even so the accounts would
have been the best evidence to show that maintenance was being given to the widows
and the best evidence was withheld by the plaintiffs and only oral evidence was
produced to the effect that the widows were being given maintenance by Basekhi
Singh. Even if it be that accounts would be the best evidence of payment of
maintenance and they had been withheld, all that one can say is that the oral

5

Basavaraj vs Padmavathi on 5 January, 2023

evidence that maintenance was being given to widows may not be acceptable; but no
adverse inference can be drawn (in the absence of any prayer by the appellant that
accounts be produced) that if they had been produced they would have shown that
income was divided half and half in accordance with the title claimed by the
appellant.” 6.2 In the case of Indira Kaur (supra) this Court after considering the
observations made by this Court in the case of Ramrati Kuer (supra) has set aside the
findings recorded by three courts below whereby an adverse inference had been
drawn against the plaintiff therein for not producing the passbook and thereby
holding that the plaintiff was not ready and willing to perform his part of the
agreement. It is observed and held that unless the plaintiff was called upon to
produce the passbook either by the defendant or, the Court orders him to do so, no
adverse inference can be drawn.

6.3 Applying the law laid down by this Court in the aforesaid two cases to the facts of
the case on hand, no adverse inference could have been drawn by the High Court.
The High Court seriously erred in reversing the findings recorded by the learned Trial
Court on the readiness and willingness of the appellant.

7. Considering the circumstances narrated hereinabove, we are of the opinion that
the High Court has materially erred in quashing and setting aside the judgment and
decree passed by the learned Trial Court by reversing the findings on the readiness
and willingness of the appellant. Under the circumstances, the impugned
judgment(s) and order(s) passed by the High Court is/are held to be unsustainable
and the same deserve to be quashed and set aside.

However, at the same time, to do the complete justice, we are of the opinion that if the plaintiff is
directed to pay a further sum of Rs. 10 lakhs towards sale consideration, it will meet the ends of
justice.

8. In view of the above discussion and for the reasons stated above, the present appeals succeed.
Impugned judgment(s) and order(s) passed by the High Court are hereby quashed and set aside.
The judgment and decree passed by the learned Trial Court for specific performance of the
agreement to sell dated 13.03.2007 is hereby restored. However, to do complete justice, we direct
the plaintiff to pay to defendant No. 1 a further sum of Rs. 10 lakhs to be deposited within a period
of eight weeks from today and on such payment, defendant No. 1 is directed to execute the sale deed
in favour of the original plaintiff – appellant within a period of two weeks therefrom. Defendant No.
1 shall also be permitted to withdraw the amount i.e., Rs. 9,74,000/- deposited by the plaintiff on
31.10.2011, pursuant to the judgment and decree passed by the learned Trial Court, with the interest
accrued thereon, which shall be paid to defendant No. 1 by an account payee cheque. Present
appeals are accordingly allowed with the above further directions. No order as to costs.

…………………………………J. (M. R. SHAH) …………………………………J. (B.V. NAGARATHNA) NEW
DELHI, JANUARY 05, 2023.

6