Bhim Rao Baswanth Rao Patil vs K.Madan Mohan Rao on 24 July, 2023

Bhim Rao Baswanth Rao Patil vs K.Madan Mohan Rao on 24
July, 2023

Author: S. Ravindra Bhat

Bench: Aravind Kumar, S. Ravindra Bhat

1

2023 INSC 641                                                                         REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S).        OF 2023
[ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO. 6614 OF 2023]

BHIM RAO BASWANTH RAO PATIL                                               …APPELLANT(S)

VERSUS

K. MADAN MOHAN RAO & ORS.                                               …RESPONDENT(S)

JUDGMENT

S. RAVINDRA BHAT, J.

1. Leave granted. The present appeal by special leave questions a judgment and order of the
Telangana High Court1 dismissing an application which sought rejection of the respondent’s
election petition. The appellant had contended that the election petition (hereafter “the petition”)
did not disclose any cause of action and was barred in law and was liable to be rejected.

2. The appellant was a successful candidate in the election conducted for the Zaheerabad
Parliamentary Constituency on 11.04.2019. He was declared elected on 23.05.2019, defeating the
respondent (hereafter referred to as “the election petitioner”) by a margin of 6229 votes. The
respondent preferred an election petition NEETA SAPRA Date: 2023.07.24 16:44:22 IST Reason:

Election Petition No.34/2019, rejecting IA 01/2020 under Sections 81 and 84 read
with Sections 100(1)(d)(i)(ii)(iii) & (iv) of the Representation of People Act, 1951
(hereafter “the Act”). The election petition alleged, amongst others, that the appellant
had furnished false information in Form 26 (election affidavit); that the Returning

1

Bhim Rao Baswanth Rao Patil vs K.Madan Mohan Rao on 24 July, 2023

Officer had not followed the Election Commission’s guidelines dated 10.10.2018; that
the appellant filed false information in C-4 report furnished to the District Election
Officer and that there was no previous publication of papers, regarding pending cases
against the appellant and those in which he was convicted. Other allegations included
failure to follow additional requirements such as the font size mentioned in the form
for publication; listing of cases in separate rows; failure to have the pending cases
disclosed in a widely circulated newspaper/news channels, and disclosure of
information with respect to cases in which the appellant was convicted and lastly that
his name was shown in a misleading manner in the newspaper publication.

3. After the election petition was filed, the appellant applied, under Order VII Rule 11
of the Code of Civil Procedure (hereafter “CPC”) for its rejection. It was contended
inter alia that the mandatory requirements under Sections 81 and 81 (3) of the Act
were not followed; it was alleged that – there was no pleading as to how the
nomination paper was improperly accepted; that there was no need to disclose the
so-called criminal cases as they did not fall within Section 8 of the Act and Section
33A of the Act as the appellant had not been sentenced to imprisonment of more than
one year. As a result, non-disclosure of conviction under Payment of Wages Act, 1936
and Minimum Wages Act, 1948 was not required. It was further alleged that the
offences pleaded against the appellant were not criminal and other allegations with
respect to publication and font size etc. were not substantial and on the other hand,
there was substantial compliance with the law and the guidelines.

The election petitioner/respondent resisted the application after which the appellant filed a
rejoinder.

4. During the course of the proceedings, on 15.11.2021, the appellant filed a memo2 which stated
that he had obtained certified copies of the order sheet dated 28.06.2013; regarding seizure of
property in CF 97/2013, from the file of the Chief Judicial Magistrate Garhwa and related criminal
case. Translations of those into English were made available. These documents were filed in the
election proceedings to contest the election petitioner’s assertion. The appellant also applied under
Section 340 of the Criminal Procedure Code (hereafter “CrPC”) read with Section 195 of the CrPC,
broadly alleging that the documents produced as true copies along with the election petition and the
averments made were false, calling for appropriate criminal proceedings to be drawn up against the
respondent.

5. The High Court had earlier heard the application 3 and reserved orders on 23.12.2021. The
judgment was delivered on 15.06.2022, whereby the respondent’s election petition was rejected, and
the appellant’s application was allowed. This court, however, set aside that order on 12.09.20224.
This court observed in its order Registered as USR 69931/2021.

I.A. No. 1/2020 in E.P. No. 34/2019 SLP(C) 17247/2022 that even on the date it disposed of the
special leave petition, i.e., 26.09.2022, the reasons for allowing the application for rejection had not
been given by the learned Judge.

2

Bhim Rao Baswanth Rao Patil vs K.Madan Mohan Rao on 24 July, 2023

6. In the present case, the High Court noticed the contentions of the parties as well as the pleadings
and was of the opinion that having regard to the terms of Order VII Rule 11 CPC, only the averments
in the petition and the accompanying documents could be considered and not any other materials
brought on record during the course of the proceedings. The court was of the opinion that taking in
the overall conspectus of the facts available on the record did not lead to a compelling reason for
rejecting the election petition. Accordingly, the appellant’s application was dismissed, and the
contentions were kept open to be agitated during the trial.

7. The appellant’s main contention was that though the appellant had urged several grounds with
respect to its explanation for the alleged non-compliance of what were termed by the election
petitioner as mandatory requirements, it was also alleged that Section 81(3) had not been complied
with. However, during the hearing, the arguments on behalf of the appellant, by Mr. C.S. Sundaram,
Senior Advocate, were confined to submissions to the aspect regarding non-disclosure of criminal
cases. The first related to a criminal case pending before the CJM, Garhwa bearing CR 96P; case
No.CF 97/13 dated 20.03.2013 in Form 26, i.e., the election affidavit. The second case was with
respect to non-disclosure in Form 26 of conviction. It was alleged that the cases referred to in the
election petition, i.e., Labour Enforcement Officer v. M/s. Patil Construction represented by (1) Mr.
B.B. Patil (partner) and (2) Mr. M.B. Patil (partner) (Case No. 20/12), this case pertained to
non-payment of minimum wages to workers under the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 and Payment of
Wages (Mines) Rules, 1956. The appellant was convicted on 30.07.2013; the second case pertained
to State through Labour Enforcement Officer v. M/s. Patil Construction represented by B.B. Patil
and M.B. Patil before Sub Divisional Judicial Magistrate registered under Section 22A of the
Minimum Wages Act, 1948 for non- maintenance of records of workers/employers. The appellant
was convicted on 05.09.2017.

8. It was argued by Mr. Sundaram that the reference to the pending case before the CJM Garhwa
District, in the documents filed along with the election petition, was an abuse of process and a clear
case of interpolation. Learned counsel pointed out that this aspect has been acknowledged by the
main judgment in para 27, whereby after considering the certified copy relating to that case, the
court observed that there appeared to be some interpolation. Learned counsel reiterated the
submissions and referred to certified copies which were placed on record. He also referred to the
original of the complaint which was summoned by this court during the present proceedings. It was
further stated that the conclusion of the High Court with respect to the non-disclosure of two cases
in respect of the Payment of Wages Act and Minimum Wages requiring them to be gone into during
the trial is in error. Learned counsel contended that even upon conviction, the minimum threshold
indicated in Section 33A of the Act is not satisfied because, in either way, the maximum sanction is a
penalty.

9. Dr. A.M. Singhvi, learned senior counsel for the election petitioner, urged that the impugned
order correctly appreciated the law relating to Order VII Rule 11 and dismissed the appellant’s
application. Counsel reiterated that the suppression of the truth with respect to criminal cases, i.e.,
non-disclosure of cases where the petitioner was convicted and of pending cases, in Form- 26
affidavit were in relation to the following:

3

Bhim Rao Baswanth Rao Patil vs K.Madan Mohan Rao on 24 July, 2023

a) Pending cases: The appellant did not disclose the criminal case pending before the
Chief Judicial Magistrate Garhwa relating to Forest Department cases.

b) Regarding cases in which the appellant was convicted (in section 6 of Form-26),
there was a deliberate attempt to suppress the truth; the appellant had written "not
applicable" when there were two cases in which he was convicted: firstly case
No.20/2012 Labour Case relating to Payment of Wages and Minimum Wages Act,
and secondly, Case No 1/ 2013, another case relating to Payment of Wages and
Minimum Wages Act.

10. It was submitted that going into the merits of whether those cases actually existed, and related to
the provisions of the Act, would amount to a mini-trial which is plainly impermissible while
considering an application seeking rejection of the petition. It was submitted that the law on the
subject is well settled. Counsel stated that the judgments of this court, such as Saleem Bhai v. State
of Maharashtra5 and Mayar (H.K.) Limited v. Owners and Parties, Vessel M.V. Fortune Express6
had, in no uncertain terms, ruled that while considering an application under Order VII Rule 11,
CPC, only the averments in the pleadings (i.e., in the suit or petition) and the accompanying
documents can be looked into. Therefore, reference to and reliance on any document which was not
part of the petition, but produced as a part of the respondent/defendant’s plea, cannot be
considered.

11. It was next urged that while it is undoubtedly important to respect popular will and the courts
ought to be slow in upsetting them, equally it important to maintain the purity of the election
process. Courts are, hence, duty bound to examine the allegations whenever the same are raised
within the framework of the statute without being unduly hyper-technical in their approach and
oblivious of the ground realities. Analysis and Conclusions

12. Section 33A of the Act, which requires disclosure of past criminal antecedents of every candidate,
reads as follows:

“33A. Right to information:

(1) A candidate shall, apart from any information which he is required to furnish,
under this Act or the rules made thereunder, in his nomination paper delivered under
sub-section (1) of section 33, also furnish the information as to whether—

(i) he is accused of any offence punishable with imprisonment for two years or more
in a pending case in which a charge has been framed by the court of competent
jurisdiction;

(ii) he has been convicted of an offence [other than any offence referred to in
sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), or covered in sub-section (3), of section 8] and
sentenced to imprisonment for one year or more.

4

Bhim Rao Baswanth Rao Patil vs K.Madan Mohan Rao on 24 July, 2023

2002 [5] Suppl. SCR 491 2006 [1] SCR 860 (2) The candidate or his proposer, as the case may be,
shall, at the time of delivering to the returning officer the nomination paper under sub-section (1) of
section 33, also deliver to him an affidavit sworn by the candidate in a prescribed form verifying the
information specified in sub-section (1). (3) The returning officer shall, as soon as may be after the
furnishing of information to him under sub-section (1), display the aforesaid information by affixing
a copy of the affidavit, delivered under sub-section (2), at a con- spicuous place at his office for the
information of the electors relating to a constituency for which the nomination paper is delivered.”
Section 8 provides for disqualification of elected candidates, upon their conviction of specified
offences. However, Section 33A, introduced through an amendment to the Act, in 2002, compels
those holding out their candidature to disclose information about their criminal antecedents. The
idea behind this provision is to ensure transparency and enable the voters to make an informed
choice while casting the ballot. The need for a detailed declaration by candidates was underlined by
this court in Public Interest Foundation & Ors v Union of India (UOI) & Ors.,7 which required the
Election Symbols (Reservation and Allotment) Order, 1968 to be suitably amended. The court
observed that:

“The best available people, as is expected by the democratic system, should not have
criminal antecedents and the voters have a right to know about their antecedents,
assets and other aspects. We are inclined to say so, for in a constitutional democracy,
criminalization of politics is an extremely disastrous and lamentable situation. The
citizens in a democracy cannot be compelled to stand as silent, deaf and mute
spectators to corruption by projecting themselves as helpless. The voters cannot be
allowed to resign to their fate. The information given by a candidate must express
everything that is warranted by the Election Commission as per law. Disclosure of
antecedents makes the election a fair one and the exercise of the right of voting by the
electorate also gets sanctified. It has to be remembered that such a right is
paramount for a democracy. A voter is entitled to have an informed choice. If his
right to get proper information is scuttled, in the ultimate eventuate, it may lead to
destruction of democracy because he will not be an informed voter having been kept
in the dark about the candidates who are Accused of heinous offences. In the present
scenario, the information given by the candidates is not widely known in the
constituency and the 2018 [10] SCR 141 multitude of voters really do not come to
know about the antecedents. Their right to have information suffers.

116. Keeping the aforesaid in view, we think it appropriate to issue the following
directions which are in accord with the decisions of this Court:

(i) Each contesting candidate shall fill up the form as provided by the Election
Commission and the form must contain all the particulars as required therein.

(ii) It shall state, in bold letters, with regard to the criminal cases pending against the
candidate.

5

Bhim Rao Baswanth Rao Patil vs K.Madan Mohan Rao on 24 July, 2023

(iii) If a candidate is contesting an election on the ticket of a particular party, he/she
is required to inform the party about the criminal cases pending against him/her.

(iv) The concerned political party shall be obligated to put up on its website the
aforesaid information pertaining to candidates having criminal antecedents.

(v) The candidate as well as the concerned political party shall issue a declaration in
the widely circulated newspapers in the locality about the antecedents of the
candidate and also give wide publicity in the electronic media. When we say wide
publicity, we mean that the same shall be done at least thrice after filing of the
nomination papers.”

13. Section 33-B inserted by the Representation of the People (Third Amendment) Act, 2002,
provided inter alia, that “…no candidate shall be liable to disclose or furnish any such information,
in respect of his election, which is not required to be disclosed or furnished under this Act or the
Rules made thereunder”. This court, in its decision reported as People’s Union for Civil Liberties v
Union of India8 held that provision to be invalid and unconstitutional. The court ruled that Section
33B imposed a “blanket ban on dissemination of information other than that spelt out in the
enactment irrespective of the need of the hour and the future exigencies and expedients and
secondly for the reason that the ban operates despite the fact that the disclosure of information now
provided for is deficient and (2003) 4 SCC 399 inadequate.” This decisively ruled that providing
information is vital for a vibrant and functioning democracy.

14. Pursuant to the decision and directions of this court, the Election Commission issued guidelines
and also framed forms that were part of guidelines requiring declarations inter alia with respect to
disclosure of pending criminal cases and those in which candidate(s) had been convicted. The
relevant extract of the guidelines first issued by the Election Commission on 10.10.2018 inter alia
reads as follows:

“2. In pursuance of the directions in the abovementioned judgment, the Commission,
after due consideration, has given the following directors to be complied with by
candidates at elections to the Houses of Parliament and Houses of State Legislatures,
who have criminal cases against them, either pending cases or cases of conviction in
the past, and to the political parties that set up such candidates.

(a) Candidates at elections to the House of the People, Council of States, Legislative
Assembly or Legislative Council who have criminal cases against them, shall publish
a declaration about their criminal cases, for wide publicity in newspapers with wide
circulation in the constituency area. This declaration is to be published in Format
C-1, attached hereto, at least on three different dates from the day following the last
date for withdrawal of candidatures and up to two days before the date of poll.

xxxxxx xxxxxx xxxxxx

6

Bhim Rao Baswanth Rao Patil vs K.Madan Mohan Rao on 24 July, 2023

3. The Political parties-recognized parties and registered un-recognized parties,
which set up candidates with criminal cases, either pending cases or cases of past
conviction, are required to publish declaration giving details in this regard, for wide
publicity, on their website as well as in TV channels and newspapers having wide
circulation in the State concerned. Declaration in this regard shall be published in
Format C-2, annexed hereto, and should be provided State wise with separate
statements for each State/Union Territory.

Publishing of the declaration in newspapers and TV channels is required to be done at least on three
different dates during the period mentioned in Para-2(a) above. As specified above, the declaration
in newspapers should appear in at least 12 font size, and should be placed suitable so that the
directions for wide publicity are complied with in letter and spirit. In the case of publishing of
declaration in TV channels, the same should be completed before the period of 48 hours ending with
the hour fixed for conclusion of poll. All such political parties shall submit as report to the Chief
Electoral Officer of the State/UT concerned confirming that they have fulfilled the requirements of
these directions and enclosing therewith the paper cuttings containing the declarations published by
the party in respect of the candidates in the State/UT concerned. This shall be done within 30 days
of completion of election. It may be noted that failure to abide by these directions would be treated
as failure/refusal to carry out a lawful direction of the Commission for the purposes of
paragraph-16A of the Election Symbols (Reservation &amp; Allotment) Order, 1968.

4. It may also be noted that the provisions for the additional affidavit in respect of dues against
Govt. accommodation, if any, that may have been allotted to the candidates, have now been
incorporated in Form-26 itself under Item (8) relating to liabilities to Public Financial Institutions
and Govt. Therefore, the candidates shall give the requisite declaration/particulars in this regard in
Item (8) of Form-26. Accordingly, the candidates are now not required to file the additional affidavit
prescribed under the Commissioner’s Order No.509/11/2004-JS-1, dated 3rd February, 2016, as the
provisions are not part of Form-26 itself.

5. These directions may be circulated to all formations of your party and also brought to the notice
of candidates of the Party in future elections for guidance and for strict compliance of these
directions.”

15. The other requirements include submission of copies of newspapers in which declarations about
criminal cases were furnished to the District Election Officer, publication of declaration on TV
Channels at least on three different dates but which was to be completed before 48 hours, ending
with the year fixed for completion of poll. In the case of candidates with criminal cases set up by
political parties, whether recognized parties or registered unrecognized parties, such candidates are
required to declare before the Returning Officer concerned that they have informed their political
party about the criminal cases against them. Provision for such declaration has been made in
Form-26 in the newly inserted item (6A) and other stipulations were framed. The relevant form with
respect to publication in newspapers was Form C-1; the report by the candidate “about publication
of declaration regarding criminal cases” was in Form C-4 and Form 26 in terms of Rule 4A dealt
with the election affidavit disclosing the description and details of income returns of the candidate.

7

Bhim Rao Baswanth Rao Patil vs K.Madan Mohan Rao on 24 July, 2023

Clause 5 of Form 26 contains the column for disclosure of pending criminal cases and those in
which the candidate was convicted for any offence. In the present instance, the relevant form filed
by the appellant along with the declaration (Clause 6A) of Form 26 reads as follows:

“FORM 26 (See Rule 4A) Affidavit to be filed by the candidate along with nomination
paper before the Returning Officer for Election to the House of the People (Lok
Sabha) (Name of the House) from 05-Aheerbad Parliamentary Constituency (name
of the Constituency) PART-A I, BHEEMRAO BASWANTHRAO PATIL son of late
BASWANTHRAO PATIL, aged 63 years, resident of H.No.1-9-, Shirpur village,
Madnoor Mandal, Kamareddy District, Telangana-503309 a candidate at the above
election, do hereby solemnly affirm and state on oath.

xxxxxx                               xxxxxx                            xxxxxx

(5)   Pending Criminal cases
i)    I declare that there is no pending criminal case against me.

(Tick this alternative if there is no criminal case pending against the Candidate and
write NOT APPLICABLE against alternative. (ii) below) OR

ii) The following criminal cases are pending against me:

(if there are pending criminal cases against the candidate, then tick this alternative
and score off alternative (i) above, and give details of all pending cases in the Table

(a) FIR No. with name and List Enclosed List Enclosed List Enclosed address of
Police station Annexure-I Annexure-I concerned Annexure-I

(b) Case No. with Name of the List Enclosed List Enclosed List Enclosed Court
Annexure-I Annexure-I Annexure-I

(c) Section(s) of concerned List Enclosed List Enclosed List Enclosed Acts/Codes
involved (give Annexure-I Annexure-I Annexure-I no of the Section, e.g. Section of
IPC, etc.)

(d) Brief description of offence List Enclosed List Enclosed List Enclosed Annexure-I
Annexure-I Annexure-I

(e) Whether charges have been List Enclosed List Enclosed List Enclosed framed
(mention Yes or No) Annexure-I Annexure-I Annexure-I

(f) If answer against (e) above List Enclosed List Enclosed List Enclosed is Yes, then
give the date on Annexure-I Annexure-I Annexure-I which charges were framed

8

Bhim Rao Baswanth Rao Patil vs K.Madan Mohan Rao on 24 July, 2023

(g) Whether any List Enclosed List Enclosed List Enclosed Appeal/application for
Annexure-I Annexure-I Annexure-I revision has been filed against the proceedings
(Yes or No) (6) Cases of conviction

(i) I declare that I have not been convicted for any criminal offence.

(Tick this alternative, if the candidate has not been convicted and write NOT OR

(ii) I have been convicted for the offences mentioned below: NOT APPLICABLE (if the candidate has
been convicted, then tick this alternative and score off alternative (i) above, and give details in the
Table below):

Table

(a) Case No. Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable

(b) Name of the Court Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable

(c) Sections of Acts/Codes in- Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable volved
(give no. of the Section e.g. Section of IPC, etc.)

(d) Brief description of of- Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable fence for
which convicted

(e) Dates of orders of convic- Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable tion

(f) Punishment imposed Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable

(g) Whether any appeal has Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable been filed
against the con-

viction (Mention Yes or No)

(h) If answer to (g) above is Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable Yes give
details and pre-

sent status of appeal (6A) I have given full and up to date information to my political party about all
pending criminal cases against me and about all cases of convic- tion as given in paragraphs (5) and
(6): Yes.”

16. The election petitioner/respondent contends that the disclosure in this case was false because
the appellant was earlier convicted in cases concerning violation of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948
and the Payment of Wages Act, 1936. The appellant counters this and, in his application, contended
that no such disclosure was essential by reason of the fact that under Section 33A, a candidate who

9

Bhim Rao Baswanth Rao Patil vs K.Madan Mohan Rao on 24 July, 2023

is accused of any offence punishable with imprisonment for two years or more in a pending case in
which a charge has been framed by the court of competent jurisdiction has to furnish such
information [Section 33A(1)(i)]. It is also contended that in cases of conviction, the requirement of
disclosure is by reason of Section 33A(1)(ii) only where she or he is convicted of an offence and
sentenced to imprisonment for one year or more, other than offences expressly mentioned in
Section 8(1) or (2) or (3). It is submitted that since the provisions of the Act, in fact, mandate
disclosure only in respect of those classes of offences expressly stated, the non-disclosure of
information with respect to criminal cases pending where the accused candidate can face
punishment for less than two years or has not been convicted of an offence and sentenced to
imprisonment for one year or more is not required.

17. The election petitioner had alleged in the election petition that with respect to withholding of
vital information inasmuch as – as mentioned earlier – particulars of offences under the Minimum
Wages Act and Payment of Wages Act where the candidate had been convicted as well as where he
was facing criminal trial under the Indian Forest Act, were not disclosed. In support of this
allegation, the election petitioner had annexed copies of a complaint and certain proceedings before
the Magistrate at Garhwa. Likewise, the proceedings before the concerned Court in the cases
relating to past convictions under the Payment of Wages Act and the Minimum Wages Act were
mentioned. The appellant’s main contention is that the election petitioner’s assertions are false
inasmuch as they rely upon a document, i.e., copies of certain order sheets in the pending criminal
case relating to offences under the Forest Act before the Court in Garhwa and that so far as the past
convictions under the Minimum Wages Act and the Payment of Wages Act are concerned, there was
no requirement at all.

18. To clear the air, this court had summoned the file pertaining to the pending criminal case before
the Garhwa Court, the records of which show that the following were arrayed as accused:

1. Sri M.B. Patil, Director, M/s. Patil Construction, S/o Unknown, Sarget, Pune,
Maharashtra

2. Sri Ramayan Singh, S/o Late Ram Chhabila Singh, Shastri Nagar, P.S.-Garhwa,
District-Garhwa. [A.G.M., Patil Construction, Kutchery Road, P.S.-Garhwa, District-
Garhwa.]

3. Santosh Sinha, S/o Radha Prasad Sinha, Bijli Colony, P.S.-Garhwa, District-

Garhwa. [Worker, Patil Constrcution].

4. Dharmpal, S/o Unknown, Patil Construction, Sarget, Pune, Maharashtra.

5. Sri Ranjan Das, S/o Chakradhar Das, 1917 Pokhanput, B.B.S.R. The complaint/intimation by the
Forest Department with respect to seizure and the commission of the offences named - M/s. M.B.
Patil B.B. Patil Construction Company and four others (Ramayan Singh, Santosh Sinha, Dharampal
and Ranjan Das) is dated 19.03.2013. The order sheet dated 02.04.2013 named four persons [other

10

Bhim Rao Baswanth Rao Patil vs K.Madan Mohan Rao on 24 July, 2023

than the present appellant] and stated that there was no need to issue warrants against the accused.
According to the allegations, the constructions were carried out by the company inside 1/3rd portion
of the forest area and stones were broken and converted into stone chips. The Forest Department
Report was to the effect that 5000 cub. Ft of small and big boulders were seized on 20.03.2013. The
order sheet for 28.06.2013 further discloses that Mr. Santosh Sinha, Ramayan Singh, Dharampal
and only M.B. Patil were charged with committing the offence. This clearly shows the appellant was
not charged for the offences alleged in the complaint under the Indian Forest Act.

19. So far as the past convictions are concerned, the allegations are not per se denied by the
appellant, but rather the application for rejection of the petition contended that no disclosure of this
kind was needed since they did not answer the description of the class of offences enumerated in
Section 33A of the Act.

20. As far as criminal charges and offences go, the punishment for violating provisions of the
Minimum Wages Act, 1948, is provided in Section 22, which prescribes a maximum prison term of 6
months or fine upto (cid:134) 500/-. Section 22A prescribes punishment for other offences imposing fine
upto (cid:134) 500/-. As regards the Payment of Wages Act, 1936, the penalty provision is Section 20, which
prescribes a maximum fine of (cid:134) 7500/-. A subsequent conviction under the same provision attracts
a stiffer punishment: imprisonment of a month which may extend to six months.

21. The impugned order, as noticed earlier, is premised on the reasoning that any material brought
on the record by the successful candidate who is a respondent in the election proceedings, ipso facto
cannot be considered within the framework of Order VII Rule 11 CPC to reject the plea altogether.
That understanding in this Court’s opinion is correct. At the same time, there could be
circumstances when there is material on the record, the consideration of which may not be
considered by Order VII Rule 11 CPC but may fall within the ambit of Order XII Rule 6 CPC (decree
on admission), which reads as follows:

“Judgement on admissions-(1) Where admissions of fact have been made either in
the pleading or otherwise, whether orally or in writing, the Court may at any stage of
the suit, either on the application of any party or of its own motion and without
waiting for the determination of any other question between the parties, make such
order or give such judgment as it may think fit, having regard to such admissions.

(2) Whenever a judgment is pronounced under sub-rule (1), a decree shall be drawn
up in accordance with the judgment and the decree shall bear the date on which the
judgment was pronounced.”

22. It has been held by this Court that the expression “otherwise” mentioned in sub-rule 1 of rule 6
of the Order XII, CPC is not confined to pleadings but also includes documents filed along with the
complaint or main pleading or other materials subsequently brought on the record which are
admitted by the other party. In other words, the matter of record that is not denied and contains
facts that can lead the court to draw a decree is sufficient for the court to do so and, by its judgment,
direct decree of the suit (in this case, petition) wholly or partly.

11

Bhim Rao Baswanth Rao Patil vs K.Madan Mohan Rao on 24 July, 2023

23. The appellant’s argument with respect to using a document (i.e., a photocopy of the court related
documents, and orders) in the case relating to Forest Act offences, not being true copies, but
containing interpolations, as the title involving the appellant’s name (i.e., “B.B. Patil) is merited. The
appellant has sought to initiate proceedings before the High Court under Section 340 read with
Section 195 of the Cr. PC. This court is loath to express any opinion about whether annexing such
photocopy amounts to an offence. The High Court indicated (in para 27 of the impugned judgment)
that the “interpolation” alleged by the appellant appears to be borne out. The original trial court
record, which this court had the benefit of considering, bears out the appellant’s submission. To that
extent, therefore, the condition in Order XII Rule 6 CPC (i.e., admission on the basis of pleadings
“or otherwise”) is undeniably made out; which is that the appellant, BB Patil, was not indicted
individually; the company of which he was a part, as director, was charged. In relation to and for the
company, as its representative, Shri M.B. Patil was charged. The trial court record establishes these
as undeniable facts. Yet, the consequence of such admission has to be considered keeping in mind
that several other allegations need a trial.

24. It is a salutary position in law that there cannot be a partial rejection of the plaint (or petition, as
in this case) in exercise of power under Order VII Rule 11, CPC. This court had stated this principle,
in Sejal Glass Ltd. vs. Navilan Merchants Pvt. Ltd9 in the following manner:

“This cannot elevate itself into a Rule of law, that once a part of a plaint cannot
proceed, the other part also cannot proceed, and the plaint as a whole must be
rejected Under Order VII Rule 11. In all such cases, if the plaint survives against
certain Defendants and/or properties, Order VII Rule 11 will have no application at
all, and the suit as a whole must then proceed to trial.” This principle was stated
clearly, in D. Ramachandran v. R.V. Jankiraman10 which, in relation to an election
petition, explained the position as follows:

“The election petition as such does disclose a cause of action which if unrebutted
could void the election and the provisions of Order 7 Rule 11 (a) CPC cannot therefore
be invoked in this case. There is no merit in the con- tention that some of the
allegations are bereft of material facts and as such do not disclose a cause of action. It
is elementary that under Order 7 Rule 11(a) CPC, the Court cannot dissect the
pleading into several parts and con- sider whether each one of them discloses a cause
of action. Under the Rule, there cannot be a partial rejection of the plaint or petition.”

25. There is some authority for the proposition, that the court’s power under Order XII Rule 6, CPC,
is not only discretionary but requires exercise of caution and that unless an admission is
unambiguous, enabling the court to draw a decree, the power would not be exercised. Thus, in
Himani Alloys Ltd. v. Tata Steel Ltd.,11 this court held that:

“It is true that a judgment can be given on an "admission" contained in the minutes
of a meeting. But the admission should be categorical. It should be a conscious and
deliberate act of the party making it, showing an intention to be bound by it. Order 12
Rule 6 being an enabling provision, it is neither mandatory nor peremptory but

12

Bhim Rao Baswanth Rao Patil vs K.Madan Mohan Rao on 24 July, 2023

discretionary. The court, on examination of the facts and circumstances, has to
exercise its judicial discretion, keeping in 2017 [7] SCR 557 1999 [1] SCR 983 2011[7]
SCR 60 mind that a judgment on admission is a judgment without trial which
permanently denies any remedy to the Defendant, by way of an appeal on merits.
Therefore unless the admission is clear, unambiguous and unconditional, the
discretion of the Court should not be exercised to deny the valuable right of a
Defendant to contest the claim. In short the discretion should be used only when
there is a clear 'admission' which can be acted upon. (See also Uttam Singh Duggal
and Co. Ltd. v. United Bank of India 2000 [Supp 2] SCR 187; Karam Kapahi v. Lal
Chand Public Charitable Trust 2010 (4) SCR 422 and Jeevan Diesels and Electricals
Ltd. v. Jasbir Singh Chadha 2010) 6 SCC 526”

26. A plain look at the election petition reveals that apart from allegations pertaining to
non-disclosure of criminal cases pending against the appellant, or cases where he was convicted,
other averments and allegations have been made regarding non-compliance with stipulations
regarding information dissemination and the manner of dissemination through publication in
newspapers, the font size, the concerned newspapers’ reach amongst the populace, etc. The alleged
non- compliance with statutory and Election Commission mandated regulations, and their legal
effect, cannot be examined in what are essentially summary proceedings under Order VII Rule 11,
CPC, or even under Order XII Rule 6, CPC. Even if the allegations regarding non-disclosure of cases
where the appellant has been arrayed as an accused, are ultimately true, the effect of such
allegations (in the context of provisions of law and the non-disclosure of all other particulars
mandated by the Election Symbols orders) has to be considered after a full trial. The admission of
certain facts (and not all) by the election petitioner cannot be sufficient for the court to reject the
petition, wholly. Even in respect of the undeniable nature of the judicial record, the effect of its
content, is wholly inadequate to draw a decree in part. This court has also ruled that the truth or
otherwise of anything is ordinarily a matter of evidence, in a full-blown trial, in Virender Nath
Gautam v Satpal Singh & Ors.12:

“52. The High Court, in our considered opinion, stepped into prohibited area of
considering correctness of allegations and evidence in support of averments by
entering into the merits of the case which would be permissible only at the stage of
trial of the election petition and not at the stage of consideration whether the election
petition was maintainable and dismissed the petition. The said action, therefore,
cannot be upheld and the order deserves to be set aside.”

27. Lastly, the right to vote, based on an informed choice, is a crucial component of the essence of
democracy. This right is precious and was the result of a long and arduous fight for freedom, for
Swaraj, where the citizen has an inalienable right to exercise her or his right to franchise. This finds
articulation in Article 326 of the Constitution which enacts that “every person who is a citizen of
India and who is not less than twenty one years of age on such date as may be fixed and is not
otherwise disqualified under this Constitution or any law made by the appropriate Legislature on
the ground of non-residence, unsoundness of mind, crime or corrupt or illegal practice, shall be
entitled to be registered as a voter at any such election”. Article 325 embeds a non-discriminatory

13

principle:

Bhim Rao Baswanth Rao Patil vs K.Madan Mohan Rao on 24 July, 2023

“325. No person to be ineligible for inclusion in, or to claim to be included in a
special, electoral roll on grounds of religion, race, caste or sex. There shall be one
general electoral roll for every territorial constituency for election to either House of
Parliament or to the House or either House of the Legislature of a State and no
person shall be ineligible for inclusion in any such roll or claim to be included in any
special electoral roll for any such constituency on grounds only of religion, race,
caste, sex or any of them.” 2006 Supp SCR 413 Democracy has been held to be a part
of one of the essential features of the Constitution. Yet, somewhat paradoxically, the
right to vote has not been recognized as a Fundamental Right yet; it was termed as a
“mere” statutory right. However, in Jyoti Basu v. Debi Ghosal,13 this court again
pointed out that:

"a right to elect, fundamental though it is to democracy, is, anomalously enough,
neither a fundamental right nor a common law right. It is pure and simple a statutory
right. With great reverence to the eminent Judges, I would like to clarify that the
right to vote, if not a fundamental right, is certainly a constitutional right. The right
originates from the Constitution and in accordance with the constitutional mandate
contained in Article 326, the right has been shaped by the statute, namely, R.P. act.
That, in my understanding, is the correct legal position as regards the nature of the
right to vote in elections to the House of the People and Legislative Assemblies. It is
not very accurate to describe it as a statutory right, pure and simple. Even with this
clarification, the argument of the learned Solicitor General that the right to vote not
being a fundamental right, the information which at best facilitates meaningful
exercise of that right cannot be read as an integral part of any fundamental right,
remains to be squarely met....” Similarly, in para 123 of the judgment, O. Chinnappa
Reddi, J., held that:

“(2) The right to vote at the elections to the House of the People or Legislative
Assembly is a constitutional right but not merely a statutory right; freedom of voting
as distinct from right to vote is a facet of the fundamental right enshrined in Article
19(1)(a). The casting of vote in favour of one or the other candidate marks the
accomplishment of freedom of expression of the voter.”

28. The elector or voter’s right to know about the full background of a candidate- evolved through
court decisions- is an added dimension to the rich tapestry of our constitutional jurisprudence.
Keeping this in mind, this court is of the opinion that if the appellant’s contentions were to be
accepted, there would be a denial of a full-fledged trial, based on the acknowledgement that material
facts were not suppressed. Whether the existence of a criminal case, where a charge has not 1982 [3]
SCR 318 been framed, in relation to an offence which does not possibly carry a prison sentence, or a
sentence for a short spell in prison, and whether conviction in a case, where penalty was imposed,
are material facts, are contested. This court would be pre-judging that issue because arguendo if the
effect of withholding some such information is seen as insignificant, by itself, that would not negate

14

Bhim Rao Baswanth Rao Patil vs K.Madan Mohan Rao on 24 July, 2023

the possibility of a conclusion based on the cumulative impact of withholding of facts and
non-compliance with statutory stipulations (which is to be established in a trial). For these reasons,
this court is of the opinion that the impugned judgment cannot be faulted.

29. In view of the foregoing discussion, there is no merit in the appeal; it is accordingly dismissed,
with costs.

.....................................................J. [S. RAVINDRA BHAT] .....................................................J.
[ARAVIND KUMAR] NEW DELHI JULY 24, 2023.

15