Bohatie Devi (Dead) vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 28 April, 2023

Bohatie Devi (Dead) vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 28 April,
2023

Author: M.R. Shah

Bench: C.T. Ravikumar, M.R. Shah

REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1294 OF 2023
(@ SLP (Crl) No. 4394/2021)

Bohatie Devi (Dead) Through LR    ...Appellant(s)

Versus

The State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors...Respondent(s)

With
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1295 OF 2023
(@ SLP (Crl) No. 7708/2021)

JUDGMENT

M.R. SHAH, J.

1. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment and order passed by the High
Court of Allahabad in Criminal Misc. Writ Petition No. 7093/2019, by which, the High Court has
dismissed the said writ petition preferred by the appellant herein – mother of the deceased –
Satyveer alias Kallu, in which, the appellant challenged order dated 13.02.2019 passed by the
Secretary (Home), State of UP, Lucknow, whereby he ordered for further investigation by CBCID of
Case Crime No. 1069/2014, the original writ petitioner has preferred the present appeal.

2. The facts leading to the present appeal in a nutshell are as under: -

2.1 That son of the appellant – Satyaveer @ Kallu was murdered by un-known
persons. An FIR was lodged by the informant Sanjeev son-in-

law of the appellant against Smt. Anju and two un-known persons. The investigation was carried out
by the Inspector of Police, Baraut, District Baghpat who submitted chargesheet on 01.03.2015
against two persons of which cognizance was taken by the learned Magistrate on 31.03.2015. That

1

Bohatie Devi (Dead) vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 28 April, 2023

thereafter, on the complaint/application by the appellant, the investigation was handed over to the
District Crime Branch. A supplementary chargesheet was filed on 02.12.2016 against herein (son of
respondent No. 9 herein) and Smt. Anju - respondent No. 11 herein. The learned Magistrate took
cognizance of the same on 21.12.2016. That thereafter, respondent No. 8, namely, Ashwani Kumar
filed the quashing petition before the High Court for quashing of the entire criminal proceedings of
Case No. 7626/2016 originating out of Case Crime No. 1069/2014 as well as for quashing of the
chargesheet dated 02.12.2016. The said application came to be dismissed by the High Court on
05.07.2017. Being aggrieved of order dated 05.07.2017, respondent No. 8 – Ashwani Kumar
approached this Court by way of Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 599/2017 which was dismissed by
this Court on 24.08.2018. This Court also vacated the interim protection granted to respondent No.
8 vide order dated 15.09.2017. The learned CJM, Baghpat issued non-bailable warrant against
respondent No. 8 vide order dated 08.09.2018. That thereafter and after non- bailable warrant was
issued against respondent No. 8 herein, mother of Ashwani Kumar – accused moved an application
dated 23.01.2019 to the Secretary (Home), State of Uttar Pradesh for transferring the investigation
to CBCID, inter-alia, on the ground that respondent No. 8 has been arraigned as accused on the
basis of statements of two witnesses who in fact were in the Jail and therefore, their statements
cannot be believed. That by order dated 13.02.2019, Secretary (Home) State of U.P., Lucknow,
ordered further investigation by CBCID. The order passed by the Secretary (Home) transferring
investigation to CBCID was impugned before the High Court by way of present petition. By the
impugned judgment and order the High Court has dismissed the writ petition by observing that
further investigation was ordered after intimation to the learned Magistrate and therefore, there is
no infirmity in the order passed by the Secretary (Home) directing further investigation. The
impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court is the subject matter of present appeal.

3. Ms. Vibha Datta Makhija, learned Senior Advocate has appeared on behalf of the appellant and
Shri S. Nagamuthu and Shri Rameshwar Singh Malik, learned Senior Advocates have appeared on
behalf of respondent Nos. 8 and 11. Shri Anand Sanjay M. Nuli, learned counsel has appeared on
behalf of the intervenor.

4. Ms. Makhija, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the appellant has vehemently
submitted that the order passed by the Secretary (Home) transferring the investigation to CBCID is
absolutely illegal and contrary to the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Cr.PC).

4.1 It is submitted that in the present case after thorough investigation by the investigating were
chargesheeted. It is submitted that once chargesheeted thereafter, at the instance of mother of one
of the accused, the Secretary (Home) could not have transferred the investigation.

4.2 It is vehemently submitted that such an order of transfer of investigation by the Secretary
(Home) and that too at the instance of mother of one of the accused, is un-known to law and is not
permissible at all.

4.3 It is further submitted by Ms. Makhija, learned Senior Advocate that in fact, the grounds on
which the investigation was sought to be transferred can be said to be the defences on behalf of the
accused which are required to be considered at the time of trial. It is submitted that as such by

2

Bohatie Devi (Dead) vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 28 April, 2023

passing the order of transfer of investigation to CBCID and the subsequent investigation by CBCID
virtually acquits the accused who are chargesheeted in the supplementary chargesheet and would
tantamount to nullify and 11, which as such is not permissible. 4.4 It is further submitted by Ms.
Makhija, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the appellant that in fact it is not a case of
further investigation but it is a case of reinvestigation and therefore, for reinvestigation the prior
approval of the Magistrate is must. It is submitted that in the present case, the Secretary (Home)
first took a decision and passed the order to transfer the investigation to CBCID and thereafter, the
IO only intimated the learned Magistrate about transfer of investigation, which cannot be said to be
following due procedure as required by law, more particularly, Section 173(8) of the Cr.PC.

4.5 It is further submitted that even on facts also, the High Court has materially erred in observing
that the order directing further investigation was passed with the concurrence of the concerned
Magistrate. It is submitted that even learned counsel for respondent No. 8 was wrong in making the
submission before the High Court that the order passed by the Secretary (Home) of further
investigation was passed after taking leave of the Magistrate competent to do so. It is submitted that
nothing is on record that any leave was sought and granted by the learned Magistrate. It is
submitted that what is there on record is only the intimation to the learned Magistrate and nothing
more than that.

4.6 It is further submitted that the High Court has not properly appreciated and considered the fact
that respondent Nos. 8 and 11 were chargesheeted pursuant to supplementary chargesheet dated
02.12.2016 of which the learned Magistrate took cognizance on 21.12.2016 and that thereafter,
respondent No. 8 prayed for quashing of the entire criminal proceedings including the chargesheet
and respondent No. 8 failed up to this Court and only thereafter, when the non- bailable warrant
was issued, on his behalf an application was moved for transfer of investigation. It is submitted that
once the chargesheet was filed and even the quashing petition came to be dismissed up to this Court,
thereafter, it was not open for the accused or on his behalf to move an application for further
investigation/reinvestigation. 4.7 Making the above submissions, it is prayed to allow the present
appeal and quash and set aside the order passed by the Secretary (Home) transferring the
investigation to CBCID.

5. While opposing the present appeal Shri Ardhendumauli Kumar Prasad, learned AAG appearing
on behalf of the State has vehemently submitted that having being satisfied that a case is made out
for further investigation and to do the complete justice to the parties including the accused, no error
has been committed by the Secretary (Home) in ordering further investigation by CBCID. It is
submitted that the order passed by the Secretary (Home) being the head of the department was on
administrative side and thereafter, the concerned IO intimated to the learned Magistrate about
transfer of investigation/further investigation which is the requirement under the law.

5.1 While opposing the present appeal, Shri S. Nagamuthu and Shri Rameshwar Singh Malik,
learned Senior Advocates appearing on behalf of respondent Nos. 8 and 11 have vehemently
submitted that fair investigation is the right of the accused as well as the victim. It is submitted that
Section 173(8) of Cr.PC permits/authorises the investigating officer (IO) to further investigate the
case for which the permission of learned Magistrate is not required. It is submitted that under

3

Bohatie Devi (Dead) vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 28 April, 2023

Section 173(8) of Cr.PC, it is the right of IO for further investigation. Reliance is placed on the
decision of this Court in the case of State of Andhra Pradesh Vs. A.S. Peter (2008) 2 SCC 383 (para
9).

5.2 It is submitted that as observed and held in the case of Ram Lal Narang Vs. State (Delhi
Administration) (1979) 2 SCC 322, in the interest of both the prosecution and the defence, the Police
should have the power to make further investigation and submit a supplemental report.

5.3 It is further submitted by learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the accused that in the
present case even, further investigation was carried out by the District Crime Branch (other than the
IO of the concerned Police Station) which was on the application/complaint by the appellant and
respondent Nos. 8 and 11 came to be chargesheeted pursuant to the supplementary chargesheet. It is
submitted that thereafter, when further investigation has been ordered by CBCID on the application
of mother of the accused thereafter it is not open for the appellant to make a grievance that further
investigation cannot be ordered by another agency – CBCID.

5.4 It is further submitted by learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the accused that even as
per Section 173(3) read with Section 158 of Cr.PC, the investigation by another agency is
permissible.

5.5 It is further submitted by Shri Nagamuthu, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of
respondent No. 8 that after the investigation by CBCID as ordered, a further report shall be
submitted before the learned Magistrate and thereafter, there shall be three reports before the
learned Magistrate, one on the basis of chargesheet, second on the basis of supplementary
chargesheet and third on the basis of further investigation by CBCID and thereafter, it is ultimately
for the learned Magistrate to consider the reports. It is submitted that therefore, let the third report
also be considered by the learned Magistrate and therefore, the impugned order may not be
interfered with by this Court.

6. Heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respective parties at length. We have also heard
Shri Anand S. Nuli, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the intervenor.

7. At the outset, it is required to be noted that respondent Nos. 8 and 11 as such have been
chargesheeted for the offence under Sections 302 and 120B of the IPC of which the cognizance has
been taken by the learned Magistrate on 21.12.2016. That thereafter, respondent No. 8 as such
moved the quashing petition before the High Court for quashing the entire criminal proceedings
including the chargesheet/supplementary chargesheet. The High Court dismissed the quashing
petition. Therefore, the accused must have taken all the defences which might have been available to
him while considering quashing petition including the ground on which now further
investigation/reinvestigation is ordered by another agency, namely, CBCID. It is required
approached this Court and the Special Leave Petition came to be dismissed by this Court and the
interim protection in favour of respondent No. 8 came to be vacated. That thereafter, non-bailable
warrant was issued against respondent No. 8 and only thereafter, mother of respondent No. 8 –
accused moved an application before the Secretary (Home) for further investigation and he

4

Bohatie Devi (Dead) vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 28 April, 2023

transferred the investigation to CBCID, inter-alia, on the ground that the so-called eye witnesses of
the murder were not the eye witnesses. The request of the mother of accused has been accepted by
the Secretary (Home) and the investigation was transferred to another agency, namely, CBCID
despite the fact that after the first chargesheet, the investigation was handed over to the District
Crime Branch to further investigate the case and they filed the supplementary chargesheet in which
respondent Nos. 8 and 11 were even chargesheeted. Therefore, as such it is not a case of further
investigation, but is a case of reinvestigation by another agency. The order passed by the Secretary
(Home) transferring the investigation/ordering further investigation by another agency and that
too, on the basis of the application/complaint submitted by mother of the accused is un- known to
law.

7.1 There cannot be any dispute that even after the chargesheet is filed, it is the right of the
investigating officer to further investigate in respect of offence even after a report under sub-section
(2) of Section 173 of Cr.PC forwarded to a Magistrate and as observed and held by this Court the
prior approval of the Magistrate is not required. However, as per the settled position of law, so far as
the reinvestigation is concerned, the prior permission/approval of the Magistrate is required. In the
present case, the Secretary (Home) has passed an order for further investigation by CBCID and
t h e r e a f t e r ,   t h e   C B C I D   h a s   s e n t   t h e   i n t i m a t i o n   t o   t h e   l e a r n e d   M a g i s t r a t e .   N o   p r i o r
approval/permission as observed by the High Court has been accorded by the learned Magistrate.
The High Court in the impugned judgment and order has observed that the further investigation is
ordered with the concurrence of the Magistrate, which is factually incorrect. What is on record is
only an intimation to the learned Magistrate which in any case cannot be said to be concurrence of
the learned Magistrate.

7.2 In any case, as it is a case of reinvestigation, the same is not permissible and that too by another
agency without the prior permission of the learned Magistrate even while exercising the powers
under Section 173(8) of the Cr.PC. Under what authority of law, the Secretary (Home) has
transferred the investigation to another agency and/or ordered further investigation by another
agency is not pointed out and that too at the instance of the accused on the grounds which as such
can be said to be the defences of the accused which are required to be considered at the time of trial.
The case on behalf of the accused that as the Secretary (Home) is the head of the department and
the further investigation was ordered by another agency on administrative side and therefore, the
Secretary (Home) is justified in ordering further investigation by CBCID cannot be accepted. So far
as the investigation is concerned under the scheme of the Cr.PC, the Police Officer of the concerned
Police Station, who is the investigating officer, has to investigate/further investigate the case under
the supervision of Superintendent of Police. So far as the Secretary (Home) is concerned, he does
not come into picture at all. If such powers are given to the Secretary (Home) in that case any
accused who is already chargesheeted may approach the Secretary (Home) and may get an order of
further investigation or reinvestigation by another agency and obtain the fresh report nullifying the
earlier chargesheet and get himself discharged. If the accused is aggrieved by the chargesheet in that
case, the remedy available to him would be either to file the quashing petition under Section 482 of
Cr.PC and/or to move an appropriate application for discharge before the learned Magistrate and it
is for the High Court and/or the learned Magistrate as the case may be, to quash criminal
proceedings or discharge the accused. The Secretary (Home) and/or any accused who is already

5

Bohatie Devi (Dead) vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 28 April, 2023

chargesheeted cannot be permitted to circumvent such provision. It is to be noted that in the
present case, respondent No. 8 – accused earlier did file the quashing petition, but failed.

7.3 Now, so far as the submission on behalf of the accused relying upon Section 173(3) of Cr.PC is
concerned, it provides how to submit/send a report to the Magistrate and who shall send the report
to the Magistrate. It provides that where a superior officer of police has been appointed under
Section 158, the report, shall be submitted through that officer, and he may, pending the orders of
the Magistrate, direct the officer in charge of the police station to make further investigation.
Therefore, Section 173(3) read with Section 158 does not permit the Secretary (Home) to order for
further investigation/reinvestigation by another agency, other than the officer in charge of the
concerned Police Station and/or his superior officer.

8. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the present appeal succeeds. The impugned
judgment and order passed by the High Court is hereby quashed and set aside. Consequently, order
dated 13.02.2019 passed by the Secretary (Home) impugned before the High Court, by which, the
Secretary (Home), State of U.P., Lucknow ordered for reinvestigation by CBCID of Case and 120B of
IPC, Police Station Baraut, District, is hereby quashed and set aside. Consequently, further
investigation /reinvestigation by the CBCID is also hereby quashed and set aside. However, it is
observed that all the defences which may be available to the accused are to be considered by the
learned Trial Court at the time of trial. Present appeal is accordingly allowed. As we have allowed
Criminal Appeal arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 4394/2021 filed by the mother of the deceased (now
dead through LR), connected Criminal Appeal arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 7708/2021 filed by
original accused Nos. 6 and 7 against issuance of non-bailable warrants against them stands
dismissed.

………………………………….J. [M.R. SHAH] ………………………………….J. [C.T. RAVIKUMAR] NEW
DELHI;

APRIL 28, 2023

6