Bothilal vs The Intelligence Officer Narcotics ... on 26 April, 2023

Bothilal vs The Intelligence Officer Narcotics ... on 26 April, 2023

Author: Abhay S. Oka

Bench: Rajesh Bindal, Abhay S. Oka

NON−REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 451 OF 2011

Bothilal                                          …Appellant

versus

The Intelligence Officer
Narcotics Control Bureau                       ...Respondent
with

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1185 OF 2011

J U D G M E N T

ABHAY S. OKA, J.

FACTUAL ASPECTS

1. Criminal Appeal No.451 of 2011 has been preferred by accused no.3 and Criminal Appeal No.1185
of 2011 has been Anita Malhotra preferred by accused no.1. As per the case of the prosecution, PW−
2 Nalini Ranjan, Intelligence Officer, Narcotics Control Reason:

Criminal Appeal No.451 of 2011 Bureau (for short, ‘NCB’), South Zonal Unit, Chennai
received information on 16th May 2002. Based on the information, she along with
her team and two independent witnesses namely Devendran and Prabhu conducted a
raid at Room No.303, Hotel Suriya, Periamet, Chennai where accused no.4 – F. Anna
Raj was staying. The officers of NCB found that apart from accused no.4, accused
nos.1 to 3 were also present in the room. The door of the room was opened by
accused no.1. In the room, a bag containing narcotic substance was found which was
seized. The narcotic substance found was 5.067 kilograms of heroin. The Trial Court

1

Bothilal vs The Intelligence Officer Narcotics ... on 26 April, 2023

convicted the accused no.1 (appellant in Criminal Appeal No.1185 of 2011) for the
offences punishable under Section 8(c) read with Sections 21(c), 27A, 28 and Section
29 of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (for short, ‘NDPS
Act’). He was sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of 11 years
and to pay a fine of Rs.1 lakh. In default of payment of fine, he was sentenced to
undergo rigorous imprisonment for six months. Accused no.3 (appellant in Criminal
Appeal No.451 of 2011) was convicted for the offences punishable under Section 8(c)
read with Sections 21(c) and 29 of the NDPS Act. The sentence is the same as that of
accused no.1. In appeal, while confirming the conviction, the High Court of
Judicature at Madras reduced the sentence of both of them to ten years. The default
sentence was reduced to one month. The other two accused with whom we are not
Criminal Appeal No.451 of 2011 concerned, were convicted for different offences
punishable under the NDPS Act.

SUBMISSIONS OF THE APPELLANTS CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 451 OF 2011

2. Shri Sushil Kumar Jain, the learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant has made
submissions in Criminal Appeal No.451 of 2011 preferred by accused no.3. At the outset, he pointed
out that till he was released on bail, accused no.3 had undergone sentence for a period of eight years
nine months and twelve days. He submitted that both the Courts have relied upon the confessional
statement of the appellant recorded under Section 67 of the NDPS Act before the officers of the NCB
who are invested with the powers under Section 53 of the NDPS Act. Relying upon a decision of this
Court in the case of Tofan Singh v. State of Tamil Nadu 1, the learned senior counsel submitted that
the officer before whom the confessional statement was made being a police officer, the bar of
Section 25 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (for short, ‘the Evidence Act’) is attracted. He submitted
that the confessional statements are not admissible in evidence against the accused.

1 (2021) 4 SCC 1 Criminal Appeal No.451 of 2011

3. The learned senior counsel submitted that the contraband was allegedly recovered from Room
no.303, which was booked in the name of accused no.4. Therefore, there was no seizure from
accused no.3. He further submitted that PW−2 – Nalini Ranjan could not have acted as a Gazetted
Officer for the purpose of effecting search under Section 50 of the NDPS Act. He pointed out that
PW−2 was heading the raid since the very inception from the stage of receipt of information. In fact,
she had led the raiding team. Therefore, she cannot act as an independent person.

4. The learned senior counsel further submitted that the officer who has the power to enter, search,
seize and arrest without any warrant or authorization, has no power to investigate the offence and
the said power has to be exercised by the officer authorized under Section 53 of the NDPS Act. He
submitted that as provided in sub−Section (3) of Section 52, the seized articles are required to be
forwarded without any unnecessary delay to the officer empowered under Section 53. He, further,
submitted that in this case, PW−2 who had seized bags containing alleged contraband, drew
representative samples of the contraband. He submitted that the officer had no power to do it and it
could have been done only under the permission of the Magistrate in accordance with clause (c) of

2

Bothilal vs The Intelligence Officer Narcotics ... on 26 April, 2023

sub−Section (2) of Section 52A. The learned senior counsel submitted that only the samples drawn
under sub−Section (2) of Criminal Appeal No.451 of 2011 Section 52A and certified by the
Magistrate become primary evidence in respect of the offence. He relied upon the decision of this
Court in the case of Union of India v. Mohanlal & Anr.2 He, therefore, submitted that the
prosecution is vitiated as the work of drawing the sample was done by PW−2 without following sub−
Section (2) of Section 52A. Lastly, the learned senior counsel submitted that the statements of the
two independent witnesses could not have been read in evidence as the prosecution failed to prove
that the presence of the witnesses could not be procured. He submitted that in the circumstances,
the evidence of PW−2 should have been subjected to a closer scrutiny. He submitted that there is no
corroboration to the evidence of PW−2 except for the alleged confessional statement which was not
admissible in evidence.

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1185 OF 2011

5. The learned counsel appearing for the appellant in Criminal Appeal No.1185 of 2011, while
adopting most of the submissions made by the learned senior counsel in the companion appeal,
submitted that the appellant had already undergone a sentence of about nine years. He submitted
that the confessional statement of accused no.1 was not voluntary as is clear from the report under
Section 57. Moreover, in the search, no incriminating material could be found against 2 (2016) 3
SCC 379 Criminal Appeal No.451 of 2011 accused no.1 as it was accused no.4 who had booked the
room in his name from which, the contraband was allegedly recovered. He would, therefore, submit
that the Courts ought to have acquitted accused no.1.

6. The learned counsel submitted that adverse inference will have to be drawn against the
prosecution for not examining the independent witnesses though they were available. He submitted
that the accused have lost the opportunity to cross− examine the independent witnesses, thereby,
causing prejudice.

7. The learned counsel appearing for the appellant further submitted that as per the prosecution’s
case, the contraband was recovered from room no.303 in Hotel Suriya, Periamet, Chennai where
accused no.4 was staying. According to the prosecution’s case, accused no.1 (appellant) was staying
in room no.213 of the Himalaya Lodge, Triplicane, Chennai. He pointed out that according to the
prosecution’s case, information was received that accused no.1 was likely to receive 5 Kilograms of
heroin from accused nos.2 and 3. He submitted that the prosecution has not proved that anyone has
seen accused nos.2 and 3 carrying contraband to the room occupied by accused no.4. It is not the
prosecution’s case that it was accused no.1 who brought the contraband to room no.303. The
contraband has been seized from the room occupied by accused no.4 who has been convicted only
for the offences punishable under Criminal Appeal No.451 of 2011 Section 8(c) read with Section 30
of the NDPS Act. He submitted that even assuming that the accused no.1 showed contraband kept in
a bag in the room occupied by the accused no.4, it cannot be inferred that he was in actual or
constructive possession of or was dealing with the contraband. The learned counsel submitted that
the entire case of the prosecution is suspicious and possibility of the prosecution framing accused
no.1, cannot be ruled out.

3

SUBMISSIONS OF NCB

Bothilal vs The Intelligence Officer Narcotics ... on 26 April, 2023

8. The learned Additional Solicitor General (A.S.G.) appearing for the respondent supported the
impugned judgment and pointed out that even if the independent witnesses to the seizure were not
examined, the offence can always be proved by the official witnesses. He submitted that the Courts
below have believed the testimony of the official witnesses namely, PW−2 and PW−4 to PW−7. He
submitted that the contraband was found in the hotel room where all four accused persons were
present. He submitted that even if confessional statements are kept out of consideration, the
conviction can be sustained on the basis of the evidence of the official witnesses and in particular,
PW−2. The evidence of PW−2 has not been shaken in the cross− examination. The learned A.S.G.
would urge that no Criminal Appeal No.451 of 2011 interference is called for with the concurrent
findings of the Courts below.

OUR VIEW

9. The prosecution’s case is that PW−2, who was the Intelligence Officer of the NCB, received
information on 16 th May 2002 at about 10:45 a.m that accused no.1 who was indulging in drug
trafficking, has come to Chennai and was staying in room no.213 of the Himalaya Lodge, Triplicane,
Chennai. He had come there to receive 5 kilograms of heroin from accused nos.2 and 3, who were
staying in room no.211 of Hotel Blue Star International, Chennai. The information received was that
the accused nos.1, 2 and 3 had planned to deliver the contraband to accused no.4 who was residing
in room no.303 of Hotel Suriya, Periamet, Chennai. The job of accused no.4 was to transfer it to
Tuticorin and from there, to Sri Lanka. PW−2 raided room no.303 occupied by accused no.4 along
with other officers and two independent witnesses namely, Devendran and Prabhu. According to the
prosecution’s case, after the door was knocked on, it was opened and it was found that all the four
accused were present there. When PW−2 questioned whether they were in possession of any
narcotic drug, the first accused took out a blue coloured rexine bag which, according to the
prosecution, contained packets of a total of 5.067 kilograms of heroin. PW−2 seized the heroine and
took two samples from each packet by Criminal Appeal No.451 of 2011 placing them in two plastic
covers separately. The plastic packets were sealed and the remaining contraband was also sealed.
According to the prosecution’s case, all the accused made confessional statements under Section 67
of the NDPS Act.

10. Though the two independent witnesses were not examined before the Court, their statements
were marked as Exhibits P−19 and P−71. A perusal of the impugned judgment of the High Court
shows that it was held that the conditions prescribed by Section 53A of the NDPS Act were not
fulfilled and therefore, these two statements were inadmissible. The High Court believed the
testimony of PW−2 and PW−4 to PW−7 and held that the confessional statements of the accused
could be taken as corroboration for the evidence of official witnesses.

11. Paragraphs 158.1 and 158.2 of the majority view in Tofan Singh’s case1, read thus:

“158. We answer the reference by stating:

4

Bothilal vs The Intelligence Officer Narcotics ... on 26 April, 2023

158.1. That the officers who are invested with powers under Section 53 of the NDPS
Act are “police officers” within the meaning of Section 25 of the Evidence Act, as a
result of which any confessional statement made to them would be barred under the
provisions of Section 25 of the Evidence Act, and cannot be taken into account in
order to convict an accused under the NDPS Act.

Criminal Appeal No.451 of 2011 158.2. That a statement recorded under Section 67 of the NDPS Act
cannot be used as a confessional statement in the trial of an offence under the NDPS Act.” (emphasis
added)

12. Admittedly, the confessional statements were made by the accused to an officer empowered
under Section 53 of the NDPS Act and hence, in view of the bar of Section 25 of the Evidence Act,
the confessional statements will have to be kept out of consideration.

13. As regards the statements of the official witnesses at Exhibits P−19 and P−71, the Special Court
relied upon the same. The High Court considered the provisions of Section 53A, which reads thus:

“53A. Relevancy of statements under certain circumstances. – (1) A statement made
and signed by a person before any officer empowered under section 53 for the
investigation of offences, during the course of any inquiry or proceedings by such
officer, shall be relevant for the purpose of proving, in any prosecution for an offence
under this Act, the truth of the facts which it contains. –

(a) when the person who made the statement is dead or cannot be found or is
incapable of giving Criminal Appeal No.451 of 2011 evidence, or is kept out of the way
by the adverse party, or whose presence cannot be obtained without an amount of
delay or expense which, under the circumstances of the case, the court considers
unreasonable; or

(b) when the person who made the statement is examined as a witness in the case
before the court and the court is of the opinion that having regard to the
circumstances of the case, the statement should be admitted in evidence in the
interest of justice.

(2) The provisions of sub−section (1) shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to any
proceedings under this Act or the rules or orders made thereunder, other than a
proceeding before a court, as they apply in relation to a proceeding before a court.”

14. A finding was recorded by the High Court that the prosecution has not proved that the witnesses
are dead or cannot be found or are incapable of giving evidence or kept out of the way of the accused
or their presence cannot be obtained without an amount of delay or expense which, under the
circumstances of the case, the Court considers unreasonable. These findings are based on the
perusal of the entire record. There is no explanation offered by the prosecution about their failure to
examine these two independent material witnesses.

5

Bothilal vs The Intelligence Officer Narcotics ... on 26 April, 2023

Criminal Appeal No.451 of 2011 Hence, the statements of both witnesses are not admissible in
evidence.

15. Admittedly, PW−2 drew two samples from each of the packets of the contraband found in the
hotel room and kept them in two separate plastic covers. These covers were sealed and the
remaining contraband was also sealed. Thus, the prosecution claims that the samples were prepared
even before the packets were sent to the Station House Officer. The submission of the learned senior
counsel appearing for the appellant in Criminal Appeal 451 of 2011 was that a grave suspicion is
created about the prosecution’s case as this action by the PW−2, was contrary to Section 52−A of
NDPS Act.

16. In paragraphs 15 to 17 of the Mohanlal’s case2, it was held thus:

“15. It is manifest from Section 52− A(2)include (supra) that upon seizure of the
contraband the same has to be forwarded either to the officer−in−charge of the
nearest police station or to the officer empowered under Section 53 who shall prepare
an inventory as stipulated in the said provision and make an application to the
Magistrate for purposes of (a) certifying the correctness of the inventory,

(b) certifying photographs of such drugs or substances taken before the Magistrate as
true, and (c) to draw representative samples in the presence of the Magistrate
Criminal Appeal No.451 of 2011 and certifying the correctness of the list of samples so
drawn.

16. Sub−section (3) of Section 52−A requires that the Magistrate shall as soon as may be allow the
application.

This implies that no sooner the seizure is effected and the contraband forwarded to the officer−in−
charge of the police station or the officer empowered, the officer concerned is in law duty−bound to
approach the Magistrate for the purposes mentioned above including grant of permission to draw
representative samples in his presence, which samples will then be enlisted and the correctness of
the list of samples so drawn certified by the Magistrate. In other words, the process of drawing of
samples has to be in the presence and under the supervision of the Magistrate and the entire
exercise has to be certified by him to be correct.

17. The question of drawing of samples at the time of seizure which, more often than not, takes place
in the absence of the Magistrate does not in the above scheme of things arise. This is so especially
when according to Section 52−A(4) of the Act, samples drawn and certified by the Magistrate in
compliance with sub−sections (2) and (3) of Section 52−A above constitute primary evidence for the
purpose of the trial. Suffice it to say that there is no provision in the Act Criminal Appeal No.451 of
2011 that mandates taking of samples at the time of seizure. That is perhaps why none of the States
claim to be taking samples at the time of seizure.” (emphasis added) Thus, the act of PW−2 of
drawing samples from all the packets at the time of seizure is not in conformity with what is held by
this Court in the case of Mohanlal2. This creates a serious doubt about the prosecution’s case that

6

the substance recovered was contraband.

Bothilal vs The Intelligence Officer Narcotics ... on 26 April, 2023

17. Even according to the prosecution’s case, as can be seen from the version of PW−2, accused no.1
(appellant in Criminal Appeal No.1185 of 2011) was staying in room no.213 of Himalaya Lodge,
Triplicane, Chennai. He was to receive 5 kilograms of heroin from accused no.2 and accused no.3
(appellant in Criminal Appeal no.451 of 2011). Accused nos.2 and 3, according to the case of the
prosecution, were staying in room no.211 of Hotel Blue Star International, Chennai. It was accused
no.4 who was staying in room no.303 of Hotel Suriya, Periamet, Chennai where PW−2 and other
members of her party entered. The case of the prosecution is that after PW−2 and others entered the
room, they called upon all the four accused who were present there to disclose whether they were in
possession of the contraband. The prosecution’s case is that accused no.1 showed a blue coloured
bag from which the Criminal Appeal No.451 of 2011 recovery of about 5 kilograms of heroin was
made. It is not the case of the prosecution that accused no.1 was carrying that bag with him or that it
was in his custody. The bag was in the room occupied by accused no.4. Thus, it cannot be said that
the contraband was found in the custody of accused no.1. At the highest, it was found in the room
occupied by accused no.4. We may note here that accused no.4 has been convicted by the High
Court only for the offence punishable under Section 30 of the NDPS Act which is for the offence of
making preparation to do or omitting to do anything which constitutes an offence punishable under
the provisions of Sections 19, 24 and 27A. The prosecution has not produced any evidence to show
that the contraband was brought to the room of the accused no.4 by the other three accused persons
or anyone of them. It is not the case that the room of accused no.4 was in possession of accused
nos.1 to 3 who were staying in different hotels.

18. Therefore, in our view, the case of the prosecution is not free from suspicion. The prosecution
has not proved beyond a reasonable doubt that the appellants in these two appeals were in
possession of the contraband or that they brought the contraband to the hotel room of the accused
no.4.

Criminal Appeal No.451 of 2011

19. In the circumstances, we cannot sustain the conviction of the appellants in these two appeals.
Accordingly, the impugned judgments are set aside and the appellants are acquitted of the offences
alleged against them. Appeals are accordingly allowed.

……..….……………J. (Abhay S. Oka) ……...………………J. (Rajesh Bindal) New Delhi;

April 26, 2023.

Criminal Appeal No.451 of 2011

7