Btl Epc Ltd. vs Macawber Beekay Pvt. Ltd. on 18 September, 2023

Btl Epc Ltd. vs Macawber Beekay Pvt. Ltd. on 18 September,
2023

Author: Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud

Bench: Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud

Reportable

2023INSC864
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

Civil Appeal No 5968 of 2023
(Arising out of SLP (C) No 18100 of 2023)

BTL EPC Ltd                                                                         …Appellant

Versus

Macawber Beekay Pvt Ltd and Others                                                  …Respondents

WITH

Civil Appeal No 5969 of 2023
(Arising out of SLP (C) No 18574 of 2023)
&
Civil Appeal No 5970 of 2023
(Arising out of SLP (C) No 19227 of 2023)

JUDGMENT

Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, CJI

1. Leave granted.

2. These appeals arise from a judgment dated 27 July 2023 of a Division Bench of the High Court of
Karnataka. The High Court set aside a judgment of a Single Judge, in a writ appeal 1. As a
consequence of the impugned judgment, a Letter of Intent 2 which was issued by Bharat Heavy

1

Btl Epc Ltd. vs Macawber Beekay Pvt. Ltd. on 18 September, 2023

Electricals Limited 3, in favour of the appellant has been quashed and BHEL has been directed to
consider the bid submitted by the first respondent in terms of a Notice Inviting Tenders dated 24
June 2022.

3. BHEL was awarded a contract for setting up the 5x800 MW Yadadri Thermal Power Station. A
part of the work was sought to be subcontracted. BHEL invited bids for undertaking the work of
design, engineering, manufacturing, supply and other related works pertaining to an Ash Handling
Plant. The appellant submitted its bid. On 29 September 2022, a letter of intent was issued to the
appellant for a total contract value of Rs 378.64 crores.

4. The controversy in the present case turns on the pre-qualification requirement for bidders,
notified by BHEL. Clause 01.00.00 deals with the technical criteria. Clauses 01.01.01, 01.01.02, and
01.01.03 are material in the present case. Clause 01.01.01 contains certain specific requirements that
bidders had to fulfill. It read as follows:

“The bidder should have executed at least one (1) number Ash Handling Plant (AHP)
in India/abroad for a thermal power station using sea water/plain water involving
design, engineering, manufacture, procurement, supply, erection & commissioning
(or supervision of erection & commissioning) comprising the following systems
which should be in successful operation for at least (1) year as on date of submission
of the bid:

1Writ Appeal No 1169 of 2022 (GM-TEN) 2“LoI” 3“BHEL” (the second respondent)
a. Bottom ash handling system comprising jet pump system in conjunction with
water impounded bottom ash hopper designed from minimum 50 TPH (on dry ash
basis) capacity or more for pulverized coal fired boilers.

AND b. First stage fly ash handling system for conveying fly ash from ESP hoppers to
Intermediate Surge Hopper (ISH) by vacuum conveying system designed for
minimum 30 TPH capacity (dry ash basis) per stream.

AND c. Second stage fly ash handling system for conveying fly ash from Intermediate Surge Hopper
(ISH) to Fly ash silos by pressure conveying system designed from minimum 20 TPH capacity (dry
ash basis) per line for a distance not less than 500 mtrs.

AND d. High Concentration Ash Slurry Disposal (HCSD) System for minimum 40 TPH capacity (dry
ash basis) per line.

The above Clauses 01.01.01 (a), (b), (c) and (d) can be in one single plant or in a combination of
plants.”

5. Clause 01.01.02 stipulated that a bidder who is a supplier of a bulk material handling system, but
does not fulfill the requirements under clause 01.01.01 could also participate, subject to certain
stipulations. The clause is extracted below:

2

Btl Epc Ltd. vs Macawber Beekay Pvt. Ltd. on 18 September, 2023

“Bidder who is a supplier of bulk material handling system but does not meet the
requirements under clause 01.01.01 above in part or in full can also participate
provided he has executed at least the following systems design, engineering,
manufacture, supply, erection & commissioning (or supervision of erection &
commissioning):

a. Fly Ash Handling System for conveying Fly Ash from ESPs in dry form (vacuum
conveying or pressure conveying system) or in wet slurry mode OR b. Bulk material
handling system, comprising of bell conveyors having a minimum design capacity of
800 TPH The systems mentioned at 01.01.02 (a) or (b) above should be in successful
operation in at least two (2) plants for at least two (2) years as on date of submission
of bid and should have been installed for pulverized coal fired boiler units in
India/abroad generating not less than 40 TPH of Ash per boiler.

AND Collaborate(s)/Associate(s) with party(ies) who meet(s) either the total requirement under
01.01.01

(a), (b) and (c) above or any of the above requirement under 01.01.01 (a), (b) and (c), which the
bidder himself is not able to meet.

In such a case, the Bidder shall be required to furnish consortium agreement jointly executed by the
Bidder and the collaborator(s)/Associate(s) and each executant, shall be jointly and severally liable
to employer for successful performance of the relevant system, as per the format (Annexure -A)
enclosed along with bid. The collaboration agreement should be submitted along with the bid.

In such a case, each Collaborator/Associate shall be required to furnish a bank guarantee at the time
of placement of order as follows:

i.    INR 10 Lakh (Rupees Ten Lakh) for
Collaborator/Associate for Jet pumping
system

(cid:12)                    ii.    INR 25 Lakh (Rupees Twenty Five Lakh) for
Collaborator/Associate   for    Vaccum
conveying system

iii.   INR 25 Lakh (Rupees Twenty Five Lakh) for
Collaborator/Associate   for     Pressure
Transportation system
AND

3

Btl Epc Ltd. vs Macawber Beekay Pvt. Ltd. on 18 September, 2023

Collaborate(s)/Associate(s) with party who meets the requirement under 01.01.01 (d) above which
the bidder himself is not able to meet.

In such a case, the Bidder shall be required to furnish Agreement of Support jointly executed by the
Bidder and the collaborator/Associate for successful performance of the HCSD system as per the
format (Annexure-B) enclosed along with bid. The Agreement of Support should be submitted along
with the bid.

In case bidder collaborates/associates for more than one system with a party, then the
Collaborators/Associate shall be required to furnish a bank guarantee for an amount arrived at by
adding up the amounts for the relevant systems as above.”

6. Clause 01.01.03 then provided as follows:

“The activity of design and engineering under 01.01.01 (a), (b) and (c) should have
been carried out by the bidder and not through any external design agency/agencies.
The activity of design and engineering under 01.01.01 (d) should have been carried
out by the bidder or through any external design agency having experience of HCSD
system.

For design and engineering activity referred under paras 01.01.02 the activity should have been
carried out by either the bidder or through design agency/agencies having experience for reference
systems. In case of collaborator(s)/associate(s) meeting the balance part of total requirement under
clause 01.01.01 (a), (b), (c) and (d) the activity of design and engineering for the reference systems
should have been carried out by them.

Bidders qualifying under Sl No.01.01.02 and collaborating/associating with party(s) meeting
total/balance part of 01.01.01 (a), (b), (c) and (d) shall follow the following for supply and
manufacturing of equipment. Bidder shall manufacture from their manufacturing set up based on
collaborator(s)/associate(s) drawing for the clause which bidder himself is not meeting the
requirement but the collaborator(s)/associate(s) is meeting the requirement, then the
collaborator(s)/associate(s) shall approve bidder’s manufacturing facilities and manufacturing
quality standards. Also after the manufacture of the items, the product shall be inspected by the
respective collaborator(s)/associate(s) and furnish certificate of conformance (COC) for the product.

Also, BHEL/Customer shall approve manufacturing facilities of the equipment of the vendor’s self-

manufacturing items in case the items are being
manufactured        by       bidder     as   per
collaborator(s)/associate(s)      design    and
manufacturing drawing.”

7. These clauses were followed by the documents which were required to be furnished.

4

Btl Epc Ltd. vs Macawber Beekay Pvt. Ltd. on 18 September, 2023

Among them, if the bidder had entered into a consortium agreement in order to meet the
requirements of clause 01.01.01 as permitted by clause 01.01.02, a copy of the consortium
agreement was to be submitted along with the tender documents. If the bidder was a foreign party,
there was a mandatory requirement of having a collaboration/consortium agreement with an Indian
agency for erection and commissioning at site.

8. Clause 01.01.02 permitted a bidder who did not meet the criteria specified in 01.01.

01, to enter into a consortium agreement. Accordingly, the appellant entered into a consortium
agreement with a Chinese company by the name of Fujian Longking Company Limited, the fourth
respondent. Annexure 1 of the agreement specified the rights and responsibilities of the appellant on
the one hand and the Chinese company on the other in the following terms:

“1. The first party (M/s BTL EPC Ltd. Kolkata) shall undertake complete works as
detailed in NIT which includes detailed design & engineering, manufacturing, supply,
erection, testing, commissioning, trial run, demonstration of PG test and handing
over for complete ash handling plant.

2. The second party (M/s Fujian Longking, China) shall undertake basic design,
vetting of detail engineering, Support in manufacturing, Support/Supervision of
erecting, commissioning & PG test for complete AHP (excluding HCSD system).”

9. On 23 July 2020, the Public Procurement Division in the Department of Expenditure of the
Union Ministry of Finance issued an Order imposing certain restrictions under Rule 144(xi) of the
General Financial Rules 2017, whereby a prospective bidder from a country that shares a land
border with India, would be eligible to bid, only if such bidder is registered with the Competent
Authority. The Order, which is described as “Public Procurement No 1” specified a requirement of
registration in the following terms:

“Requirement of registration 1 Any bidder from a country which shares a land border
with India will be eligible to bid in any procurement whether of goods, services
(including consultancy services and non-

consultancy services) or works (including turnkey projects) only if the bidder is registered with the
Competent Authority, specified in Annex I. 2 This Order shall not apply to (i) cases where orders
have been placed or contract has been concluded or letter/notice of award/acceptance (LoA) has
been issued on or before the date of this order; and (ii) cases falling under Annex II.”

10. Clause (6) of the Order defined a “bidder” as follows:

“Bidder” for the purpose of this Order (including the term ‘tenderer’, ‘consultant’,
‘vendor’ or ‘service provider’ in certain contexts) means any person or firm or
company, including any member of a consortium or joint venture (that is an
association of several persons, or firms or companies), every artificial juridical person

5

Btl Epc Ltd. vs Macawber Beekay Pvt. Ltd. on 18 September, 2023

not falling in any of the descriptions of bidders stated hereinbefore, including any
agency, branch or office controlled by such person, participating in a procurement
process.”

11. Similarly, clause (8) contains a definition of the expression “bidder from a country which shares
a land border with India” in the following terms:

“Bidder from a country which shares a land border with India” for the purpose of this
Order means

a) An entity incorporated, established or registered in such a country; or

b) A subsidiary of an entity incorporated, established or registered in such a country;
or

c) An entity substantially controlled through entities incorporated, established or
registered in such a country; or

d) An entity whose beneficial owner is situated in such a country; or

e) An Indian (or other) agent of such an entity; or

f) A natural person who is a citizen of such a country; or

g) A consortium or joint venture where any member of the consortium or joint
venture falls under any of the above.”

12. The first respondent instituted a writ petition 4 under Article 226 of the Constitution before the
High Court of Karnataka contending that the award of the contract to the appellant was in breach of
the conditions which were imposed in the Order dated 23 July 2020 of the Union Ministry of
Finance. The contention was that the Chinese company which had entered into a consortium
agreement with the appellant so as to enable the appellant to fulfill the eligibility conditions under
the tender floated by BHEL was required to be registered with the competent authority, according to
the Public Procurement Order dated 23 July 2020. It was urged that in the absence of such
registration, the tender submitted by the appellant did not meet the technical requirements and
could not have been considered by BHEL.

13. The Single Judge of the Karnataka High Court dismissed the writ petition by a judgement dated
2 November 2022. The Single Judge held that

(i) Entering into a consortium agreement was permissible under the terms of the tender;

(ii) The submission of the tender by the appellant, along with the copy of the agreement, was proper;

6

Btl Epc Ltd. vs Macawber Beekay Pvt. Ltd. on 18 September, 2023

(iii) On the issue of mandatory registration under the Public Procurement Order, a clarification
dated 8 February 2021 stated that a bidder can procure raw material, as opposed to finished goods,
from an entity such as the fourth respondent even if the latter was not registered with the competent
authority; 4Writ Petition No 20333 of 2022 (GM-TEN)

(iv) Since the appellant was not even procuring raw materials but only sought support for design,
erection and commissioning requirements, the bid did not violate the procurement order;

(v) The Court’s scrutiny was limited to the decision-making process;

(vi) The financial bid of the appellant was Rs 58 crores lower in value than the financial bid
submitted by the first respondent; and

(vii) The decision-making process was not arbitrary and did not merit interference, in line with the
principle of limited judicial scrutiny of the discretion vested in a tendering authority.

14. The judgment of the Single Judge was carried in appeal.

15. The Division Bench of the High Court reversed the decision of the Single Judge and allowed the
writ appeal. The respondent (who was the appellant before the Division Bench) argued that

(i) The consortium agreement between the appellant and the Chinese entity was meant to confer
eligibility on the appellant, which did not possess the requisite qualifications on its own;

(ii) Thus, by way of the consortium agreement, a bidding consortium was created where the Chinese
entity was a joint bidder;

(iii) As such, according to the Public Procurement Order the Chinese company was required to
register with the competent authority in order to participate in the tender process; and

(iv) In the absence of registration, the bidding consortium comprising the appellant and the Chinese
Company did not meet the technical criteria of the tender.

16. The appellant on the other hand, maintained that

(i) The agreement was not a consortium agreement in the technical sense (clause 7 of the
pre-qualification requirements);

(ii) It was called a consortium agreement only because it was styled in accordance with the template
for a consortium agreement, appended to the tender document;

(iii) If it were actually a consortium agreement in the strict sense, the Chinese company would have
contributed to the bid and had a share in the profits as well;

7

Btl Epc Ltd. vs Macawber Beekay Pvt. Ltd. on 18 September, 2023

(iv) the nature of the agreement was more like a service contract than like a consortium agreement
strictly speaking;

(v) The Chinese company was a mere associate who was providing services in relation to the designs
under the terms of the agreement; it did not contribute to the bid and was not entitled to any profits
that accrued in favor of the appellant;

(vi) The bid was submitted and awarded in favour of the appellant as a standalone bidder and not as
a part of a bidding consortium; and

(vii) Considering the nature of the contract and the Chinese company’s limited role, the
non-registration under the Procurement Order was inconsequential.

17. By its impugned judgment dated 27 July 2023, the Division Bench reversed the decision of the
Single Judge. The Division Bench observed that

(i) The agreement between the appellant and the Chinese Company is an undertaking to the
tendering authority as to the due performance of the contract;

(ii) The agreement is central to the appellant’s bid and is thus a consortium agreement;

(iii) The bid was thus made on behalf of the bidding consortium;

(iv) According to the Single Judge, the requirement of registration was not applicable in view of the
clarification by the subsequent Office Memorandum dated 23 July 2020; this subsequent
clarification applied in respect of import of raw material and whether the goods procured would be
considered raw material or finished goods was relevant only after the award of the contract;

(v) The requirement of mandatory registration had not been done away with by the clarification
contained in the Office Memorandum dated 23 July 2020;

(vi) The Chinese company, as a part of the bidding consortium was required to register in the
absence of which the bidding consortium was ineligible to participate in the tender process; and

(vii) BHEL, in awarding the tender, had overlooked this violation and wrongly based its decision
only on the financial bid.

18. The Division Bench thus, set aside the Single Judge’s decision. The LoI which was awarded to
the appellant has been set aside with the consequential direction to process the bids submitted by
the first respondent in terms of the Notice Inviting Tenders. In the meantime, albeit in pursuance of
interim directions to the effect that no equities would be created in favour of the successful bidder,
work has proceeded apace. The stage of the work and the impact, if any, it should have on the
outcome of these proceedings would be considered subsequently.

8

Btl Epc Ltd. vs Macawber Beekay Pvt. Ltd. on 18 September, 2023

19. Besides this appeal which has been filed by the successful party to whom the contract was
awarded by BHEL, a companion Special Leave Petition has been filed before this Court by BHEL
and by the Telangana State Power Generation Company Limited. The latter had awarded the
contract for the construction of a 5x800 MW Thermal Power Station to BHEL and in its submission,
the project is likely to get affected by the orders which have been passed by the High Court in
relation to the setting up of the Ash Handling Plant.

20. We have heard Mr Mukul Rohatgi, Mr Gaurab Banerjee and Mr V Giri, senior counsel appearing
on behalf of the appellants in support of the appeals. Mr Harish N Salve and Mr Neeraj Kishan Kaul,
senior counsel have appeared on behalf of the original petitioner before the High Court, namely, the
first respondent. For convenience of reference, the parties as they appear in the lead appeal are
referred to in these proceedings.

21. The controversy in the present case lies in a narrow frame. Clause 01.01.01 stipulates four
requirements that each bidder has to fulfill. All the requirements are cumulative as is indicated by
the use of the word “and” after sub-clauses (a), (b) and (c). Evidently, it is not in dispute that the
appellant did not fulfill the technical requirements specified in clause 01.01.01. However, this was
not the end of the matter for the reason that clause 01.01.02 specifically contemplated such an
eventuality. This clause stipulates that a bidder which is a supplier of bulk material handling
systems, but does not meet the requirements under clause 01.01.01 in part or in full, could also
participate provided such a bidder had executed at least the systems design, engineering,
manufacture, supply, erection and commissioning of projects of the nature described in either (a) or
(b). Apart from having experience of the projects that were specified under clause 01.01.02, there
was an additional condition which was that such a bidder must collaborate/associate with a party or
parties who meet all the requirements of sub-clauses (a), (b), and (c) of clause 01.01.01. In other
words, though the bidder itself was not able to meet the requirements of clause 01.01.01, such
non-compliance would be obviated if the bidder collaborated or associated with an entity that met
the requirements of sub-clauses (a), (b) and (c) either individually or in conjunction with the bidder
himself. In that case, the bidder was required to furnish a consortium agreement jointly executed
with the collaborator/associate so as to accept joint and several responsibilities towards the
tendering authority. Clause 01.01.03 contains certain stipulations in regard to the activity of design
and engineering under clause 01.01.01.

22. Clause 7.2 of the pre-qualification requirements contains specific stipulations in regard to the
nature of the bidding consortium. Clause 7.2 is in the following terms:

“The members of bidding Consortium should have entered into a Memorandum of
Association (MOA) between themselves. One of the members of Consortium, holding
at least 51% of the equity/ownership stake shall be authorized and nominated as the
‘Lead member’ (Lead Member) to act and represent all the members of the
Consortium for bidding and implementation of the Project.”

23. The agreement between the appellant and the Chinese company, it is common ground, did not
involve an equity, stake, or ownership of the Chinese company. This aspect has not been disputed.

9

Btl Epc Ltd. vs Macawber Beekay Pvt. Ltd. on 18 September, 2023

The issue which fell for determination before the High Court was whether the bid submitted by the
appellant was liable to be rejected on the ground that the Chinese company with whom it had
entered into a consortium agreement was not registered with the competent authority in terms of
the Public Procurement Order dated 23 July 2020.

24. At this stage, it would be material to note that the Procurement Order dated 23 July 2020 has
been clarified by an OM dated 8 February 2021. The OM stipulates that in terms of paragraph 11 of
the Order dated 23 July 2020, in the case of a works contract including a turnkey contract, the
contractor shall not be allowed to sub- contract the work to any contractor from a country that
shares a land boundary with India unless the contractor is registered with the competent authority.
The OM clarifies the earlier order by stipulating that:

“However, no such restriction is stipulated in the Order regarding other
procurements i.e. procurement of Goods, Services, etc.”

25. The High Court went on to decide whether the registration requirement applied even after the
clarification and whether the absence of such registration vitiated the bid and the decision to award
the contract to the appellant.

26. The submissions which have been urged on behalf of the appellant are that:

(i) The appellant was at all material times the sole bidder to whom a LoI was awarded
by BHEL on 29 September 2022;

(ii) There was no bidding consortium within the meaning of clause 7.2 of the pre-

qualification requirements;

(iii) The Chinese company with whom a consortium agreement was entered into by the appellant
had no equity in the project which was being contracted for by the appellant;

(iv) The Procurement Order dated 23 July 2020 with the clarification which was issued thereafter
on 8 February 2021 requires only a registration and does not impose a disqualification; and

(v) As a matter of public interest, the High Court ought not to have interfered consistently with
settled legal principles since a large part of the work has already been completed.

27. These submissions have been opposed on behalf of the respondents who have urged that:

(i) The appellant did not qualify under clause 01.01.01 and could bid for the project
only in pursuance of the experience of the Chinese entity with whom a collaboration
agreement was entered into;

10

Btl Epc Ltd. vs Macawber Beekay Pvt. Ltd. on 18 September, 2023

(ii) The consortium agreement with the Chinese company specifically stated that the
appellant did not qualify in terms of clause 01.01.01;

(iii) The definition of the expression ‘bidder’ in the OM dated 23 July 2020 is broad
enough so as to encompass a consortium agreement;

(iv) The above position would be amplified by the responses submitted by the
appellant in the course of the queries that were raised in the tendering process;

(v) Clause 52 of the Special Conditions of Contract specifically emphasizes the
conditions that were set out in the OM;

(vi) The responses which were furnished by the appellant to the pre-

qualification requirements contain a specific statement that the appellant had entered into a
consortium agreement with the Chinese company; and

(vii) Likewise, the Chinese company in its letter dated 18 July 2023 clarified that it had entered into
a consortium agreement in pursuance of which it was undertaking joint and several liability towards
BHEL.

28. The bid which was submitted by the appellant was lower than the bid submitted by the first
respondent in the vicinity of Rs 58 crores. During the course of the hearing, it has been submitted on
behalf of the first respondent that the first respondent would be willing to match the bid which was
submitted by the appellant and if the contract is awarded to it in pursuance of the impugned
judgment of the Division Bench of the High Court, it would take over the contract from the stage
where it was left by the appellant. However, BHEL and Telangana State Power Generation Company
have stated that since the ongoing work is design intensive, substituting a new entity would require
redesigning of the whole project at a significant cost to the exchequer.

29. In assessing the validity of the rival submissions, it needs to be noted that the Procurement
Order issued by the Union Ministry of Finance on 23 July 2020 imposes a requirement of
registration where a bidder shares a land border with India. The order specifies that such a bidder
would be eligible to bid in any procurement of goods, services (including consultancy and
non-consultancy services), or works, including turnkey projects if the bidder is registered with the
competent authority as set out in Annexure I. The expression ‘bidder’ is defined in clause (6) in
broad terms so as to encompass any member of a consortium or joint venture. Similarly, clause (8)
also incorporates a consortium or joint venture.

30. Clause 11 of the Order contains the following provision in relation to the sub- contracting of
works contracts in the following terms:

“In works contracts, including turnkey contracts, contractors shall not be allowed to
sub-contract works to any contractor from a country which shares a land border with

11

Btl Epc Ltd. vs Macawber Beekay Pvt. Ltd. on 18 September, 2023

India unless such contractor is registered with the Competent Authority. The
definition of “contractor from a country which shares a land border with India” shall
be as in paragraph 8 above. This shall not apply to sub-contracts already awarded on
or before the date of this Order.”

31. The above requirement in clause 11 was subsequently clarified in the OM of the Union Ministry
of Finance dated 8 February 2021 so as to exclude from its ambit the procurement of goods and
services. According to the appellant, the relaxation which was granted on 8 February 2021 would
enure to its benefit. At this stage, it would be material to note that clause 01.01.02 of the
pre-qualification requirements enables bidders who otherwise do not fulfill the requirements of
clause 01.01.01 to submit a bid so long as they fulfill the requirements of having experience in the
commissioning of projects as spelt out in the paragraph and in addition, they would have to have a
collaborator or an associate who meets the requirements of clause 01.01.01. In such a case, the
bidder is required to furnish a consortium agreement jointly executed with the collaborator or
associate. It was in pursuance of the above requirement that the appellant submitted a consortium
agreement with the Chinese company.

32. Clause 7 of the bid documents stipulates that a bidder may collaborate or tie up in any legal form
with other parties. As part of this requirement, clause 7.2 envisages that a Memorandum of
Association should be executed between the members of a bidding consortium in which one of the
members holding at least 50% of the equity/ownership stake would be treated as a lead member to
act for and represent all the members of the consortium. The agreement between the appellant and
the Chinese company does not fall within the description of clause 7.2 since the Chinese company
has no ownership or equity in the project, no MoU as required by the clause was executed between
the appellant and the Chinese entity and it has no contribution in the bid. The agreement was pure
and simple, an agreement in terms of the requirements that were imposed by clause 01.01.02.

33. Neither Telangana State Power Generation Company Limited nor for that matter BHEL raised
any dispute in regard to the eligibility of the appellant to bid for the contract. The challenge was
addressed by the first respondent who is a competing bidder whose bid was admittedly higher than
the bid which was submitted by the successful bidder by approximately Rs 58 crores. The
Procurement Order dated 23 July 2020 imposes a registration requirement and also states that the
bidder would not be eligible unless it is registered in the event that it belongs to a country that
shares a land border with India. The primary decision on whether the appellant meets the technical
requirements of the tender on account of its collaborator/associate being a Chinese company that
was not registered had to be determined by BHEL. BHEL has not found that there was a breach of
the OM dated 23 July 2020 which, as noted earlier, has been relaxed by the subsequent OM dated 8
February 2021. In this context, it has been submitted on behalf of the appellant that out of a total
contract value of Rs 378.64 crores in the contract between BHEL and the appellant, the Chinese
sub-contract for carrying out design and other related aspects of the Ash Handling Plant is to the
extent of US dollars 95,000 corresponding approximately to Rs 78 lakhs, which is only 0.2% of the
entire contract value. BHEL and the Telangana State Power Generation Company found that the
agreement with the Chinese company was in the nature of a service agreement and not a
“consortium” under clause 7.2 of the pre-qualification requirements. The bid was made by the

12

Btl Epc Ltd. vs Macawber Beekay Pvt. Ltd. on 18 September, 2023

appellant as a standalone entity and not in a consortium comprising the unregistered Chinese entity.
It was neither a joint bid nor a bid made by a bidding consortium. Thus, the registration
requirement did not apply. Further, in accordance with the pre- qualification requirements, the
appellant’s manufacturing facilities were duly examined and approved by BHEL, and the bid was
approved after due consideration and satisfaction of BHEL, the tendering authority. The Union
Government by its subsequent OM dated 8 February 2021 has diluted the rigours of the earlier
Procurement Order dated 23 July 2020 by stipulating that the earlier order shall not affect the
procurement of goods and services per se.

34. In this view of the matter, we are of the considered view that the Division Bench which was
considering an appeal against a judgment of a Single Judge rejecting the writ petition ought to have
proceeded with circumspection.

35. It is settled law that in contracts involving complex technical issues, the Court should exercise
restraint in exercising the power of judicial review. Even if a party to the contract is ‘State’ within the
meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution, and as such, is amenable to the writ jurisdiction of the
High Court or the Supreme Court, the Court should not readily interfere in commercial or
contractual matters. This principle has been reiterated in a recent judgment of this Court. Justice J
B Pardiwala, speaking for the Bench in Tata Motors Limited v. BEST held:

“48. This Court being the guardian of fundamental rights Is duty- bound to Interfere
when there Is arbitrariness, irrationality, mala fides, and bias However, this Court
has cautioned time and again that courts should exercise a lot of restraint while
exercising their powers of judicial review In contractual or commercial matters This
Court Is normally loathe to Interfere In contractual matters unless a clear-cut case of
arbitrariness or mala fides or bias or Irrationality Is made out One must remember
that today many public sector undertakings compete with the private industry The
contracts entered Into between private parties are not subject to scrutiny under writ
jurisdiction. No doubt, the bodies which are State within the meaning of Article 12 of
the Constitution are bound to act fairly and are amenable to the writ jurisdiction of
superior courts but this discretionary power must be exercised with a great deal of
restraint and caution. The courts must realise their limitations and the havoc which
needless Interference in commercial matters can cause. In contracts Involving
technical issues the courts should be even more reluctant because most of us in
Judges' robes do not have the necessary expertise to adjudicate upon technical Issues
beyond our domain. The courts should not use a magnifying glass while scanning the
tenders and make every small mistake appear like a big blunder. In fact, the courts
must give fair play In the Joints' to the government and public sector undertakings In
matters of contract. Courts must also not Interfere where such interference will cause
unnecessary loss to the public exchequer. 5”

36. The Court ought to defer to the discretion of the tender inviting authority which, by reason of
having authored the tender documents, is best placed to interpret their terms. The Courts ought not
to sit as courts of appeal but review the decision-making process and examine arbitrariness or mala

13

fides, if any. 6

Btl Epc Ltd. vs Macawber Beekay Pvt. Ltd. on 18 September, 2023

37. Even in a writ appeal, it is well settled that the Division Bench would ordinarily not interfere
with the judgment of a Single Judge unless it suffers from perversity or error. 5 Tata Motors Limited
vs Brihan Mumbai Electric Supply & Transport Undertaking (BEST) and Others, 2023 SCC OnLine
SC 671.

6 Monte Carlo Limited vs National Thermal Power Corporation Limited, (2016) 15 SCC 272.

38. Hence, having considered the rival submissions, and for the above reasons, we are of the view
that the interference of the Division Bench in the judgment of the Single Judge was not warranted.
That apart, during the course of the hearing, it has emerged before this Court that the contract is
under implementation. Paragraphs 39 and 40 of the affidavit which was filed before the High Court
by BHEL are extracted below:

39. Of the total Project work, 80% of the civil work, 72% of the structural work and 65% of the
supply work of the Project in totality has been completed. BTL has completed around 80% of the
mechanical engineering, supply and work worth about INR 50,00,00,000 so far.

40. Further, 99% of the Engineering for the Wet Ash system has been completed by BTL. Moreover,
50% of the Civil and Structural Works of the Power station, being completed by BHEL, is already in
place”

39. At this stage, the High Court has, while setting aside the award of the contract to the appellant,
directed that the bid which was submitted by the first respondent shall be considered in terms of the
Notice Inviting Tenders. Though during the course of the hearing, the first respondent has made a
statement through senior counsel that it would match the bid which was submitted by the appellant,
there can be no gainsaying the fact that this will cause insuperable difficulties in the implementation
of the contract since the work under the contract has progressed. While the appellant was placed on
notice that this would not create any special equities in its favour, there is apart from the interest of
the appellant which is a private entity, the interest of both the Telangana State Power Generation
Company Limited and of BHEL, both of which are public entities which have invested funds for the
realization of the project involving the setting up of the 5x800 MW thermal power plant.

40. For the above reasons, we allow the appeals and set aside the judgment of the Division Bench of
the High Court of Karnataka. The judgment of the Single Judge dismissing the writ petition shall
stand restored. There shall be no order as to costs.

41. The civil appeals are accordingly allowed.

42. Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.

…….……....…...….......…………………..CJI.

14

Btl Epc Ltd. vs Macawber Beekay Pvt. Ltd. on 18 September, 2023

[Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud] …………......…........……………….…........J. [J B Pardiwala]
....……….....…........……………….…........J. [Manoj Misra] New Delhi;

September 18, 2023 CKB

15