C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

Author: B.V. Nagarathna

Bench: B.V. Nagarathna

REPORTABLE
2023 INSC 917
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 11128 OF 2016

C.I.T., DELHI                                    ....APPELLANT(S)

VS.

BHARTI HEXACOM LTD.                            ...RESPONDENT(S)

WITH

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 4902/2022

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 162/2018

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 159/2021

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 4839/2017

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 153/2021

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 6897/2018

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S)._ _______of 2023
(@ SLP (C)_________OF 2023
(@DIARY NO(S). 4178/2019)

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). ________of 2023
(@ SLP(C) NO. 24740/2019)

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). ________of 2023
(@ SLP(C) NO. 20863/2019)

Signature Not Verified
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 158/2021
Digitally signed by
Neetu Sachdeva

1

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

Date: 2023.10.16
16:17:21 IST
Reason:
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 302/2021

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 303/2021

1
(cid:12) CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 11149/2016

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 11148/2016

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 11130/2016

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 11131/2016

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 11134/2016

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 11132/2016

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 11136/2016

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 11133/2016

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 11135/2016

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 11137/2016

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 11140/2016

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 11141/2016

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 11139/2016

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 11142/2016

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 11143/2016

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 11145/2016

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 11146/2016

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 11147/2016

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 163/2018

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 11129/2016

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). ________OF 2023
(@ SLP (C)__________OF 2023

2

DIARY NO(S). 24728/2023)

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

2
(cid:12)                           JUDGMENT

NAGARATHNA, J.

Delay condoned.

2. Leave granted.

3. The judgment of the Division Bench of the High Court of Delhi, dated 19 December, 2013 in ITA
No. 1336 of 2010 and connected matters, whereby the High Court of Delhi, confirming the decision
of the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, New Delhi (hereinafter, “Tribunal” for short) has held that
the variable licence fee paid by the respondents- assessees under the New Telecom Policy, 1999
((hereinafter referred to as “Policy of 1999” for the sake of convenience), is revenue expenditure in
nature and is to be deducted under Section 37 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as
“the Act” for the sake of brevity) is assailed in these appeals. Some of these appeals also arise from
judgments passed by the High Courts of Bombay and Karnataka, following the judgment of the
Division Bench of the High Court of Delhi, dated 19 December, 2013.

4. Since common questions of law and facts arise in these appeals, they have been clubbed together
and heard and disposed of by this common judgment.

Bird’s eye view of the controversy:

5. The controversy in these cases revolves around the question, as to, whether, the variable licence
fee paid by the respondent-assessees to the Department of Telecommunications (hereinafter
referred to as “DoT”, for short) under the New Telecom Policy of 1999 (Policy of 1999) is revenue
expenditure in nature and is to be allowed deduction under Section 37 of the Act, or, whether the
same is capital in nature, Section 35ABB of the Act.

Brief facts of the case:

6. The National Telecom Policy of 1994 was substituted by the New Telecom Policy of 1999 dated 22
July, 1999. The said Policy of 1999 stipulated that the licencee would be required to pay a one-time
entry fee and additionally, a licence fee on a percentage share of gross revenue. The entry fee
chargeable would be the fee payable by the existing operator upto 31 July, 1999, calculated upto the
said date and adjusted upon notional extension of the effective date. Subsequently, w.e.f. 01 August,
1999, licence fee was payable on a percentage of Annual Gross Revenue (“AGR”, for short) earned.
The quantum of revenue share to be charged as licence fee was to be finally decided after obtaining
recommendation of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (“TRAI”) but in the meanwhile, the
Government of India fixed 15% of the gross revenue of the licencee as provisional licence fee. On

3

receipt of TRAI’s recommendation by the Government, adjustment of the dues was to be made.

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

6.1. Clause 7 of the Policy of 1999 stipulated that upon migration thereto, the licencees would forego
the right of operating in a regime of limited number of operators as per the existing licensing
agreement and would operate in a multiple licence regime, that is, additional licences without any
limit could be issued in a given service area. The period of licence was stated to be twenty years from
the effective date of the existing licence agreement, that is, the 1994 Agreement. Migration to the
Policy of 1999 was on the condition and premise that the conditions should be accepted as a package
in entirety and simultaneously and all legal proceedings shall be withdrawn and no dispute relating
to the period upto 31 July, 1999 shall be raised at any future date. If all the terms were accepted,
amendments to the existing licence agreement would be signed. The respondents herein migrated to
the Policy of 1999. They had paid licence fee upto 31 July, 1999. The respondents treated the licence
f e e   p a i d   u p t o   t o   3 1   J u l y ,   1 9 9 9   t h a t   i s ,   t h e   o n e - t i m e   l i c e n c e   f e e   a s   s t i p u l a t e d   i n   t h e
letter/communications dated 22 July, 1999, as capital expenditure.

6.2. The respondent companies which are engaged in the business of telecommunication services
have procured licences in different telecom circles. Initially, the said licences were given under a
licence agreement executed in the year 1994 for a period of ten years subject to expansion of one
year or more at the discretion of the authorities. The said licence was non-transferable and
non-assignable. In case, there was a breach of any term of the licence or default in payment, the
licence could be revoked after providing sixty days’ notice. The licence gave the right to operate the
services within a geographical area on a non-exclusive basis and the authorities would have the right
to modify the conditions of the licence as explained in Schedule A and Schedule B of the licence
agreement, in the interest of general public or for security considerations. The schedules pertained
to the area of service, tariff ceiling etc. 6.3. In the above backdrop, for the sake of convenience, the
specific facts of the lead matter, Civil Appeal No. 11128 of 2016 shall be narrated hereinunder:

Pursuant to the request of the respondent-assessee, a licence was granted to it,
inter-alia on certain terms and conditions to establish, maintain and operate cellular
mobile services. Accordingly, having accepted the Policy of 1999 and migrated
thereto, after paying the licence fee upto 31 July, 1999, i.e., the one-time licence fee as
stipulated in the Communication dated 22 July, 1999, the respondent-assesee
continued in the business of cellular telecommunication and associated value added
s e r v i c e s ,   u n d e r   t h e   r e g i m e   g o v e r n e d   b y   t h e   P o l i c y   o f   1 9 9 9 .   6 . 4 .   T h e
respondent-assessee filed its return of income on 01 November, 2004 for the
assessment year 2003-2004 declaring nil income. The same was processed under
Section 143(1) of the Act on 30 March, 2006. The case was selected for scrutiny and a
notice was issued to the respondent-assessee under Section 143(2) of the Act, on 20
October, 2005.

6.5. It was noted that an amount of Rs. 11,88,81,000/-, which was the licence fee paid
by the assessee on revenue sharing basis, was claimed by the respondent-assessee as
revenue expenditure. In that regard, vide questionnaire dated 15 November, 2006,
the assessee was required to explain as to why the said amount may, instead, be

4

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

treated as capital expenditure and amortised over the remaining licence period of
twelve years. The respondent-assessee furnished its response to the questionnaire, on
04 December, 2006. On consideration of the assessee’s response, an Assessment
Order was passed on 27 December, 2006 observing that the amount of Rs.
11,88,81,000/-, i.e. the licence fee paid by the assessee on revenue sharing basis,
which was claimed as a revenue expense, ought to have instead been amortised over
the remainder of the licence period, i.e., twelve years. Accordingly, an amount of Rs.
99,06,750/- was allowed as a deduction under Section 35ABB of the Act and the
remaining amount of Rs. 10,89,74,250/- was disallowed and added back to the
income of the respondent-assessee. 6.6. Being aggrieved, the respondent-assessee
filed an appeal before the Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeal), New Delhi. In view
of the decision of the Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeal) in the assessee’s own
case for the assessment year 2003-2004, it was reaffirmed vide order dated 27
September, 2007 that the annual licence fee calculated on the basis of annual gross
revenue of the assessee would be revenue expenditure deductible under Section 37 of
the Act. 6.7. Aggrieved by the said order, the appellant-Revenue preferred an appeal
before the Tribunal, New Delhi. By order dated 24 July, 2009, the Tribunal dismissed
the Revenue’s appeal following its earlier order dated 29 May, 2009 in ITA No. 5335
(Del)/2003 in the case of Bharti Cellular Ltd., for the assessment year 2000-2001,
the facts of which case were held to be identical to the facts of the case at hand. Being
aggrieved, the Revenue filed an appeal before the High Court of Delhi. 6.8. Before the
High Court, the Revenue made the following submissions:

That the respondents were granted a licence under the agreement executed under the
Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 (hereinafter referred to as the “Telegraph Act” for the
sake of brevity). This agreement stated that the licence was granted on certain terms
and conditions to establish, maintain and operate cellular mobile services. That the
significance of the words "establish, maintain and operate" in the original licence
cannot be lost sight of under the Telecom Policy of 1999. The nature and character of
the licence fee was not changed. What was changed was only the method of
computation. That the assessees had accepted the licence fee payable under the 1994
Agreement as a capital expenditure. They cannot now dispute the same under the
Policy of 1999. That under the Policy of 1994, from the fourth year onwards, the
assessee had to pay a fixed sum per hundred subscribers. The only change that was
made was in the measure, namely, that under the Policy of 1999, the amount was
modified to 15% of the gross revenue, but the nature and character of the payment
was the same. That mere payment of an amount in instalments did not convert or
change the capital payment to a revenue payment. That in order to acquire the right
to operate telecom services, obtaining of licence was a sine qua non. The term of the
licence was twenty years from the date of commencement and therefore the
expenditure is in the nature of capital expenditure. 6.9. Per contra, the contention of
the assessee before the High Court was that the licence fee payable under the Policy
of 1999 was in the nature of revenue expenditure. This was because the earnings are
shared and the licence fee depends upon the gross revenue and is payable yearly.

5

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

That the new operators under the Policy of 1999 were issued licences and were
required to pay a one-time licence fee for entry and to start operations and in
addition, yearly turn over based licence fee was payable. One-time payment of licence
fee was capital expenditure in nature but yearly payable licence fee was revenue
expenditure. It was a running expense for maintaining and operating the business of
telecommunication and therefore, considered in the commercial sense, the yearly
payment was in the nature of revenue expenditure.

6.10. Since the Tribunal had held that variable licence fee paid by the assessees was
properly deductible as revenue expenditure, the substantial question of law raised by
the High Court at the instance of appellant Revenue was, “whether the variable
licence fee paid by the respondents under the Telegraph Act, and Indian Wireless
Telegraphy Act, 1933 payable under the New Telecom Policy 1999 or 1994
Agreement, is revenue expenditure or capital expenditure which is required to be
amortized under Section 35ABB of the Act?” The pertinent observations of the High
Court and the salient aspects discussed in the judgment dated 19 December, 2013 are
as under:

i. Section 35ABB applies when expenditure of a capital nature is incurred by an
assessee for acquiring a right for operating telecommunication services. It is
immaterial whether the expenditure is/was incurred before or after commencement
of the business to operate telecommunication services but what is material is that the
payment should be actually made. That Section 35ABB is not a deeming provision but
comes into operation and is effective when the expenditure itself is of a capital nature
and is incurred towards acquiring a right to operate telecommunication services or
for the purposes of obtaining a licence for the said services. That Section 35ABB does
not help in determining and deciding the question, as to, whether licence fee paid
under the Policy of 1999 or under the 1994 Agreement, was/is capital or revenue in
nature.

ii. That there was no decision of the Supreme Court or any of the High Courts directly
applicable to the factual matrix of the case and therefore, it would be useful to
consider a number of decisions of this Court including, Empire Jute Co. Ltd. vs.
Commissioner of Income Tax, (1980) 124 ITR 1 (“Empire Jute Co. Ltd.”); Assam
Bengal Cement Co. Ltd. vs. CIT, West Bengal, (1955) 27 ITR 34 (“Assam Bengal
Cement Co. Ltd.”); Board of Agricultural Income Tax, Assam vs. Sindhurani
Chaudurani, (1957) 32 ITR 169 (“Sindhurani”); Enterprising Enterprises vs. Deputy
Commissioner of Income Tax, (2007) 293 ITR 437 (“Enterprising Enterprises”).

iii. Having referred to the aforesaid decisions, three other judgments were noticed by the Delhi High
Court which, according to learned ASG appearing for the appellant-Revenue were wrongly applied
to the case at hand. The said judgments are, Jonas Woodhead and Sons Ltd. vs. Commissioner of
Income Tax, (1997) 224 ITR 342 (“Jonas Woodhead and Sons”), Southern Switch Gear Ltd. vs. CIT,
(1998) 232 ITR 359 (“Southern Switch Gear Ltd.”); CIT, Madras vs. Best and Co. (Pvt.) Ltd., (1966)

6

60 ITR 11 (“Best and Co.”).

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

iv. After considering all of the aforesaid judgments, the Delhi High Court in paragraph 29 discerned
the facts of the present case as under:

“29. When we turn to the facts of the present case, the following position emerges:

i. The licence was issued under a statutory mandate and was required and acquired,
before the commencement of operations or business, to establish and also to
maintain and operate cellular telephone services.

ii. The licence was for initial setting up but, thereafter for maintaining and operating
cellular telephone services during the term of the licence.

iii. Contrary to what was stated, under the licence agreement executed in 1994 the
considerations paid and payable were with the understanding that there would be
only two players who would have unfettered right to operate and provide cellular
telephone service in the circle. The payment, therefore, had element of warding off
competition or protecting the business from third party competition.

iv. Under the 1994 agreement, the licence was initially for 10 years extendable by one
year or more at the discretion of the Government/authority.

v. 1994 Licence was not assignable or transferable to a third party or by way of a sub-
licence or in partnership. There was no stipulation regarding transfer or issue of
shares to third parties in the company.

vi. Under the 1994 agreement, the licencee was liable to pay fixed licence fee for first
3 years. For 4th year and onwards, the licencee was liable to pay variable licence fee
@ Rs.

5,00,000/- per 100 subscribers or part thereof, with a specific stipulation on
minimum licence fee payable for 4th to 6th year and with modified but similar
stipulations from 7th year onwards. vii. The licence could be revoked at any time on
breach of the terms and conditions or in default of payment of consideration by
giving 60 days' notice.

viii. The authority also reserved the right to revoke the licence in the interest of public
by giving 60 days' notice.

ix. Under 1999 policy, the licencee had to forego the right of operating in the regime
of limited number of operators and agreed to multiparty regime competition where
additional licences could be issued without limit.

7

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

x. There was lock in period on the present shareholding for a period of 5 years from
the date of licence agreement i.e. the effective date and even transfer of shareholding
directly or indirectly through subsidiary or holding company, was not permitted
during this period. This had the effect of ‘modifying’ or clarifying the 1994 agreement,
which was silent.

xi. Licence fee calculated as a percentage of gross revenue was payable w.e.f. 1
August, 1999.

This was provisionally fixed at 15% of the gross revenue of the licensee but was
subject to final decision of the Government about the quantum of revenue share to be
charged as licence fee after obtaining recommendation of the Telecom Regulatory
Authority of India (TRAI).

xii. At least 35% of the outstanding dues including interest payable as on 31 July,
1999 and liquidated damages in full, had to be paid on or before 15 August, 1999.
Dates for payments of arrears were specified.

xiii. Past dues upto 31 July, 1999 along with liquidated damages had to be paid as
stipulated in the 1999 policy, on or before 31 January, 2000 or earlier date as stated.

xiv. The period of licences under 1999 policy was extended to 20 years starting from
the effective date.

xv. Failure to pay the licence fee on yearly basis would result in cancellation of
licences.

Therefore, to this extent licence fee was/is payable for operating and continuing
operations as cellular telephone operator.” v. On a consideration of the aforesaid
aspects, the Delhi High Court held that the payment of licence fee was capital in part
and revenue in part and that it would not be correct to hold that the whole fee was
capital or revenue in nature in its entirety. It was further observed that the
licencees/assessees in question required a licence in order to start or commence
business as cellular telephone operators; that payment of a licence fee was a
precondition for the assessees to commence or set up the business. That it was a
privilege granted to the assessee subject to payment and compliance with the terms
and conditions. For immediate reference, paragraph Nos.31 to 36 of the said
judgment are extracted as under:

“31. Licence fee under the 1994 agreement ensured that there would be only two
private operators in a circle and thus their limited monopoly would be protected and
competition by way of third-party private players was warded off. Restricted
monopoly of the licencees was ensured. The licence fee fixed included an element
towards the said right of the licencees. 1994 agreement, for first three years

8

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

postulated a lump-sum payment irrespective of number of subscribers. Minimum fee
was also prescribed for later years. It appears that licencees were unable to make
payments as per the 1994 agreement and under the 1999 policy, were required to pay
lump-sum payment for past arrears before specified dates.

32. There was restriction under the 1994 agreement, on transfer of the licence or even
grant sub-

licence but there was no specific restriction on change of shareholding. 1999 policy ensured that
even shareholding did not change for a period of 5 years from the effective date. The effect of
acquiring the licence has been examined in paragraph 15 above. The licence was not assignable or
transferrable as such, but induction of share capital, transfer of shares etc. was permitted subject to
conditions in the 1999 policy. In commercial sense the licence constituted and continues to be the
most valuable right which the company has and possesses. Thus, the payment made is for acquiring
the licence which is essential and mandatory, prerequisite for establishing the business and for
operations or continuance and running of business. Yet, as observed below, it cannot be equated
with one time entry fee which a person has to pay to establish the business. It therefore, represents
composite payment, both capital and revenue.

33. The licence fee was imposed and payable under the Indian Telegraph Act and other statutory
provisions and was/is mandatory. Failure to pay the same would/will result in discontinuance or
stoppage of business operations. Under 1999 policy, the amount payable speaks of sharing of gross
revenue earned by the service provider from the customers. 1994 agreement as noticed did have a
provision for sharing but with minimum payment stipulation. In case of non- payment of licence fee,
the licence could be revoked and licencee was not permitted to carry on and continue cellular
telephone service. Thus, the licence fee payable was/is equally with the objective and purpose to
maintain and operate cellular telephone services. It was also an operating expense and non payment
can lead to cancellation as one of the consequences. Endurement requires current expenses and is
subject to payment on revenue share. It will not be correct to hold or propound that entire payment
during the term of licence, is deferred capital payment. This was/is not the intent under the 1994
agreement or 1999 policy. The intent is to also share the gross earning to maintain and operate the
licence.

34. The licence fee as such is similar to both prospecting fee, acquisition of right to lease as well as
leases which enabled removal of sand/tendu leaves, etc. as nothing has to be won over, or extracted.
Part payment was towards an initial investment which an assessee had to make to establish the
business. It was a precondition to setting up of business. It has element and includes payment made
to acquire the ‘asset’ i.e. the right to establish cellular telephone service. But the licence permits and
allows the assessee to maintain, operate and continue business activities. Payment of licence fee has
certain ingredients and is like lease rent which is payable from time to time to be able to use the
licence.

35. The licence acquired was initially for 10 years and the term was extended under the 1999 policy
to 20 years but this itself does not justify treating the licence fee paid on revenue sharing basis under

9

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

the 1999 policy as a capital expense made to acquire an asset. As observed in Empire Jute Co. Ltd.
(supra), the enduring benefit test has limitation and cannot be mechanically applied without
considering the commercial or business aspects. Practical and pragmatic view and considerations
rather than juristic classification is the determinative factor. The payment of yearly licence fee on
revenue sharing basis is for carrying on business as cellular telephone operator. It is a normal
business expense.

36. Read in this manner, the licence granted by the Government/authority to the assessee would be
a capital asset, yet at the same time, the assessee has to make payment on yearly basis on the gross
revenue to continue, to be able to operate and run the business, it would also be revenue in nature.
Failure to make stipulated revenue sharing payment on yearly basis would result in forfeiting the
right to operate and in turn deny the assessee, right to do business with the aid of the capital asset.
Non-payment will prevent and bar an assessee from providing services.” vi. In paragraph 36, it was
observed that the licence granted by the Government or the concerned authority to the assessee
would be a capital asset and yet, since the assessee had to make the payment on a yearly basis on the
gross revenue to continue to be able to operate and run the business, it would also be in the nature
of revenue expenditure. Having opined thus, the High Court decided to apportion the licence fee as
partly revenue and partly capital and divided the licence fee into two periods, that is, before and
after 31 July, 1999 and observed that the licence fee that had been paid or was payable for the period
upto 31 July, 1999 i.e. the date set out in the Policy of 1999, should be treated as capital expenditure
and the balance amount payable on or after the said date should be treated as revenue expenditure.
The reasons for the same were stipulated in paragraphs 43 to 46 of the said judgment which reads as
under:

“43. Licence fee was payable for establishment, maintenance and operation of
cellular telephone service. Establishment and set up took place in the initial years and
thereafter the payments made were/are for operation or maintaining the cellular
telephone service. Initial outlay and payment, therefore, is capital in nature, whereas
the outlays and payments made subsequently are to operate and maintain the service.
1999 policy in the form of letter dated 22 July, 1999 also refers to one time entry fee
which is chargeable and had to be calculated as licence fee dues payable upto 31 July,
1999 and licence fee was thereafter payable on percentage share of gross revenue.
The new licences issued to others also stipulated one time entry fee and then licence
fee payment on sharing basis. In view of the new 1999 policy, the earlier policy which
restricted competition, underwent a change and licencees forgo their right to operate
in the regime of limited number of operators. Another reason why we feel that licence
fee payable for the period on or before 31 July, 1999 should be treated as capital and
the amount payable thereafter as revenue, is justified and appropriate in view of
Section 35ABB. We have already quoted the said section above. The provision
provides that licence fee of capital nature shall be amortized by dividing the amount
by number of remainder years of licences. Thus, the capitalized amount of licence fee
is to be apportioned as a deduction in the unexpired period of the licence. The
provision will have ballooning effect with amortized amount substantially increasing
in the later years and in the last year the entire licence fee alongwith the brought

10

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

forward amortized amount would be allowed as deduction. After a particular point of
time, deduction allowable under Section 35ABB would be more than the actual
payment by the assessee as licence fee for the said year. This would normally happen
after the mid-term of the licence period. Section 35ABB, therefore, ensures that the
capital payment is duly allowed as a deduction over the term and once the
expenditure is allowed, it would be revenue or tax neutral provided the tax rates
remain the same during this period.

44. ITA Nos. at serial Nos. 1 to 9 above primarily relate to variable licence fee, which
is to be shared under the 1999 Policy whereas, ITA No. 417/2013 filed against
Hutchison Essar Ltd. relates to the period of variable licence fee payable for the
fourth year under the 1994 Agreement.

45. The effect thereof is that we are treating about 20% of the expenditure in terms of
the tenure as per the 1999 Policy as capital in nature, whereas if we apply the 1994
Agreement, we would be treating about 40% of the expenditure as per the tenure as
payable towards establishing or setting up of cellular business. By the time 1999
Policy was implemented in the case of the respondents-assessees, the cellular
telephone business had already commenced and was in operation. The 1999 Policy
had the effect of extending period of licence from 10 years to 20 years, but from the
effective date. The view, we have taken, effectively means that the entire licence fee
paid in the initial first four years is treated as capital in nature i.e. the expenditure
incurred to establish cellular telephone business, whereas the balance expenditure
payable on year to year basis from 5 year onwards is treated as revenue expenditure
to run and operate cellular telephone business.

46. However, we would like to discuss two judgments relied upon by Huthison Essar
Pvt. Ltd. in support of their contention that the variable fee even prior to 31 July,
1999 should be treated as revenue expenditure. As noted above, this was the 4 year
and the contention of the assessee is that in this year even as per the 1994 agreement,
payment had to be made on revenue sharing basis subject to the minimum guarantee.
Learned counsel for the assessee had relied upon CIT v. Sharda Motors Industry Ltd.
(supra). In the said case reference was made to J.K. Synthetics Ltd. (supra) to hold
that no substantial question of law arises. The Revenue had relied upon Southern
Switch Gear Ltd. v. CIT (1998) 232 ITR 359 (SC), but the said judgment was
distinguished on the ground that lump-sum royalty was paid and 25% thereof was
disallowed by the tribunal on the ground that it was capital payment. In Sharda
Motor Industries Ltd.

(supra), royalty was to be paid on quantity of goods produced calculated per piece. However, this
does not appear to be sole basis why the payment made was treated as revenue expenditure. The
court had relied upon other facts which are noticed in paragraph 3 of the same judgment i.e. the
payment was made for running business. The question of apportionment and payment was not
made to establish business. In CIT v. Modi Revlon (P.) Ltd. (2012) 26 Taxmann.com 133 (Delhi), a

11

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

Division Bench of this High Court observed that the tests evolved over the period have disapproved
the applicability of the ‘once and for all’ payment and more structured approach which would take
into account several factors like the licence tenure; whether licence created further rights; whether
there was restriction for use of confidential information; whether benefits were transferred once and
for all; whether after expiry of the licence, plans and drawings were to be returned, etc. As held and
observed above, it is nature and object for which the payment is made which determines the
character of payment. In the said case, it was observed that there was nothing to show or to suggest
vesting of knowhow in the assessee and therefore, the assessee did not derive any enduring benefit.
Thus, the royalty payment was held to be revenue in nature.” In view of the above discussion, the
substantial question was answered by the High Court in the following manner:

“47. In view of the aforesaid findings, the substantial question mentioned above in
item Nos. 1 to 9 is answered in the following manner:

(i) The expenditure incurred towards licence fee is partly revenue and partly capital.
Licence fee payable upto 31 July, 1999 should be treated as capital expenditure and
licence fee on revenue sharing basis after 1 August, 1999 should be treated as revenue
expenditure.

(ii) Capital expenditure will qualify for deduction as per Section 35ABB of the Act.

48. The appeal ITA No. 417/2013 by the Revenue in the case of Hutchison Essar Pvt. Ltd., pertains
to the assessment year 1999-2000 i.e. year ending 31 March, 1999. It is for the period prior to the
period 31 July, 1999. As per the discussion above, the licence fee payable on or before 31 July, 1999
should be treated as capital expenditure and the licence fee payable thereafter should be treated as
revenue expenditure. In view of the aforesaid position, the question of law admitted for hearing in
this appeal as recorded in the order dated 21 August, 2013, has to be answered in favour of the
revenue and against the respondent assessee.” 6.11. Aggrieved by the aforesaid reasoning and
conclusions arrived at by the High Court of Delhi in its judgment dated 19 December, 2013, which
has been followed by High Courts of Delhi, Bombay and Karnataka, the appellant-Revenue has
preferred these appeals. Submissions:

7. We have heard the learned Additional Solicitor General of India (ASG), Sri N. Venkataraman for
the Revenue and learned senior counsel Sri Ajay Vohra, Sri Arvind Datar and learned counsel Sri
Sachit Jolly, for the respondent-assessees and perused the material placed on record.

Submissions on behalf of the appellant-Revenue:

7.1. Learned ASG, at the outset, submitted that the judgment of the High Court of
Delhi dated 19 December, 2013 is incorrect inasmuch as it has sought to dissect the
payment of licence fee to hold that the entry fee paid in the initial four years ought to
be treated as capital expenditure and amortised accordingly, while the fee payable on
an annual basis from the fifth year onwards, as a percentage of the gross revenue of
the assessees was treated as revenue/business expenditure.

12

It was further contended as follows:

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

i. That the schedule of payment cannot recharacterize the transaction under income
tax law, particularly when this Court had laid down from time to time that the
schedule of payment, whether lump-sum or periodical, is immaterial in determining
its classification under income tax law. The payment(s) towards the same purpose,
i.e., payment of licence fee, cannot be characterised partly as capital and partly as
revenue in nature by artificially defining one part as an entry fee and the remainder,
payable annually, when both types of payment was towards licence fees. ii. That when
the respondent-assessees have duly amortised the licence fee paid annually as capital
expenditure, under the 1994 licence regime as well as the entry fee under the Policy
of 1999 regime, there was no basis to reclassify the same as revenue expenditure
insofar as variable licence fee is concerned for the subsequent years. Variable
payments made annually, based on the annual gross revenue in the relevant year
were also towards licence fee. Therefore, there could not have been a shift in the tax
treatment thereof upon migration to a new regime, wherein merely the payment
schedule was revised while preserving the character of the payment.

iii. That payments made, either of entry fee or of annual licence fee, is in essence only
towards securing a licence to establish, maintain or operate a telegraph i.e. system. If
either of the aforesaid payments is not made, or short paid, the licence would be
revoked under Section 8 of the Telegraph Act. Further, Section 4 of the said Act
authorises the Government to grant licence against a consideration. Therefore, both
entry fee as well as annual licence fee are included within the ambit of ‘consideration’
chargeable under Section 4. Hence, any submission that licence fee should be split
into two components, namely, entry fee for acquiring the licence and variable licence
fee for operating the licence, has no legal basis. Such a fragmentation is neither
statutorily permissible, nor prescribed in the licence agreement.

iv. Referring to Section 35ABB of the Act, which allows amortisation of expenditure
incurred for obtaining a licence to operate telecommunication services, it was
contended that the said provision applies in relation to payments made for “acquiring
any right to operate telecommunication services” whether such payment was made
“before the commencement of the business to operate or thereafter at any time
during the previous year.” In view of the aforesaid expression, the mode and manner
of payment becomes irrelevant. As long as the payment is towards licence fee, the
expenditure so incurred will be “in the nature of capital expenditure” as envisaged
under Section 35ABB of the Act. v. That the expression “either before the
commencement of the business to operate or thereafter” is also found in Section
35ABA of the Act which pertains to the right to use Spectrum, similar to Section
35ABB which relates to licence to operate telecommunication services. The legislative
intent is therefore clear that both these rights would flow from the Central
Government on payment, and further, the payment would be partly lump-sum and
partly in a deferred manner, considering the nature of rights acquired.

13

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

vi. Reliance was placed on the decision of a Constitution-Bench of this Court in
Aditya Minerals Pvt. Ltd. vs. Commissioner of Income Tax, (1999) 8 SCC 97 (“Aditya
Minerals Pvt. Ltd.”) to assert that the law laid down therein is that as long as
payment is towards a capital expenditure, it is immaterial whether it is paid in
lump-sum or as periodical payments, or, as a combination of both. That the mode of
payment will not be determinative in identifying the nature of the expenditure, i.e., as
to whether it is capital or not. vii. That the decision of this Court in Assam Bengal
Cement Co. Ltd.

has clarified that the aim and object of the expenditure would determine the
character thereof, while the source and manner of payment would have no
consequence.

viii. Referring to the cases of Jonas Woodhead and Sons, Southern Switch Gear Ltd.
and Best and Co., which have been referred to by the High Court of Delhi in the
impugned judgement, it was submitted that reliance on the said cases is misplaced
inasmuch as the said cases did not deal with a single source/purpose towards which
payments in different forms had been made. On the contrary, in the said cases, the
purpose of payments was traceable to different subject matters and accordingly, this
Court held that the payments could be apportioned. However, in the present case, the
licence issued under Section 4 of the Telegraph Act is a single licence to establish,
maintain and operate telecommunication services. Since it is not a licence for
divisible rights which conceives of divisible payments, apportionment of the licence
fee by holding that the entry fee paid is towards establishment and therefore, capital,
while the licence fee paid as a percentage of gross revenue is towards operation and
maintenance and therefore, Revenue, is without legal basis.

ix. Reliance was placed on the decision of this Court in CIT vs. Jalan Trading Co. Pvt.
Ltd., (1985) 4 SCC 59 (“Jalan Trading Co.”) to submit that in the said case this Court
had an occasion to consider an annual payment in the form of profit sharing towards
the right to carry on business. That in the said case, this Court concluded that the
annual payment of 75% profit share would still be a payment that was capital in
nature, as the same was paid as consideration under a deed of assignment for the
right to carry on business. That this judgement will squarely apply to the facts of the
present case since the annual payment based on AGR is only towards licence fees and
merely because it is paid on the annual gross revenue, the payment cannot be
construed as a revenue expenditure.

With the aforesaid submissions, it was prayed that these appeals filed by the Revenue
be allowed and the impugned judgments of the High Courts of Delhi, Bombay and
Karnataka, following the judgment of the Division Bench of the High Court of Delhi
dated 19 December, 2013, be set aside and it be declared that the annual payment is
in the nature of a capital expenditure. 7.2. Per contra, learned senior counsel, Sri Ajay
Vohra, appearing on behalf of the respondent-assessees in Civil Appeal No. 11130 of

14

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

2016, supported the judgment of the Division Bench of the High Court of Delhi dated
19 December, 2013 and submitted that the said judgment was passed based on a
correct appreciation of the facts of the case and the law and therefore, the same
would not call for any interference by this Court. It was further submitted as follows:

i. That on a bare reading of the said provision and the mode of amortisation of
expenses, it is patently clear that the same would be applicable only if the following
cumulative conditions are satisfied:

a) the expenditure is capital in nature;

b) the expenditure is incurred by an assessee on acquisition of the right to operate
telecom services;

c) the expenditure represents payment actually made to obtain a licence.

Thus, for attracting the provisions of Section 35ABB, it is necessary that the expenditure under
consideration must be capital in nature and is incurred for acquiring or obtaining a licence, which
gives the right to the assessee to operate telecom services.

ii. That in the present case, the respondent-assessees had obtained the licence in the year 1994 and
h a d   t h e r e a f t e r   s e t   u p   t h e   t e l e c o m m u n i c a t i o n   i n f r a s t r u c t u r e   a n d   s t a r t e d   o p e r a t i n g
telecommunication services. The payment of licence fee under the fixed regime, i.e., prior to
migration to the Policy of 1999 was for obtaining the licence, thereby resulting in the acquisition of
the right to operate telecommunication services. Therefore, the fixed licence fee upto 31 July, 1999
was amortised and allowed in terms of Section 35ABB of the Act. On the other hand, the variable
licence fee payable w.e.f. 01 August, 1999, is a percentage of the AGR. The same is not in the nature
of capital expenditure as it is not incurred with a view to acquire the right to operate
telecommunication services. The said services were already being operated by the respondents by
virtue of a licence which had been obtained in the year 1994. The variable licence fee was, thus, for
continuing the right to operate telecommunication services, which were already being operated and
provided by the respondent-assessees. iii. Referring to the salient features of the Policy of 1999, it
was submitted that the said policy made a paradigm shift by making qualitative changes in licence
conditions. It facilitated the entry of new players on payment of one-time entry fee and variable
revenue share. The policy document highlights and emphasises the distinction between a one-time
fee which is the payment for obtaining the licence, on the one hand and the variable licence fee,
which is payment made on a recurring basis based on revenue share, for continuing the right to
operate telecommunication services. Therefore, the one-time entry fee to be paid by a new entrant
obtaining a licence post 31 July 1999 is required to be amortised under section 30ABB of the Act
while the variable licence fee payable as a revenue share would be admissible business expenditure
or revenue deduction.

iv. That the Policy of 1999 has not only changed the mechanism of payment but also modified the
rights accruing under the licence already obtained vide the original agreement dated 29 November

15

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

1994, in lieu of the payment of variable licence fee. The tenure of the licence was increased from ten
to twenty years; the licence fee was bifurcated into two parts, i.e., fixed entry fee paid for obtaining
the licence and variable annual licence fee paid for continuing with the licence. Thereby the whole
complexion of the consideration provided under the original agreement, was changed. That, since
the restriction of the number of players or operators in each region was completely lifted, coupled
with the fact that variable licence fee was to be paid on an annual basis, in order to continue with the
right to operate telecommunication services, no enduring benefit was accruing to the
respondent-assessees. Neither was there any monopoly right, nor would the licence remain valid
and subsist for an indefinite period of time. The licence would be valid only so long as the annual
payment of variable licence fee was made. v. That the provisions of Section 35ABB of the Act were
introduced in the year 1996. At that time, the concept of variable licence fee did not exist.
Application of the said provision to variable licence fee would give rise to absurd results, not
intended by the Legislature. vi. That payment of variable licence fee from 01 August, 1999 is not for
“acquiring any right to operate telecommunication services”, which right vested in and was being
exploited by the assessees pursuant to obtaining the licence in 1994 and setting up the requisite
infrastructure.

vii. Further, variable licence fee paid from 01 August, 1999 could not be regarded as payment made
“to obtain a licence”, so as to fall within the ambit of Section 35ABB of the Act.

That Section 35ABB of the Act would not be attracted in the present case to require amortisation of
the variable licence fee, because:

a) payment of variable licence fee is not in the nature of capital expenditure;

b )   s u c h   p a y m e n t   i s   n o t   i n c u r r e d   f o r   “ a c q u i r i n g   a n y   r i g h t   t o   o p e r a t e
telecommunication services”;

c) such payment has not been made “to obtain a licence”.

With the aforesaid submissions, it was prayed that the High Courts’ decision as to the inapplicability
of Section 35ABB of the Act, to the facts of the present case, be upheld, and these appeals be
dismissed as being devoid of merit.

7.3. Learned senior counsel, Sri Arvind P. Datar, appearing on behalf of some of the
respondent-assessees in Civil Appeal Nos. 11131 of 2016 and 153 of 2021 adopted the submissions of
Sri Ajay Vohra and further submitted as under:

i. That it would be incorrect to suggest that the annual licence fee which is paid as a
percentage of the revenue earnings is paid to acquire the right and obtain the licence.
That it is absurd to state that every year, each telecom licencee acquires the right and
obtains a licence. Acquisition of the right and obtaining the licence is a one-time
event and the expenditure for acquisition of the licence is always capital expenditure.
Section 35ABB of the Act covers this aspect of the transaction.

16

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

ii. That the annual licence fee, even though termed as a licence fee is in essence,
expenditure incurred to operate the telecommunication services from year to year.
Such expenditure is incurred annually to earn revenue and consequently is an annual
revenue expenditure. In various sectors, such as mining, oil exploration, etc., the
licences are acquired on payment of a lump-sum amount. This expenditure is to
acquire a right and obtain licence to engage in mining, oil exploration, and so on.
Thereafter, annual amounts are paid, depending on the quantities of minerals or
petroleum that is extracted. It was submitted that by analogy, the one-time entry fee
paid by existing telecom operators and the entry fee that was paid by all the new
entrants, was capital expenditure which resulted in acquisition of rights and
obtaining licence. However, the annual licence fee, which varied according to the
AGR in the relevant year, was incurred annually on revenue earned and consequently
is an annual revenue expenditure. iii. Referring to the decision of this Court in Mewar
Sugar Mills Ltd.

vs. CIT, (1973) 3 SCC 143 (“Mewar Sugar Mills Ltd.”), it was submitted that in the
said case, the expenditure incurred by the assessee was apportioned and it was held
that the sums paid by the assessee for acquisition of monopoly rights for manufacture
of sugar were in the nature of capital expenditure, while the royalty paid on a yearly
basis was revenue expenditure. It was submitted in that context that the principle
laid down in the said case would directly apply to the case at hand. The one-time
entry fee is payed for acquiring the licence and is therefore in the nature of capital
expenditure; whereas, the annual licence fee is to operate the licence and earn profits,
therefore, the same is revenue expenditure.

iv. That a similar view was taken in CIT vs. Sarada Binding Works, (1976) 102 ITR
187 (“Sarada Binding Works”) wherein the Madras High Court considered various
judgments of this Court and held that a lump-sum payment to acquire a right would
be capital expenditure, whereas any amount paid as royalty based on annual earnings
or profit would be revenue expenditure. That the payment of annual licence fee, in
the present case, would be similar to the payment of royalty as it relates to the annual
turnover and would therefore be revenue in nature.

v. That it could not be axiomatically held that the nomenclature ‘annual licence fee’ would itself
indicate that the annual variable licence fee was also incurred for the purpose of acquiring the
capital asset, i.e., the licence and therefore, had to be amortised under Section 35ABB of the Act. The
nomenclature does not mean that a licence is acquired annually or the licence is obtained annually.
This amount is the expenditure incurred to operate the telecom licence and earn revenue or profits.
In this regard, reliance was placed on the dictum of this Court in Sundaram Finance Ltd. vs. State of
Kerala, (1966) 2 SCR 828 to submit that the use of a particular expression is not conclusive of the
nature of a transaction.

vi. That the judgment of this Court in Jalan Trading Co., sought to be relied upon by the
appellant-Revenue would have no application to the facts of the present case as unlike in the case at

17

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

hand, there was no lump-sum payment in the said case. The agreement itself provided for 75% of
the net profits to be paid for the assignment of the right to carry on business. The aim or object of
payment of the said consideration was for the purpose of acquiring the right to carry on business.
However, in the present case, the annual licence fee is paid not to acquire the licence, but to operate
the telecom licence and earn revenue or profits. Hence, the decision of this Court in Jalan Trading
Co., turns on its own facts. 7.4. Sri Sachit Jolly, learned counsel appearing for the respondent-
assessees in Civil Appeal No. 4902 of 2022 adopted the submissions of learned senior counsel, Sri
Ajay Vohra and Sri Arvind P. Datar and further contended as follows:

i. That merely because the DoT can rescind the licence owing to non-

payment of the variable licence fee, it does not mean that the payment of such fee is
towards the acquisition of the licence. Violation of other conditions of licence like
non-maintenance of KYC of subscribers could also lead to cancellation of licence. In
fact, payment of licence fee for any one year, neither leads to acquisition of any new
asset nor to any enduring benefit. Further, the benefit, if any, of the variable licence
fee is only restricted to one year to which the payment pertains. Hence, the same
could not be held to be capital expenditure or expenditure incurred for acquisition of
a capital asset.

ii. That the interpretation sought to be canvassed by the appellant would result in a
completely absurd result wherein the deduction under Section 35ABB would exceed
the actual payment made by the assessee in a given year, in the later years. This
aspect of the matter was rightly appreciated by the Delhi High Court in the impugned
judgement and it was accordingly held that the interpretation proposed by the
appellant would give Section 35ABB a ballooning effect with the amortised amount
substantially increasing in the later years and in the last year, the entire licence fee
along with the brought forward, amortised amount would be allowed as deduction. It
was rightly held that after a certain point of time, deduction allowable under Section
35ABB would be more than the actual payment made by the assessee as licence fee
for that year.

In this context, reliance was placed on the decision of this Court in CIT, Bangalore vs.
J.H. Gotla, A.I.R. 1985 SC 1698 to contend that it is settled law that an interpretation
which leads to an absurd result should be avoided and such interpretation should
give way to a more harmonious interpretation so that the legislation is given its
desired result.

iii. With the aforesaid submissions, it was stated that the impugned decision of the
High Court of Delhi is detailed and well-reasoned. It is not contrary to any principle
laid down by this Court and hence does not merit interference. It was prayed that the
appeals filed by the Revenue be dismissed on the ground that there is no infirmity in
the impugned judgment of the High Court of Delhi. Reply arguments:

18

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

8. By way of reply, learned ASG, Sri N. Venkataraman, reiterated his submissions while also
contending that the judgment of this Court in Mewar Sugar Mills Ltd. and the judgment of the
Madras High Court in Sarada Binding Works, relied upon by Sri Datar to substantiate the claim that
the same source of expenditure incurred by an assessee could be construed as partly capital and
partly revenue would not come to the aid of the respondents-assessees in the present case. In this
regard, it was further submitted as follows:

i. That in both the aforesaid cases sought to be relied upon by Sri Datar, a single
source of expenditure was not split partly as capital and partly as revenue
expenditure. On the contrary, in both of those decisions, this Court examined two
different constituents of expenditure and held one to be capital and the other to be
revenue in nature.

ii. That in Sarada Binding Works the facts were that the agreement in question
envisaged conveyances of two distinct aspects: first, the right to run the business of
Chandamama Publications for a consideration of a fixed sum of Rs.5000/- per
annum; second, royalty on the sales equivalent to 10% of the net profit of each year of
business. The High Court’s judgment categorically records that annual payments
based on the turnover had no nexus with the payment made to acquire the right to
carry on trade, which was also paid annually at Rs.5000/- every year. However, in
the facts of the present case, the entry fee as well as the annual licence fee payable as
a percentage of AGR, are both towards the same purpose, i.e., acquisition of licence to
carry on telecommunication operator services.

iii. That similarly, in the case of Mewar Sugar Mills Ltd., two different payments were
made, relatable to two different subject matters. In the said judgment, this Court
noted that the payment of royalty based on quantity of sugar manufactured, was not
with a view to acquire monopoly rights. In the said case, there were two clearly
discernible purposes towards which the payment of lump-sum consideration and
payment of royalty were made. However, in the present case, the purpose of payment
of entry fee as well as the annual licence fee, is singular, i.e., to acquire and retain the
right to carry on the business of rendering telecommunication services. In light of the
aforesaid submissions, Sri N. Venkataraman urged that this Bench may allow the
appeals filed by the Revenue. Points for consideration:

9. Having heard the learned counsel for the respective parties and on perusal of the material on
record, the following points would emerge for our consideration:

i. Whether the variable annual licence fee paid by the respondents-

assessees to the DoT under the Policy of 1999 is revenue in nature and is to be
allowed deduction under Section 37 of the Act, or, the same is capital in nature and is
accordingly required to be amortised under Section 35ABB of the Act?

19

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

ii. Whether the High Court of Delhi was right in apportioning the licence fee as partly
revenue and partly capital by dividing the licence fee into two periods, that is, before
and after 31st July, 1999 and accordingly holding that the licence fee paid or payable
for the period upto 31 July, 1999 i.e. the date set out in the Policy of 1999 should be
treated as capital and the balance amount payable on or after the said date should be
treated as revenue?

iii.         What order?

Statutory Framework:

10. The statutory scheme and structure of the Act on the characterisation of capital
expenditure is as follows:

10.1. Section 32 of the Act identifies tangible and intangible assets which are capital in nature and
prescribes the mode and manner of depreciation. Section 32(1)(i) identifies a list of tangible assets
and Section 32(1)(ii), a set of intangible assets which includes licences. Explanation 3 to Section
32(1) defines ‘assets’ into two categories, i.e., tangible and intangible. Licences are identified as
intangible assets and are therefore, capital in nature.

10.2. Any capital asset is depreciable in terms of Section 32 of the Act, unless specifically dealt with
elsewhere. One of the exceptions to depreciation of capital assets is amortisation. Sections 35A,
35AB, 35ABA and 35ABB form one cluster of exceptions wherein, the capital assets referred to in the
relevant sections have to be amortised in the manner and mode prescribed therein.

10.3. Amortisation is a form of depreciation, however, the distinction between the two being that in
the case of depreciation, an asset may be depreciated progressively, and may even be exhausted
before the lifetime expectancy of the asset in question, whereas, in the case of amortisation, the
value of the asset gets progressively depleted, matching with the expected timeframe of the right.
10.4. A brief overview of the provisions of the Act which provide for amortisation as a prescribed
method, is as under:

i. Section 35A of the Act provides for amortisation of expenditure incurred on
acquisition of patent rights or copyright which are intangible assets.

ii. Section 35AB of the Act prescribes the method of amortisation in the case of
acquisition of know-how.

iii. Section 35ABA of the Act prescribes the method of amortisation of expenditure
incurred on obtaining the right to use spectrum. iv. Section 35ABB of the Act
provides for amortisation of the expenditure incurred for obtaining a licence to
operate telecommunication services.

20

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

11. At this juncture, it would be useful to reproduce Section 35ABB (1) of the Act, which reads as
under:

“35ABB. Expenditure for obtaining licence to operate telecommunication services.—
(1) In respect of any expenditure, being in the nature of capital expenditure, incurred
for acquiring any right to operate telecommunication services either before the
commencement of the business to operate telecommunication services or thereafter
at any time during any previous year and for which payment has actually been made
to obtain a licence, there shall, subject to and in accordance with the provisions of
this section, be allowed for each of the relevant previous years, a deduction equal to
the appropriate fraction of the amount of such expenditure.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—

(i) “relevant previous years” means,— (A) in a case where the licence fee is actually
paid before the commencement of the business to operate telecommunication
services, the previous years beginning with the previous year in which such business
commenced;

(B) in any other case, the previous years beginning with the previous year in which
the licence fee is actually paid, and the subsequent previous year or years during
which the licence, for which the fee is paid, shall be in force;

(ii) “appropriate fraction” means the fraction the numerator of which is one and the
denominator of which is the total number of the relevant previous years;

(iii) “payment has actually been made” means the actual payment of expenditure
irrespective of the previous year in which the liability for the expenditure was
incurred according to the method of accounting regularly employed by the assessee.”
(2) Where the licence is transferred and the proceeds of the transfer (so far as they
consist of capital sums) are less than the expenditure incurred remaining unallowed,
a deduction equal to such expenditure remaining unallowed, as reduced by the
proceeds of the transfer, shall be allowed in respect of the previous year in which the
licence is transferred.

(3) Where the whole or any part of the licence is transferred and the proceeds of the
transfer (so far as they consist of capital sums) exceed the amount of the expenditure
incurred remaining unallowed, so much of the excess as does not exceed the
difference between the expenditure incurred to obtain the licence and the amount of
such expenditure remaining unallowed shall be chargeable to income-tax as profits
and gains of the business in the previous year in which the licence has been
transferred.

21

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

Explanation.—Where the licence is transferred in a previous year in which the business is no longer
in existence, the provisions of this sub-section shall apply as if the business is in existence in that
previous year.

(4) Where the whole or any part of the licence is transferred and the proceeds of the transfer (so far
as they consist of capital sums) are not less than the amount of expenditure incurred remaining
unallowed, no deduction for such expenditure shall be allowed under sub-section (1) in respect of
the previous year in which the licence is transferred or in respect of any subsequent previous year or
years.

(5) here a part of the licence is transferred in a previous year and sub-section (3) does not apply, the
deduction to be allowed under sub-section (1) for expenditure incurred remaining unallowed shall
be arrived at by—

(a) subtracting the proceeds of transfer (so far as they consist of capital sums) from the expenditure
remaining unallowed; and

(b) dividing the remainder by the number of relevant previous years which have not expired at the
beginning of the previous year during which the licence is transferred.

(6) Where, in a scheme of amalgamation, the amalgamating company sells or otherwise transfers
the licence to the amalgamated company (being an Indian company),—

(i) the provisions of sub-sections (2), (3) and (4) shall not apply in the case of the amalgamating
company; and

(ii) the provisions of this section shall, as far as may be, apply to the amalgamated company as they
would have applied to the amalgamating company if the latter had not transferred the licence.

(7) Where, in a scheme of demerger, the demerged company sells or otherwise transfers the licence
to the resulting company (being an Indian company),—

(i) the provisions of sub-sections (2), (3) and (4) shall not apply in the case of the demerged
company; and

(ii) the provisions of this section shall, as far as may be, apply to the resulting company as they
would have applied to the demerged company if the latter had not transferred the licence.

(8) Where a deduction for any previous year under sub-section (1) is claimed and allowed in respect
of any expenditure referred to in that sub-section, no deduction shall be allowed under sub-section
(1) of section 32 for the same previous year or any subsequent previous year.

11.1. Section 35ABB of the Act governs the treatment of expenditure incurred by entities to obtain a
licence for operating telecommunication services in India. The provision addresses the tax

22

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

treatment of such expenses and ensures that they align with the income tax framework. With effect
from 1 April 1996, this provision provides for amortisation of capital expenditure incurred for
acquisition of any right to operate telecommunication services, regardless of whether such cost is
incurred before the commencement of such business or thereafter. The cost is allowed to be
amortised in equal instalments in the years for which the licence is in force. The amortisation
commences from the year in which such business commences (where such cost is incurred before
the commencement of such business) or the year in which such cost is actually paid, irrespective of
the method of accounting adopted by the assessee for such expenditure.

11.2. In order for Section 35ABB of the Act to be applicable, the following cumulative conditions
specified in Section 35ABB (1) of the Act are to satisfied:

First, the expenditure must be capital in nature; Second, the expenditure must be
incurred by an assessee for the purpose of acquisition of the right to operate telecom
services;

Third, the expenditure must represent the payment actually made to obtain a licence.

Thus, for attracting the provisions of Section 35ABB, it is necessary that the
expenditure under consideration must be capital in nature and is incurred for
acquiring or obtaining a licence which gives the right to the assessee to operate
telecommunication services. Section 35ABB of the Act operates and is effective when
the expenditure itself is of a capital nature and is incurred for acquiring a right to
operate telecommunication services or is made to obtain a licence for the said
services.

Further, the definitions of “relevant previous years”, “appropriate fraction” and
“payment has actually been made” have been given by way of an Explanation for the
purpose of this Section. Sub-section (2) to (5) deal with deduction to be made
accordingly when a licence is transferred and the proceeds of the transfer (so far as
they consist of capital sums) are less than or exceed the expenditure incurred
remaining unallowed. Sub-section (6) to (7) deal with situation where, in a scheme of
amalgamation, demerger, etc. as to how the provisions of sub-section (2), (3) and (4)
of Section 35ABB would not apply but the provisions of this Section shall, as far as
may be, apply to the amalgamated company or to the demerged company, apply to
the resulting company as they would have applied to the amalgamating company if
the latter had not transferred the licence or to the demerged company if the latter had
not transferred the licence, as the case may be. Sub-section (8) states that where a
deduction for any previous years under sub-section (1) is claimed and allowed in
respect of any expenditure referred to in that sub-section, no deduction shall be
allowed under the sub-section (1) of Section 32 for the same previous year or any
subsequent previous year.

11.3. The salient aspects of Section 35ABB (1) of the Act may be read as under:

23

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

(i) Purpose and nature of expenditure - Capital expenditure incurred for the purpose
of obtaining licence to operate telecommunication services.

(ii) Mode of amortisation of expenses – For each year of the relevant previous years,
a deduction equal to the appropriate fraction of the amount of such expenditure, shall
be allowed.

(iii) Conditions to be satisfied for applicability of the Provision –

(a) The expenditure must be capital in nature;

(b) The expenditure must be incurred by an assessee for the purpose of acquisition of
the right to operate telecom services;

(c) The said expenditure may be incurred before the commencement of business to
operate telecommunication services, or thereafter at any time during any previous
year;

(d) The expenditure must represent the payment actually made to obtain a licence.

12. Since the variable licence fee paid by the respondents-assessees to the DoT under the Telecom
Policy of 1999 is stated to be imposed and collected on the strength of the Telegraph Act, the
relevant provisions of the said Act are extracted hereinunder for immediate reference:

“4. Exclusive privilege in respect of telegraphs, and power to grant licences:-

(1) Within India, the Central Government shall have the exclusive privilege of
establishing, maintaining and working telegraphs:

Provided that the Central Government may grant a licence, on such conditions and in
consideration of such payments as it thinks fit, to any person to establish, maintain
or work a telegraph within any part of India:

Provided further that the Central Government may, by rules made under this Act and
published in the Official Gazette, permit, subject to such restrictions and conditions
as it thinks fit, the establishment, maintenance and working-

(a) of wireless telegraphs on ships within Indian territorial waters and on aircraft
within or above India, or Indian territorial waters, and

(b) of telegraphs other than wireless telegraphs within any part of India.

Explanation.-- The payments made for the grant of a licence under this subsection shall include
such sum attributable to the Universal Service Obligation as may be determined by the Central

24

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

Government after considering the recommendation made in this behalf by the Telecom Regulatory
Authority of India established under sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Telecom Regulatory
Authority of India Act, 1997 (24 of 1997).

(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, delegate to the telegraph
authority all or any of its powers under the first proviso to sub-section (1).

The exercise by the telegraph authority of any power so delegated shall be subject to such
restrictions and conditions as the Central Government may, by the notification, think fit to impose.”
(3) Any person who is granted a license under the first proviso to sub-section (1) to establish,
maintain or work a telegraph within any part of India, shall identify any person to whom it provides
its services by--

(a) authentication under the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies, Benefits
and Services) Act, 2016 (18 of 2016);

or

(b) offline verification under the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies,
Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 (18 of 2016); or

(c) use of passport issued under section 4 of the PassportsAct, 1967 (15 of 1967); or

(d) use of any other officially valid document or modes of identification as may be notified by the
Central Government in thisbehalf.

(4) If any person who is granted a license under the first proviso to sub-section (1) to establish,
maintain or work a telegraph within any part of India is using authentication under clause (a) of
sub-section (3) to identify any person to whom it provides its services, it shall make the other modes
of identification under clauses (b) to (d) of sub-section (3) also available to such person. (5) The use
of modes of identification under sub- section (3) shall be a voluntary choice of the person who is
sought to be identified and no person shall be denied any service for not having an Aadhaar number.

(6) If, for identification of a person, authentication under clause (a) of sub-section (3) is used,
neither his core biometric information nor the Aadhaar number of the person shall be stored.

(7) Nothing contained in sub-sections (3), (4) and (5) shall prevent the Central Government from
specifying further safeguards and conditions for compliance by any person who is granted a license
under the first proviso to sub-section (1) in respect of identification of person to whom it provides its
services.

Explanation.-- The expressions "Aadhaar number" and "core biometric information" shall have the
same meanings as are respectively assigned to them in clauses (a) and (j) of section 2 of the Aadhaar
(Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 (18 of 2016).

25

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

xxx xxx “8. Revocation of licences:- The Central Government may, at any time, revoke any licence
granted under section 4, on the breach of any of the conditions therein contained, or in default of
payment of any consideration payable there under.” xxx xxx “PART IV PENALTIES

20. Establishing, maintaining or working unauthorized telegraph:– (1) If any person establishes,
maintains or works a telegraph within India in contravention of the provisions of section 4 or
otherwise than as permitted by rules made under that section, he shall be punished, if the telegraph
is a wireless telegraph, with imprisonment which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with
both, and in any other case, with a fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.

(2) Not withstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898),
offences under this section in respect of a wireless telegraph shall, for the purposes of the said Code,
be bailable and non-cognizable.

(3) When any person is convicted of an offence punishable under this section, the Court before
which he is convicted may direct that the telegraph in respect of which the offence has been
committed, or any part of such telegraph, be forfeited to Government.” “20A. Breach of condition of
licence:– If the holder of a licence granted under section 4 contravenes any condition contained in
his licence, he shall be punished with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, and with a
further fine which may extend to five hundred rupees for every week during which the breach of the
condition continues.” “21. Using unauthorized telegraphs:– If any person, knowing or having reason
to believe that a telegraph has been established or is maintained or worked; in contravention of this
Act, transmits or receives any message by such telegraph, or performs any service incidental thereto,
or delivers any message for transmission by such telegraph or accepts delivery of any message sent
thereby, he shall be punished with fine which may extend to fifty rupees.” 12.1. The Telegraph Act is
the parent legislation under which licences to establish, maintain or work a telegraph are issued.
Section 4(1) of the Telegraph Act states that the Central Government shall have the exclusive
privilege of establishing, maintaining and working telegraphs. The proviso to Section 4(1) indicates
that the Central Government may grant a licence to any person to establish, maintain or work a
telegraph within any part of India on such conditions and in consideration of such payment as it
thinks fit.

12.2. Section 8 of the Telegraph Act allows the Central Government to revoke at any time any licence
granted under Section 4 thereof, on breach of any of the conditions therein contained or in default of
payment of any consideration payable thereunder. 12.3. Section 20 of the Telegraph Act declares
that any person who establishes, maintains or works a telegraph in contravention of the provisions
of Section 4 shall be punished with imprisonment, which may extend to three years, or with fine, or
with both. Section 20A and 21 deal with breach of conditions of licence and the consequences of
using unauthorised telegraphs.

12.4. A bare perusal of the aforesaid provisions of the Telegraph Act would throw light onto the
following aspects:

26

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

i. The Central Government may grant a licence to establish, maintain or work a
telegraph, by granting a licence on payment of a licence fee, under the proviso to
Section 4(1) of the Telegraph Act.

ii. The Central Government may, under Section 8, revoke any licence issued under
Section 4 of the Telegraph Act, on ground of default in payment of consideration.

iii. Any contravention of Section 4 of the Telegraph Act, or of conditions of the licence
issued under Section 4, would invite imprisonment and/or imposition of fine.

13. We shall now refer to the terms of the Licence Agreement entered into under the Policy of 1994
and the terms of migration of the existing licencees to the New Telecom Policy, 1999 regime, with a
view to examine whether the nature and character of the licence fee was changed in light of
migration.

13.1. For ready reference, a specimen licence agreement dated 29 November, 1994, in favour of
Bharti Cellular Ltd. is extracted hereinunder. It is to be clarified at this juncture that the date of
agreement with each respondents may be different but the terms are identical:

“Licence Agreement under the Indian Telegraph Act This Agreement made the 29th
day of November, 1994 between the President of India acting through the Director
(TM-IX), Department of Telecommunications (called the Licenser) of the ONE PART
and M/s. Bharti Cellular Ltd., registered under The Companies Act 1956 and having
its registered office at 15th Floor, Devika Tower, 6 Nehru Place, New Delhi-110 019.
(hereinafter called the Licensee which expression shall unless excluded by repugnant
to this context be deemed to include its successor in business) of the OTHER PART.

Whereas in exercise of the powers of the Central Government under Sub Section 2 of
Section 4 of the Indian Telegraph Act 1885, the Central Government delegated its
powers to Telegraph Authority (hereinafter referred to as Authority) by GSR 806
Gazette of India, Part II, Section 3(i) dated 24th August 1985.

And whereas pursuant to the request of the Licensee the Authority has agreed to
grant licence to the Licensee on the terms and conditions appearing hereinafter to
establish, maintain and operate Cellular Mobile Telephone Service upto the
subscriber's terminal connection (hereinafter called the Service) in the areas given in
Schedule "A" annexed hereto and the Licensee has agreed to accept the same on the
terms and conditions appearing hereinafter.

Now this Agreement witnesseth as follows:

1. In consideration of mutual covenants as well as the licence fee payable in advance
in terms of schedule 'C' and observations and/or due performance of all the terms
and conditions to be observed/performed on the part of the licensee, the Licenser

27

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

does hereby grant licence to the Licensee to establish, maintain and operate Cellular
Mobile Telephone Service upto the subscriber's terminal connection in the areas
given in Schedule "A" annexed hereto on the terms and conditions mentioned in
Schedule “C” annexed hereto.

2. The licence is granted initially for a period of 10 years extendible for one year or
more at a time at the discretion of the authority, on such terms and conditions as the
Authority may, at his sole discretion, agree provided that the Licensee is not in
default or has committed/any breach of any terms and conditions of the Licence. The
licence fee payable is given in Schedule "C" condition 19 of this licence.

3. The licence is governed by the provisions of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 and
Indian Wireless Telegraphy Act, 1933 as modified from time to time.

4. Unless otherwise mentioned in the subject or context appearing hereinafter the
main body of the agreement and all the Schedules annexed hereto including the
tender documents will form part and parcel of this agreement provided however in
case of conflict terms of this agreement and those of schedules hereto will prevail
over the tender documents.

5. In this Agreement words and expressions will have the same meaning as are
respectively assigned to them in the Schedule "C" Part-I.

6. The licensee should clearly indicate the specifications of the service to the
subscribers at the time of signing the contract with them.

7. The Ceiling Tariff to be charged from the subscribers of the service is given in
Schedule "B"

annexed hereto. Licensee can charge less tariff without any approval of the Authority.

8. The bank guarantees to be given by the licensee prior to the signing of the Licence Agreement is
given in Schedule "D" annexed hereto.

9. The Licensee will not assign or transfer its rights in any manner whatsoever under the licence to a
third party or enter into any agreement for sub-licence and/or partnership relating to any subject
matter of the licence to any third party either in whole or in part i.e. no sub-leasing
/partnership/third party interest shall be created.

10. In case of interruption of service lasting for more than 72 hours, an appropriate rebate shall be
given to the users of the service by the Licensee. The Authority reserves the right to, in case of a
default, impose any penalty as it may deem fit.

28

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

11. The Authority may at any time revoke the licence on the breach of any of the terms and
conditions therein contained or in default of payment of any consideration payable thereunder by
giving a 60 days notice.

12.1 The Licensee is not allowed to use any encryption in the network.

12.2 The Licensee is required to provide list of subscribers to the Authority every quarter regularly
and, as and when required by the Authority.

12.3 The Authority or its representative will have an access to the MSC as well as the technical
facility provided by the Licensee for monitoring, inspection etc. without giving any prior notice.

13. It is further agreed and declared by the parties that notwithstanding anything contained
hereinbefore, that

(i) The licence is issued on non-exclusive basis. The Authority reserves the right to operate the
service within the same geographical area.

(ii) The Authority reserves the right to modify at any time the terms and conditions of the licence
covered under Schedules "A", "B", "C", and "D", annexed hereto, if in the opinion of the Authority it
is necessary or expedient to do so in the interests of the general public or for the proper conduct of
telegraphs or on security consideration.

(iii) The Authority reserves the right to revoke the licence at any time in the interest of public by
giving a 60 days’ notice.

(iv) Notwithstanding anything contained anywhere else in the licence the Authority's decision shall
be final.

(v) The authority reserves the right to take over the entire services and networks of the licensee or
revoke/ terminate /suspend the licence in the interest of national security or in the event of a
national emergency/war or low intensity conflict type of situations.

In Witness whereof the parties hereto have caused this Agreement to be executed through their
respective authorized representatives the day and year first before written Signed and Delivered for
and on behalf of President of India” (Emphasis by us) 13.2. The conditions on which the licence was
granted were stipulated in Schedule A and Schedule B of the licence agreement. The payment of
licence fee was in the following terms:

“PAYMENT OF LICENCE FEES 19.1 The Licence fee payable by licencee for each
service area shall be regulated as follows: -

Licence Fee For Service 1st Year 2nd Year 3rd Year Area (Rupees in Crores) 4th Year
and onwards @ Rs. 5 lakhs (five lakhs) per 100 (one hundred) subscribers or part

29

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

thereof; subject to the minimum shown below :-

Minimum Licence Fee for
Fourth to Sixth Year Seventh (for         year onwards (for
Service Area    each year)                each year)
(Rs.in crores)

a) For purpose of charging the lump-sum Licence fee for the first three years, the year
shall be reckoned as twelve months, beginning with the date of commissioning of
services or completion of 12 months from date of signing of Licence Agreement,
whichever is earlier.

b) The fourth year for purpose of charging the Licence fee shall be the period from
the completion of the third year as defined above to the 31st day of March succeeding.
The annual Licence Fee for the fourth year will therefore, be computed prorate with
reference to the actual number of days. Thereafter, the year for purpose of levy of
Licence fee shall be the financial year i.e. 1st April to 31st March and part of the year
as balance period, if any.

c) For the purpose of calculation of Licence fee from the fourth year onwards as
indicated in para 19.1 above, the number of subscribers at the end of each month
shall be added for all the months of the year and divided by the number of completed
months.

XXX

(f) The rate of Rs. five lakhs per hundred subscribers or part thereof is based on the unit call rate of
Rs. 1.10. Fourth year onwards, as defined in the clause 19.1(d), the rate of Rs. five lakhs will be
revised based on the prevalent unit call rate. The revision will be limited to 75% of the overall
increase in the unit rate during the period preceding such revision.” The Agreement further
stipulated:

“19.2 On completion of three years from the date of commissioning/provision of
services; the Authority reserves the right to fix the share of the gross revenue from
rental, air time charges for all other services provided from the cellular network of
the Licensee, as additional licence fee.

19.3 The annual Licence fee as prescribed above does not include Licence fees
payable to WPC wing of Ministry of Communications (WPC) for use of Radio
Frequencies which shall be paid separately by the Licensee on the rates prescribed by
the WPC and as per procedure specified by it (condition 20).” 13.3. The key features

30

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

of the licence agreement under the 1994 Policy regime may be enumerated as under:

i. The licence was granted enabling the licencee to establish, maintain and operate
cellular mobile telephone service, within a given geographical area.

ii. The licence was granted for a period of ten years, which was extendable for five
years or more, at the discretion of the licensor, i.e., the Central Government, unless
terminated earlier. iii. Fixed amount of licence fee was to be paid for the first three
years, irrespective of the number of subscribers, as provided in paragraph 19 of the
agreement and such amounts was subject to increase annually.

iv. From the fourth year onwards, the amount of licence fees to be paid, was
dependent on the number of subscribers, irrespective of the revenue accrued by the
licencee from such subscribers, subject to the prescribed minimum.

v. The consequence of non-payment of licence fee was termination of the licence
agreement.

vi. In accordance with the Policy of 1994, the condition of maintaining duopoly in the
market was formalised in the licence agreement.

vii. The licence was non-assignable.

13.4. Subsequently, with a view to implement the Policy of 1999, letters dated 27 July,
1999 were issued by the DoT proposing the package for migration of existing
licencees to the Policy of 1999 regime. It was stated that the conditions prescribed
therein are to be accepted as a package, in entirety. Pursuant to the acceptance of the
terms of migration, the original licence agreement was amended. The relevant
portions of a specimen letter evidencing the amendments is extracted as under:

“GOVERNMENT OF INDIA MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS DEPARTMENT
OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS (VAS CELL) SANCHAR BHAWAN, 20, ASHOKA
ROAD, NEW DELHI-110001 No 842-47/2000-VAS/Vol. IV Dated: January 29, 2001
To M/s Bharti Cellular Ltd.

D-184, OKHLA Industrial Area, Phase-1, New Delhi-110 020.

Subject:- Amendment in the Licence Agreement No 842-1893-TM Dated 29.11.1994
for Cellular Mobile Telephone Service in Delhi Metro Service Area as a consequence
to Migration to revenue sharing regime of New Telecom Policy-1999 (NTP-99) Sirs,
In consideration of the acceptance by the Licensee, of the terms and conditions
contained in the offered Migration Package vide No. 842-153/99-VAS (Vol. V) (Pt.)
dated 22.7.1999 for migration to the revenue sharing regime under New Telecom
Policy-1999, the license agreement shall stand substituted and modified as follows

31

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

with effect from 1.8,1999, notwithstanding anything contained in the License
Agreement:

(i) The Licensee shall forego the right of operating in the regime of limited number of
operators after 01.08.1999 and shall operate in a multipoly regime, that is to say that
the Licensor may issue additional licenses for the Service without any limit in the
Service Area where the Licensee Company is providing Cellular Mobile Telephone
Service.

(ii) Licence fee: With effect from 1.8.1999, the payable license fee shall be equal to prescribed
percentage as share of gross revenue of the Licensee Company. Provisionally the licensor has fixed
15% of the gross revenue as license fee and presently the gross revenue for this purpose shall mean
the total revenue of the Licensee Company under the license excluding,

(a) the PSTN related call charges paid to Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited (BSNL)/MTNL or any
other Telecom Service Provider and,

(b) service tax or charge collected by the Licensee on behalf of the Government from their
subscribers. The Government will take a final decision about the quantum of revenue share,
definition of revenue for this purpose, after taking into consideration the recommendations of

(iii) Period of Licence: The period of license shall be twenty years from the effective date of the
existing license agreement unless terminated for the reasons stated therein. The Licensor may
extend the period of license, if requested during 19th year from the effective date for a period of 10
years at a time on mutually agreed terms and conditions The decision of licensor shall be final in
regard to grant of extension.

(iv) The acceptance of the Migration Package shall be taken and deemed as full and final settlement
of all existing disputes whatsoever, for the period upto 31.7.1999 (the cut-off date) irrespective of
whether they are related to the Migration Package or not. No dispute or difference shall be raised by
the licensee for the said period at any later date.” (Emphasis supplied) 13.5. Thereafter, the DoT
introduced further amendments to the licence agreement, w.e.f. 01 August, 1999. The relevant
portions of a specimen letter dated 25 September, 2001 evidencing the amendments is extracted as
under:

“GOVERNMENT OF INDIA MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS DEPARTMENT
OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS (VAS CELL) SANCHAR BHAWAN, 20, ASHOKA
ROAD, NEW DELHI-110 001 Dated 25 September, 2001 No.842-47/2000-VAS(Vol.
IV) (Part) To M/s Bharti Cellular Ltd.

D-184, Okhla Industrial Area, Phase-1, New Delhi-110020.

Subject: Amendment in the Licence Agreement No. 842-18/93-TM dated 29.11.1994
for Cellular Mobile Telephone Service in Delhi Service Area as a consequence to

32

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

Migration to revenue sharing regime of New Telecom Policy-1999 (NTP-99).

In continuation of Amendment dated 29th January, 2001 of the aforesaid License
Agreement and more specifically Para (ii) thereto, reserving the power to take a final
decision on the quantum of license fee and WPC charges; the licensor hereby decides
the following in pursuance of the said power which shall modify and supersede
whatever is contained and described in the Licence Agreement or the above stated
Amendment.

(i) Annual License fee at the rate of 15% of Adjusted Gross Revenue (AGR) shall be
payable by you, with effect from 1st August, 1999.

(ii) In addition the cellular licenses shall pay spectrum charges, with effect from
(1.8.1999) the cut-

off date of change over to NTP-99 regime, on revenue share basis of 2% of AGR towards WPC
Charges covering royalty payment of the use of cellular spectrum upto 4.4 MHz+4.4 MHz and
Licence fee for Cellular Mobile handsets & Cellular Mobile Base Stations and also for possession of
wireless telegraphy equipment as per the details prescribed by Wireless Planning & Coordination
Wing (WPC). Any additional band width, if allotted subject to availability and justification shall
attract additional License fee as revenue share (typically) 1% additional revenue share if Bandwidth
allocated is upto 6.2 MHz + 6.2 MHz is place of 4.4 MHz+4,4 MHz).” (Emphasis supplied) 13.6. The
pertinent qualitative changes effected in the licence conditions, following migration into the Policy
of 1999 regime, may be presented in a tabular form, as under:

Sl. Parameters for National Telecom New Telecom Policy, No. Distinction Policy,
1994 1999

1. Details of the i. Fixed licence fee for i. One-time entry fee payment to be the first
three years; paid by existing made by the ii. From the fourth telecom operators
operator: year onwards, the and entry fee that amount of licence was paid by all the
fees to be paid, was new entrants;

dependent on the ii. Variable         annual
number              of    licence fee paid as
subscribers,              a percentage of
irrespective of the       AGR.
revenue account by
the licencee from
such subscribers,
subject      to    the
prescribed
minimum
2.    Maximum            Two                       No restriction
number          of
operators
permissible in a

33

circle

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

3. Validity of the 10 years, subject to 20 years, subject to licence extension. extension.

4. Right of the Licence was non- Restriction on operator/ assignable and non-
assignment/transfer licencee to transferable. of licence was assign/transfer relaxed.

the licence

14. The discussion on the points set out above, in our view, must begin with a detailed review of
relevant case law detailing the nature and characteristics of capital expenditure and revenue
expenditure and the tests to identify the same.

14.1. In the impugned order, the High Court of Delhi found that there was no decision of the
Supreme Court or any of the High Courts directly applicable to the factual matrix of the case and
therefore, considered a number of decisions of this Court which we shall refer to as under:

(a) At the outset, we preface our discussion by the observations of this Court in
Alembic Chemical Works Co. Ltd. vs. CIT, (1989) 3 SCC 329 (“Alembic Chemical
Works Co. Ltd.”) wherein the transaction in question was with regard to the one-time
payment made under an agreement with a foreign firm, by the assessee, to obtain
technical know-how for increasing yield of penicillin in its existing plant. While
considering the nature of the said transaction, this Court indicated that “in the
infinite variety of situational diversities in which the concept of what is capital
expenditure and what is revenue arises,” it is not possible “to formulate any general
rule even in the generality of cases, sufficiently accurate and reasonably
comprehensive, to draw any clear line of demarcation”. This Court further held that
there is no single definitive criterion which by itself demarcates whether a particular
outlay is capital or revenue. Therefore, the “once for all” test as well as the test of
“enduring benefit” may not be conclusive. Consequently, the various terms and
conditions of the agreement, the advantages derived by an assessee under the
agreement, the payment made by the assessee under the agreement are all to be
taken into account and then it has to be decided whether the whole or a part of the
payment thus made is a capital expenditure or a revenue expenditure.

This Court observed that courts have applied different tests like starting of a new business on the
basis of technical know-how received from the foreign firm; exclusive right of the company to use
the patent or trademark which it receives from the foreign firm; the payments made by the company
to the foreign firm whether, a definite one or dependent upon certain contingencies; right to use the
technical know-how for production even after the completion of the agreement; obtaining enduring
benefit for a considerable part on account of the technical information received from a foreign firm,
payment whether made “once for all” or in different installments co-relatable to the percentage of
gross turnover of the product, etc. to ultimately find out whether the expenditure or payment thus
made makes an accretion to the capital asset(s) and after the court comes to the conclusion that it

34

does, then, has to be held to be a capital expenditure.

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

It was further observed that no single definitive criterion by itself would be determinative and
therefore, bearing in mind the changing economic realities of business and the varieties of
situational diversities, the various clauses of the agreement are to be examined.

On fact, as regards the question as to whether “once for all” payment made under an agreement with
a foreign firm by the assessee to obtain technical knowhow, for increasing yield of penicillin in its
existing plant with a condition to keep the said know-how confidential, constituted business
expenditure allowable for deduction, this Court held in the affirmative. M.N. Venkatachalia, J. (as
the learned Chief Justice then was) held that in computing the income chargeable under the head
“Profits and Gains of Business or Profession”, Section 37 of the Act enables the deduction of any
expenditure laid out or expended wholly and exclusively for the purpose of the business or
profession, as the case may be. The fact that an item of expenditure is wholly and exclusively laid out
for purposes of the business, by itself, is not sufficient to entitle its allowance in computing the
income chargeable to tax. In addition, the expenditure should not be in the nature of a capital
expenditure.

(b) In Empire Jute Co. Ltd., the question which arose was whether the sale of loom hours was to be
held to be in the nature of capital receipt and hence not taxable. The transaction involved one jute
mill transferring loom hours to another for consideration, subject to certain conditions. It was
observed in the said case that a capital expenditure would be for securing an enduring benefit but
when it comes to acquiring an advantage in the commercial sense, the enduring benefit test should
not be applied mechanically. In the said case, another test was adopted, i.e., fixed and circulating
capital test. It was observed that the purchase of loom hours was not like circulating capital (labour,
raw material, power etc.) but loom hours were also not part of fixed capital. It was observed that
whether an expenditure is revenue or capital should depend upon practical and business
considerations rather than juristic classification of legal rights. That the test to be adopted was
whether the expenditure was in view of a business necessity or expediency, i.e., was the expenditure
a part of assessee’s working expenditure or a part of process of profit earning; whether the
expenditure was necessary to acquire a right of permanent character, the possession of which was a
condition for carrying on trade was highlighted.

(c) Insofar as lease agreements are concerned, this Court in Assam Bengal Cement Co. Ltd., in the
context of acquiring lease of mining stone quarries for manufacture of cement for twenty years on
payment of yearly rent as well as protection fee to ward off competition held the same to be capital
expenditure. It was observed in the said case that the consideration payable was per annum but was
for the entire or whole duration of the lease and it protected and gave right to the assessee to carry
on business unfettered from outsiders. It was held that the expenditure was not a part of the
working or operational expenses but for acquiring a capital asset.

(d) In Sindhurani, salami or lump-sum payment of non-recurring nature made by the prospective
tenant to the landlord as consideration for settlement of agricultural land and parting with certain
rights paid anterior to landlord and tenant relationship was held not to be in the nature of rent and

35

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

thus capital payment. It was held that the payment was not for use of land but for the land to be put
to use by the assessee. Salami was not rent paid in advance.

(e) In Enterprising Enterprises, this Court affirmed the decision of Madras High Court after
referring to Pingle Industries Ltd. vs. CIT, (1960) 40 ITR 67 (SC) (“Pingle Industries Ltd.”); Gotan
Lime vs. CIT, (1999) 239 ITR 718 (“Gotan Lime”) and Aditya Minerals Pvt. Ltd. to hold that there is
a distinction between a payment of royalty or rent and where the entire amount of lease premium
was paid either at one time or in instalments. Royalty or rent is a revenue expenditure whereas the
payment of a lease premium either at one time or in instalments would be a capital expenditure.

14.2. Having referred to the aforesaid decisions, three other judgments were noticed by the Delhi
High Court which, according to learned ASG appearing for the appellant-Revenue were erroneously
applied to the case at hand. They could be alluded to as under:

(a) In Jonas Woodhead and Sons, the question was whether 25% of the gross revenue
paid as royalty to the foreign company for technical information/know-how relating
to setting up of a plant for manufacture of products, was capital expenditure. The
issue depended upon several factors including whether the assessee had set up an
entirely new business, or whether the technical knowhow was for the betterment of
the product which was already being produced; whether it was a part and parcel of
the existing business or a new business?; whether on expiry of the period of
agreement, the assessee was required to give back the plans, drawings etc., which
were obtained from the foreign company or could continue to manufacture the
products? The assessing officer in the said case had treated 25% of the amount paid
as royalty as capital and the balance amount was treated as revenue expenditure.

The question that came up for consideration before this Court was, whether, on the facts and in the
circumstances of the said case, the Tribunal was right in holding that 25% of the amount paid by the
assessees therein as royalty to Jonas Woodhead and Sons was capital expenditure and therefore not
allowable as revenue expenditure under the provisions of the Act for the Assessment years
1961-1968 and 1968-1969.

It was observed that this question would depend upon several factors stated above and the
cumulative effect of a construction of the various terms and conditions of the agreement; whether
the assessee derived benefits coming to its capital for which the payment was made or not so.

Considering the different clauses of the agreement in the said case, it was concluded that the
agreement with the foreign firm was to set up a new business by the assessee and the foreign firm
had not only furnished information and technical know-how but had also rendered valuable services
in setting up of the factory itself and even after the expiry of the agreement, there was no embargo
on the assessee to continue to manufacture the product in question. Therefore, it was difficult to
hold that the entire payment made was a revenue expenditure merely because the payment was
required to be made on a certain percentage of the rates of the gross turnover of the products of the
income as royalty. That alone did not make it a revenue expenditure. Therefore, the question raised

36

was answered in favour of the Revenue and the appeals filed were dismissed.

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

b) In Southern Switch Gear Ltd., this Court affirmed the decision of the Madras High Court, wherein
royalty payable was apportioned and 25% thereof was treated as capital payment or expenditure on
the ground that the right to manufacture certain goods exclusively in India should be taken as an
independent right secured by the assessee from the foreign company and this right was of enduring
nature.

(c) In Best and Co., the respondent assessee therein was carrying on business and had innumerable
agencies and compensation was received on account of cancellation of one agency and the question
was, whether, the said compensation was capital or revenue receipt in nature; whether by the
termination of an agency the asseessee therein had lost an earning asset and the compensation paid
for the destruction of such an asset was a capital receipt and therefore not liable to tax. K. Subba
Rao. J. (as the learned Chief Justice then was) speaking for a three-Judge Bench observed that the
question, as to, whether, the compensation received by an assessee for the loss of agency is a capital
receipt or a revenue receipt depends upon the circumstances of each case. This is because many
questions have to be asked and answered, particularly, whether the loss of an agency was an
ordinary incidence in the course of business or did it amount to loss of an enduring asset causing an
unabsorbed shock dislocating the entire or a part of the earning apparatus or structure. It was held
that if a loss of a particular agency was incidental to the business, compensation received would be a
revenue receipt but if it was compensation received for the loss of an enduring asset, then it would
be a capital receipt. But for this, the previous history of the business and relative importance of the
agency lost and the position of the business after the loss of the said agency have to be scrutinized by
the department. While considering the said issue, on the facts of the said case, it was held that the
asseessee therein was a well-established and long standing company in South India which had taken
up innumerable agencies in different lines and one such agency had been taken from the Imperial
Chemical Industries (Exports) Limited, Glasgow. When there was no material to show that the loss
of the said agency was so large that the business of the agency was dislocated, on considering the
facts of the said case, this Court observed that the loss of the said agency by the assessee was only a
normal trading loss and the income it received was revenue receipt.

Another question which was considered was whether compensation received by the assessee in lieu
of a restrictive covenant was a capital receipt. It was observed that the non-compete clause came
into operation after the termination of the agency and it was an independent obligation undertaken
by the assessee therein not to compete with the new agent in the same field for a specified period
and therefore, the compensation received was attributable to the restrictive covenant and was a
capital receipt and hence not assessable to tax.

The majority judgment answered the said question by observing that compensation on cancellation
of an agency could be both capital and revenue depending upon facts of each case and whether, the
cancellation had affected the earning apparatus or structure from a physical, financial, commercial
and administrative point of view. In the said case, compensation received was held to be revenue
receipt as the respondent assessee had innumerable agencies in different lines and had given up
only one to continue business in other lines. Loss of an agency, it was observed, was in the normal

37

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

course of business and a part of normal business, therefore, the amount received as compensation
was revenue in nature. At the same time, it was accepted that the compensation paid/received on
account of a restrictive covenant for a specified period on which the assessee had undertaken not to
take up competitive agency was a capital receipt and therefore, not taxable.

14.3. In Alembic Chemical Works Co. Ltd., on facts, it was observed that the improvisation in the
process and technology in some areas of the enterprise was supplemental to the existing business
and there was no material to hold that it amounted to a new or fresh venture. That the further
circumstance that the agreement pertained to a product already in the line of the established
business of the assessees and not to a new product indicated that what was stipulated was an
improvement in the operations of the existing business and its efficiency and profitability not
removed from the area of the day-to-day business of the assessee.

In the above context, it was held that the expenditure was in the nature of a revenue expenditure
and not capital expenditure. It was further observed that there was no material before the Tribunal
to hold that the area of improvisation was not a part of the existing business or that the entire
existing manufacturing operations for the commercial production of penicillin in the assessees
existing plant had become obsolete or inappropriate in relation to the exploitation of the new sub-
cultures of the high-yielding strains of penicillin supplied by a company, Meiji and that the mere
introduction of the new bio-synthetic source required the erection and commissioning of a totally
new and different type of plant and machinery.

14.4. Another case which has been discussed by the High Court in the impugned Judgment and
relied upon by the appellant–Revenue is Pingle Industries Ltd. In the said case, the majority
judgment stated that the payment in question therein was made with a view to acquire a long-term
lease and a right to mine stones and the lease was conveyed to the assessee who had to extract the
stones and convert them as a stock-in-trade. That the expenditure was incurred towards securing a
capital asset from which, after extraction, stones could be converted into stock-in-trade. The
payment, though periodic, in fact, was neither rent nor royalty but a lump-sum payment in
instalments for acquiring a capital asset of enduring benefit to his trade. In this view of the matter,
the High Court treated the outgoings as on capital account. On facts, it was observed that the
assessee therein had made a down payment of Rs.96,000/- and for the remaining amount for the
acquisition of lease had asked for easy terms. The remaining amount was paid every month but it
was not for acquisition of the right from month to month. According to this Court “it was really the
entire sum chopped into small payments for his convenience.” Hence, the amount could not be
described as a business expense, because the outgoings every month were not to be taken as spent
over purchase of stones but in discharge of the entire liability to the jagir. This was because the lease
was taken to excavate stones from certain quarries in six villages from the quarry situated therein.

The assessee had undertaken not to manufacture cement and not to allow any other person to
excavate stones in the area of those six villages. The lease was in the nature of exclusive right and a
monopoly. In case of any default of the instalment, the contract would be re- auctioned after one
month's notice to the contractor, who would be responsible for any shortfall but would not have the
benefit of any extra amount.

38

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

14.5. Learned ASG also relied upon the judgment in Jalan Trading Co. In the said case, a
manufacturing company gave its sole selling agency to a firm, namely, Jalan Trading Company for
two years with a right to renew by an agreement under a deed of assignment. The benefit of the
agreement was assigned to the assessee on its payment of 75% of its profit and commission,
remuneration and other moneys received under the said agreement or any further agreement. The
assessees therein claimed the payment of 75% of their profits in the relevant assessment year as a
business deduction. The question was, whether, the payment was a revenue expenditure or a capital
expenditure. It was observed, on facts, that the assessee therein was a new company and it had
acquired under the contract the right to carry out a business on a long-term basis subject to the
renewal of the agreement on payment of 75% of its annual net profits. The question was whether the
assessee had acquired a capital asset and therefore, the payment was not admissible as a deduction
under Section 10(2)(vii) of the Act. On perusing the clauses of the deed of assignment, this Court
held that the payment of 75% of the profits and commission paid under the said agreement was in
the nature of a capital expenditure and the same was not allowable as a deduction under the Act.

14.6. Learned senior counsel Sri Datar relied upon four decisions which we shall discuss as under:

(a) In Travancore Sugars and Chemicals Ltd. vs. Commissioner of Income-tax, (1966)
62 ITR 566 (SC) (“Travancore Sugars and Chemicals Ltd.”), the facts were that three
undertakings run by the Government of Travancore were taken over by a company
under an agreement wherein the assets of the three undertakings were agreed to be
sold by the Government to the new company. Cash consideration for the sale of the
assets of the three undertakings was to be paid and also 20% of the annual net profit
subject to a maximum of Rs.40,000/- was to be paid to the Government. The said
20% was later reduced to 10% by an amendment of the terms of the agreement. The
question was, whether, the said payment was allowable under Section 10 of the Act.
The High Court held that the amount constituted a capital expenditure. However,
this Court held that the payment in question was in the nature of revenue
expenditure for the following reasons:

i) The payment was for an indefinite period and had no limitation of time attached to
it.

ii) The payment was related to the annual profits which flowed from the trading
activities of the appellant-company and had no relation to the capital value of the
assets and;

iii) The payment was not related to or tied up, in any way, to any fixed sum agreed
between the parties as part of the purchase price of the three undertakings.

This Court held that the real nature of the transaction had to be gathered not only from concerned
documents but also from the surrounding circumstances.

39

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

(b) In M/s. Devidas Vithaldas and Co. vs. C.I.T., Bombay City, (1972) 3 SCC 457, (1972) 184 ITR 277
(SC) (“Devidas Vithaldas and Co.”) this Court was dealing with the question regarding acquisition of
a running business and whether, the acquisition of goodwill of the business would amount to an
acquisition of a capital asset and the purchase price will be a capital expenditure. This Court also
considered the question whether, it would make any difference whether, the consideration is paid in
lump-sum, or at one time, or in instalments, distributed over a definite period. It was held that
where the acquisition is not of the goodwill itself but for the right to use it, the expenditure would be
a revenue expenditure. It was further observed that if the payment is in the nature of royalty it has
to be treated as a revenue expenditure. The main reason for holding that the transaction did not
amount to the sale of goodwill was that the duration of the payment as also the amount of
consideration was indefinite as they depended on the rise and fall in the profits of the business. In
the said case, it was observed by a majority of 3:1 that “in distinguishing between capital and
revenue expenditure, the courts have applied in different cases different tests. Nonetheless, it is
recognised that none of them by itself is conclusive and the determination one way or the other has
to be made on the facts and circumstances of each case. However, Sikri, C.J. in his dissenting
opinion reasoned that the mode of payment of purchase price of any capital asset cannot convert the
capital payment into a revenue payment in the hands of the vendee. The mode of payment may
affect the character of the receipt in the hands of the vendor but as far as the vendee is concerned,
what is obviously a capital payment cannot be converted to a revenue payment. However, the
majority held that the transaction did not amount to a sale and that the payment of consideration
for the use of the goodwill of the business which is indefinite and depends on the profits earned by
the company each year can be a revenue expenditure.

(c) Reliance was also placed on Sarada Binding works by Sri Datar. In the said case, a registered firm
carrying on business as a book binder and publisher had entered into an agreement with “B” under
which it obtained the right to run the business of a publication concern for a consideration of a fixed
sum of Rs.5,000/- per annum plus a sum equivalent to 10% of the net profits of each year of
business. The assessee claimed the said amount as a business expenditure. The Madras High Court
held that where the transaction in question amounted to a purchase of the business, the
consideration paid partly as a fixed annual sum and partly a periodical payment on a certain
percentage of the profits earned by the assessee from the said business could not be treated entirely
as capital payment. The fixed annual sum payable was a capital payment but the periodical
payments of sums which were indefinite depending upon the future profits earned could not be
treated as capital in nature. In the said case, the following extract from Wheatcroft’s treatise on The
Law of Income Tax, Sur Tax and Profits Tax, was quoted wherein three types of cases where the
purchase price may be paid periodically or in instalments and the points of distinction between
them were quoted:

"First, there are cases where all the payments must be treated as income of the
recipient and the payer is entitled to deduct tax on payment and to a deduction in
computing his total income. Secondly, there are cases where the payments are all
treated as capital and are neither taxable to the recipient nor deductible in computing
the payer's total income. Thirdly, there are cases where the payments must be
dissected into an income content and a capital content so that the former part is

40

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

taxable and deductible whilst the latter is not."

On facts, the case before was classified as falling under the third category and it was held that the
question, whether, the payment is capital or revenue has to be considered in relation to the facts of
each case and the true nature of the payment has to be ascertained from the documents and all the
surrounding circumstances with the important features to consider being the nature of the original
obligation, the period of time during which the payments are to continue, whether or not they are
expressed in the form of instalments of some capital sum and what provisions, if any, are made for
commutation.

Further, four tests in deciding the question, whether, a particular expenditure is allowable or not
were also quoted from the same treatise. The said extract is as under:

"In general, however, in order to decide whether some particular expenditure of a
trader should be brought into account, four tests, similar to those considered in
relation to receipts, should be applied. First, is the expenditure wholly and exclusively
laid out for the purposes of the trade? If not, it will be excluded. Secondly, is the
expenditure of a revenue, and not of a capital nature ? Unless it is of a revenue nature
it will be excluded. Thirdly, may tax be deducted and retained on payment ? If so, it
will be excluded. Finally, is there some other special provision of the Income-tax Act
which permits, or requires, the payment to be brought in, or left out of account ?"

Therefore, in the said case, the Madras High Court held that the payments were of revenue character
and that there were no elements present which would justify the court in attributing to the payments
a capital character. The payments were fixed with reference to the profits which were indirectly
related to the turnover. The payments were not related to any specified sum which was agreed upon
by the parties as purchase price of the business. The decision of the Madras High Court was upheld
by this Court.

(d) Sri Datar has also referred to the decision of this Court in Mewar Sugar Mills Ltd. In the said
case, a licence was granted by the then ruler of Udaipur State for the manufacture of sugar which
was to be a monopoly enduring to the assessee’s benefit for thirty two years. One of the conditions
was that no permission would be granted to any other person for starting a sugar factory for a period
of thirty-two years from the date of the said order. Another condition was that royalty must be
charged on the sugar manufactured in the factory. No other tax was to be charged. After the grant of
the monopoly, a limited company was floated called the Mewar Industries Ltd. and the company
took steps to set up a factory, obtained requisite machinery and installed it. After completion of the
factory, production could not be started on account of financial difficulties. As a result, an
agreement was entered into with two other persons to acquire from the company all the rights and
assets held by it for the unexpired period of twenty-eight years and to run the business in
consideration of the payment of 10% of the net profits. Before this Court, two controversies arose,
namely, i) relating to the deduction of the payments made by the appellant therein for monopoly
rights and ii) concerning the payment to the State of the royalty of the price of sugar manufactured
by the company. The challenge to the question as to the disallowance of the payments made by the

41

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

assessee in respect of the monopoly rights was given up. The only other question being that the
payment of 2% royalty on the price of sugar manufactured by the appellant therein was relatable to
the monopoly rights and therefore was capital expenditure was considered.

It was found that the payment of the 2% royalty on the price of sugar manufactured by the appellant
therein had no relationship with the payment referable to the monopoly conferred under the grant.
It was observed that on the facts and circumstances of the said case, the expenditure incurred, that
is, payment of 2% royalty payment on the sugar manufactured was a revenue expenditure while the
payment made in respect of the monopoly rights obtained was of a capital nature.

The applicability of the judgments discussed hereinabove to the case at hand, shall be examined at a
later juncture.

15. A tabular representation outlining the classification of different transactions by this Court in
various cases, is as under:

Sl. Citation Transaction In Classification Reasons for No. Question of the
classification:

Transaction in Question by this Court:

1. Assam Bengal Payment made by Capital It was held that the Cement Co. the
assessee for expenditure expenditure was not a Ltd. vs. acquiring a lease of part of
working or Commissioner mine stone quarries operational expenses, but of Income
Tax, for the manufacture was for acquiring a capital Sl. Citation Transaction In
Classification Reasons for No. Question of the classification:

Transaction in Question by this Court:

West Bengal, of cement, for a asset. The expenditure (1955) 27 ITR period of twenty
was held to be a capital 34 (SC). years, on payment expenditure although it of yearly
rent as well was payable per annum, as a protection fee to as it protected and gave
ward off the right to the assessee to competition. carry on business unfettered by
outsiders.

2. Member of the Lump-sum payment Capital It was held that such Board of (non-recurring)
expenditure payment was not in the Agricultural made by the nature of rent, but in the Income Tax,
prospective tenant nature of capital Assam vs. to the landlord as expenditure as the same
Sindhurani consideration for was incurred prior to the Chaudurani, settlement of coming into effect
of the (1957) 32 ITR agricultural land. landlord-tenant 169 (SC). relationship.

1. 3. Pingle Lump-sum amount, Capital That the assessee had Industries payable in expenditure
acquired through the long Ltd. vs. instalments for term lease, the right to Commissioner acquiring
exclusive extract stones and that of Income Tax, monopoly rights to the lease conveyed to the (1960)

42

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

40 ITR extract flag stones assessee a part of the 67 (SC). from certain land. The lease was held
quarries. to be a capital asset, which could be converted into stock-in-trade.

2. 4. Commissioner Receipt of the Capital That the surplus loom-

of Income Tax, assessee on sale of receipt             hours were disposed of by
U.P.         vs loom-hours.                            the assessee and no
Maheshwari                                             interest remained therein
Devi Jute Mills                                        with the assessee. It was
Ltd., (1965) 57                                        not a case of exploitation
ITR 36 (SC).                                           of the loom hours by
permitting an additional
user,    while    retaining
ownership.       Therefore,
receipt by sale of loom
hours must be regarded
as a capital receipt.
3. 5.   R.B.    Seth Prospecting licence Capital               That 1/20th of the licence
Moolchand    fee   and    tender expenditure           fee could not be claimed
Suganchand   money    for   mica                       as revenue expenditure on

(cid:12)  Sl.   Citation          Transaction    In Classification      Reasons                 for
No.                     Question          of         the      classification:
Transaction
in   Question
by this Court:
vs.             mining rights for a                     a yearly basis. That the
Commissioner period of twenty                           lease in question was for a
of Income Tax, years.                                   long period; the amount
Delhi, (1973) 3                                         paid was for acquiring a
SCC 257.                                                right of enduring nature
to extract and remove the
Mica and bring it to the
surface.
4. 6.   CIT, Bombay       75% profit share, Capital             That what was conveyed
vs.     Jalan     paid             as expenditure       was the right to carry on
Trading Co.,      consideration under                   the whole business and
(1985) 4 SCC      a      deed      of                   what was agreed to be
59.               assignment, for the                   paid was a profit share of
right to carry on                     75%      every   year,   as
business.                             consideration to acquire
this right. The fact that
the payments were made
annually would have no
bearing on the nature of
the transaction.
5. 7.   Commissioner      Lump-sum                Capital       That the payment was for
of Income Tax     consideration paid      expenditure   sterilisation of the profit-
vs.    Bombay     by the assessee for                   making apparatus, i.e.,
Burmah            surrender of export                   the capital asset. The

43

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

Trading           rights in a forest                    payment was not only
Corporation,      lease, where the                      with a view to earn profit
(1986) 161 ITR    assessee had the                      in a new form, but was
386 (SC).         right to extract and                  made to structure the
cut    timber    and                  assessee’s profit-making
remove them on                        apparatus and affected
payment of royalty.                   the conduct of business.
6. 8.   Aditya            Advance rent for        Capital       That the rent paid by the
Minerals Pvt.     fifteen years to be     expenditure   assessee was in the
Ltd.        vs.   paid, calculated at                   nature of a deposit and
Commissioner      the rate of Rs. 35/-                  was adjustable against
of Income Tax,    per month, for lease                  the rent of each month.
(1999) 239 ITR    of      land      for                 Since the rent for the
817.              excavation         of                 entire period of lease was
minerals         and                  paid in advance, the
subsidiary                            expenditure would be
purposes.                             capital        expenditure.
Reliance was placed on
Pingle Industries Ltd.

(cid:12)  Sl.    Citation          Transaction        In Classification   Reasons                 for
No.                      Question              of         the   classification:
Transaction
in   Question
by this Court:
7. 9.    Enterprising      Proportionate lease Capital            Acquisition of a leasehold
Enterprises       rent paid by mining expenditure        right to extract minerals.
vs.     Deputy    lessee for acquiring
Commissioner      leasehold right for
of Income Tax,    extracting minerals
(2007) 293 ITR    from         mineral
437 (SC).         bearing land.
8. 10.   M/s      Gotan    Royalty paid by the Revenue            That the lease was for
Lime              assessee per annum expenditure         excavation of limestone
Syndicate vs.     in lieu of a mining                    alone and no other rights
Commissioner      lease/    rights   to                  were       created      in
of Income Tax,    excavate limestone                     immovable property. That
(1966) 59 ITR     in a certain area.                     the royalty paid was not a
718 (SC).                                                payment     for   securing
enduring advantage but
was a payment in order to
obtain raw material and
hence, was in the nature
of a revenue expenditure.

11.   Commissioner      Compensation          Revenue          That the assessee had
of      Income    received    by    the receipt          innumerable agencies in
Tax vs.    Best   assessee on account                    different lines and had

and Co. (Pvt.)    of cancellation of                     given up only one, to
Ltd. (1966) 60    one of its agencies.                   continue     business     in

44

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

ITR 11 (SC).                                             other lines. Loss of agency
was in the normal course
of business and a part of
normal            business,
therefore, the amount
received as compensation
was revenue in nature.
12.   Travancore        Payment of 20% of Revenue              That the payment was to
Sugars    and     the    annual     net expenditure      be made for an indefinite
Chemicals         profits subject to a                   period    and     had    no
Ltd.       vs.    maximum             of                 limitation of time attached
Commissioner      Rs.40,000/- which                      to it; The payment was
of Income-tax,    was to be paid to the                  related to the annual
(1966) 62 ITR     Government by the                      profits which flowed from
566 (SC).         assessee,          in                  the trading activities of
addition to a one-                     the     appellant-company
time            cash                   and had no relation to the
consideration,     on                  capital value of the assets.
taking over three

(cid:12)Sl.   Citation          Transaction         In Classification    Reasons                 for
No.                     Question                of         the   classification:
Transaction
in   Question
by this Court:
undertakings      run
by the Government
of Travancore.
13.   Commissioner      Contribution            Revenue          That the assessee did not
of Income Tax,    payable     by     the expenditure       become entitled, even for
Bombay City I     assessee at the rate                     the    period    of    the
vs. CIBA India    of 6% of the net                         agreement to the patents
Ltd., (1968) 69   selling price, to the                    and trademark of the
ITR 692 (SC).     Swiss Company, on                        Swiss Company. That the
receiving          the                   assessee merely had a
formula, scientific                      licence to trade and
data, working rules                      access to the patents and
and     prescriptions                    trademark of the Swiss
pertaining to the                        Company for the limited
manufacturing and                        period of the agreement.
processing           of                  That the assessee did not
products discovered                      acquire any asset or
and developed in the                     advantage of enduring
Swiss     Company’s                      nature.
laboratories.
14.   Jabbar (M.A.)     Payment made for a Revenue               That the lease was for a
vs.               short term lease of expenditure          short period and the
Commissioner      eleven months for                        expenditure incurred by
of Income Tax,    quarrying and to                         the assessee was not
Andhra            carry away, sell and                     related to the acquisition
Pradesh,          dispose of sand                          of an asset or of a right of

45

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

(1968) 68 ITR     which was lying on                       enduring     nature,    but
493 (SC).         the surface of a river                   merely to obtain stock-in-
bed.                                     trade in the form of sand.
15.   Lakshmiji         Expenditure             Revenue          That the said expenditure
Sugar     Mills   incurred            on expenditure       was incurred for the
Co. Pvt. Ltd.     construction      and                    purpose of providing ease
vs.               development          of                  of transportation to the
Commissioner      roads        between                     assessee and facilitating
of Income Tax,    different sugarcane                      the assessee’s business.
(1972) 82 ITR     producing centres                        There was no evidence to
376 (SC).         and sugar factories.                     show that without such
roads, the assessee would
be unable to carry on
business. Therefore, the
expenditure was incurred
merely for commercial
expediency.

(cid:12)Sl.   Citation          Transaction        In Classification    Reasons                  for
No.                     Question              of         the    classification:
Transaction
in   Question
by this Court:
16.
Vithaldas and     percentage         of Expenditure       not amount to the sale of
Co. vs. C.I.T.,   profits), paid on (Majority        of   goodwill, as the duration

Devidas           Purchase price (as a Revenue            That the transaction did

Bombay City,      acquisition    of   a 3:1; Sikri C.J.   of the payment as also the
(1972) 3 SCC      running business, Dissenting)           amount of consideration
457.              as consideration for                    was indefinite as they
the right to use the                    depended on the rise and
goodwill    of    the                   fall in the profits of the
business.                               business. It was held that
where the acquisition is
not of the goodwill itself
but for the rights to use it,
the expenditure in the
nature of royalty would be
a revenue expenditure.
17.   Mewar Sugar       i. Payment made by    Payment of        That       payment        of
Mills Ltd. vs.        the assessee to   two percent       the two per cent royalty
CIT, (1973) 3         acquire monopoly  royalty on the    on the price of sugar
SCC 143.              rights         to sugar             manufactured       by   the
manufacture       manufacture       appellant therein had no
sugar in Udaipur; was held to be    relationship    with    the
ii. 2% royalty paid   revenue           payment in reference to
to the ruler of   expenditure       the monopoly conferred
Udaipur State on  while      the    under the grant.
the price of the  payment
sugar             made        in
manufactured.     respect of the

46

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

monopoly
rights
obtained was
held to be of
capital
nature.
18.   Empire    Jute    Payment made by Revenue              The payment made by the
Co. Ltd vs.       the assessees for Expenditure        assessees for purchase of
Commissioner      purchase of loom                     loom hours was held to be
of Income Tax,    hours,     and    for                expenditure incurred as
(1980) 124 ITR    allotment of hours                   part of the process of
1 (SC).           of work per week,                    profit earning. The said
under a contractual                  expense was categorised
agreement between                    as an outlay of a business
various        mills,                in order to carry it on and
restricting the right                to earn profit out of the
expense. It was concluded

(cid:12)Sl.   Citation         Transaction        In Classification     Reasons                 for
No.                    Question              of         the     classification:
Transaction
in   Question
by this Court:
of every mill to work                   that the expense was a
at full capacity.                       part of the cost of
operating the          profit
earning apparatus and
was clearly in the nature
of revenue expenditure.
19.   L.H.    Sugar i.     Assessee’s          i. Merely an i. That the assessee’s
Factory   and        contribution            act of good     contribution towards
Oil Mills Pvt.       towards      the        citizenship     the construction of a
Ltd.       vs.       construction of         and     not     dam,      carried     no
Commissioner         a          dam,         “deductibl      advantage      for   the
of Income Tax,       pursuant to the         e               business       of    the
U.P.,   (1980)       request of the          expenditur      assessee. The same
125 ITR 293.         Collector;              e”.             was         contributed
ii.   Expenditure         ii. Revenue         without any obligation
incurred by the         expenditur      to do so and was
assessee                e               simply an act of good
towards      the                        citizenship and hence,
construction of                         not deductible.
roads in the                        ii. That construction of
area around its                         roads in the area
factory, under a                        around the assessee’s
Sugarcane                               factory     would     be
Development                             considerably
Scheme floated                          advantageous to the
by the State                            business       of    the
Government.                             assessee as it would
facilitate transport of

47

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

sugarcane into the
factory             and
manufactured sugar
out of the factory.
Hence,             such
expenditure         was
indubitably connected
with the business
activity      of     the
assessee.
20.   Commissioner     Expenditure             Revenue         That      the     advantage
of Income Tax    incurred     by   the   expenditure     secured by the assessee
vs. Associated   assessee under a                        by         making        the
Cement           tripartite agreement                    expenditure was          the
Companies        with     the    State                   securing of absolution or
Ltd.,   (1988)   Government       and                    immunity from liability to

(cid:12)Sl.   Citation         Transaction   In Classification         Reasons                 for
No.                    Question         of         the         classification:
Transaction
in   Question
by this Court:
172 ITR 257 Municipality       of                      pay municipal rates and
(SC).       Shahabad,          to                      taxes for       a period of
supply water and                           fifteen years. If these
electricity        to                      liabilities had been paid,
Shahabad and to                            the payments would have
concrete the road                          been on revenue account
from the factory to                        and hence the advantage
the railway station.                       secured was in the field of
In consideration of                        revenue and not capital.
these amenities to                         As a result of the
be provided by the                         expenditure there was no
assessee company,                          addition to the capital
the         assessee                       assets of the assessee
secured immunity                           company and no change
from payment of                            in its capital structure.
municipal taxes for                        The pipelines which came
a period of 15 years.                      into existence as a result
of      the      expenditure
belonged            to    the
Municipality.
21.   Alembic          One-time payment        Revenue       First, that the expenditure
Chemical         made      under   an    expenditure   was incurred for the
Works Co. Ltd.   agreement with a                      purpose of existing day-
vs.              foreign firm by the                   to-day      business,    i.e.,
Commissioner     assessee to obtain                    manufacture of penicillin
of Income Tax,   technical                             and not for an entirely
Gujarat (1989)   knowhow, for incr                     new venture unconnected
177 ITR 377      easing     yield   of                 or different from the
(SC).            penicillin    in  its                 existing business;

48

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

existing plant with a                 Second, that given the
condition to keep                     rapid advancements in
the said know-how                     the field of medicine, a
confidential.                         degree of durability and
permanence cannot be
attributed to the technical
know-how,        particularly
when it is not a case of
exclusive acquisition.
22.   Jonas            i.   Payment made       The           Under the agreement with
Woodhead              towards            consolidated the      foreign    company,
and      Sons.        accessing   the    payments      what was set up by the
India Ltd. vs.        know-how and       made     were assessee was a new
Commissioner          technical          apportioned   business and the foreign
of Income Tax,        information        and      25% company had not only

(cid:12)Sl.   Citation          Transaction           In Classification   Reasons               for
No.                     Question                 of         the   classification:
Transaction
in   Question
by this Court:
(1997) 224 ITR        regarding       the thereof was       furnished     information
342 (SC).             setting up of a held to be in         and technical know-how
plant;               the nature of    but had also rendered
ii. Payment in the capital                valuable services in the
form of royalty expenditure           setting up of the factory
for the services while        75%,    itself. That even after
to be rendered payable           on   expiry of the agreement
to the assessee services, was         there was no embargo on
by the foreign held to be             the assessee to continue
firm.                revenue          to     manufacture    the
expenditure.     product.
23.   Commissioner      Expenditure              Revenue          That the asset created,
of Income Tax     incurred     by     the expenditure       though of an enduring
vs.    Madras     assessee             on                   nature, did not belong to
Auto Services     demolishing          an                   the assessee.
Pvt.      Ltd.,   existing      building
(1998) 233 ITR    and constructing a
468 (SC).         new          building,
during              the
subsistence of a 39
year            lease,
whereafter,         the
assessee continued
to be a lessee in the
building        which
belonged     to     the
lessor.
24.   Honda      Siel   Lump-sum             fee Revenue          That the payment was
Cars     India    payable     by      the expenditure       made by the assessee, not
Ltd.        vs.   assessee to M/s                           to set up the plant to

49

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

Commissioner      Honda          Motors                     manufacture Honda cars
of Income Tax,    Company           Ltd.,                   but so as to obtain the
Ghaziabad,        Japan      in      five                   licence to manufacture
(2017) 8 SCC      continuous                                Honda cars in India,
170.              instalments       after                   which were its stock in
commencement of                           trade. That the agreement
commercial                                was framed in a manner
production            of                  as to give licence for a
Honda cars by the                         limited period, having no
assessee, under a                         enduring nature.
licensing          and
technical assistance
agreement between
the parties.

Details of certain decisions of various High Courts, which have also been considered are presented
in the table hereinbelow:

Sl. Cause Title Transaction in Classification of Reasons for No. and Citation Question
the Transaction classification:

in question by the High Court:

1. Mohan Meakin Annual payment Capital That but for the licence Breweries Ltd.
made to the State expenditure so obtained, the vs. towards licence fee assessee could
not have Commissioner for established the of Income Tax, working/operating
distillery.

(1997) 220 ITR     of a distillery.
878.      (High
Court         of
Himachal
Pradesh,
Shimla)
2.    Commissioner       i.   Payment made i.    The              That           payments
of Income Tax           by           the   expenditure      calculated as a certain
vs.     Sarada          assessee, of a     incurred         percentage of profits of
Binding                 fixed sum of       towards the      a business for an
Works, (1976)           Rs. 5000/- per     right to run     indefinite period of time
102 ITR 187             annum         to   the business     cannot be treated as
(Madras High            acquire      the   of               payments               by
Court)                  right to run the   ‘Chandamam       instalments of a capital
business      of   a                sum. The payment of
‘Chandamama        Publications’    royalty was related to
Publications’;     was held to      the future profits of the
be    Capital    assessee and had no
ii. Royalty    paid     expenditure;     nexus with the capital
annually     on                      sum.

50

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

sales            ii. Royalty was
equivalent to        held to be in
10% of the           the nature of
annual      net      revenue
profits.             expenditure.
3.    Commissioner       i. Payment        of i. Technical       That by making a
of Income Tax          technical            collaboration payment of royalty, the
vs. Southern           collaboration/       fee was held assessee had acquired
Switch     Gear        technical aid        to be capital an exclusive privilege to
Ltd.,    (1984)        fees by the          expenditure; manufacture and sell
148 ITR 272            assessee to a ii. 25% of the the                   products.
(Madras High           foreign              royalty was Therefore,       the   said
Court)                 company;             held to be expenditure was to be
Decision           ii. Royalty              capital     in treated partly as capital
affirmed     by        payable in five      nature, while and partly revenue. The

(cid:12)Sl.   Cause     Title Transaction         in Classification of   Reasons               for
No.   and Citation    Question               the Transaction     classification:
in question by
the High Court:
this Court in         instalments          75%      was    value of the royalty
Southern              for          the     stated to be    related      to      the
Switch   Gear         acquisition of       revenue         acquisition of the right

Ltd. vs. CIT,         an     exclusive     expenditure.    of enduring nature was

CIT vs. Saw     Service       charges     Revenue          That the service lines

(1998) 232 ITR        privilege     of                     estimated at 25% and
35 (SC).              manufacturin                         treated    as     capital
g and selling                        expenditure, while the
the products.                        rest was stated to be
revenue expenditure.
4.
Pipes     Ltd., paid      by      the     expenditure      did not belong to the
(2008) 300 ITR  assessee           to                      assessee but to the
35 (High Court  Maharashtra State                          MSEB and were laid out
of Delhi)       Electricity Board                          to enable the assessee
(MSEB) to set up a                         to conduct its business
service line for                           more effectively. Hence,
supplying                                  the same was to be
electricity, as part                       regarded as revenue
of an arrangement                          expenditure.
wherein           the
ownership of the
cables         would
remain with the
MSEB.
5.
Synthetics,     the assessee under        expenditure      acquired “access” to the
(2009) 309 ITR an agreement to                             technical information
371       (High access      technical                      which related to the
Court of Delhi) information of a                           process                 of
foreign company,                           manufacture,        which
whereby         there                      was not related to any

CIT vs. J.K. Payment made by              Revenue          That the assessee only

51

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

would       be     no                      secret      process    or
transfer            of                     intellectual     property
ownership of the                           rights. The products in
know-how           in                      question were already
favour      of    the                      being manufactured by
assessee, and the                          the assessee and the
access was granted                         know-how would only
on a non-exclusive                         increase the assessee’s
basis.                                     profitability. Therefore,
the expenditure would
be in the nature of
revenue expenditure.
6.    Commissioner Royalty         payable Revenue               That since royalty was
of Income Tax annually       by the expenditure            payable on the quantity

(cid:12)Sl.   Cause     Title Transaction        in Classification of   Reasons              for
No.   and Citation    Question              the Transaction     classification:
in question by
the High Court:
vs.    Sharda     assessee, on the                        of the good produced,
Motors, (2009)    number of pieces                        the same would be
319 ITR 109       manufactured, to a                      revenue expenditure.
(High Court of    Korean Co. which
Delhi)            had        provided
technical    know-
how      to     the
assessee.
7.    CIT vs. Modi      Royalty             Revenue             That notwithstanding
Revlon     Pvt.   consideration paid expenditure          the    fact   that    the
Ltd.,     2012    by the assessee                         assessee was the sole
SCC     OnLine    annually,    as   a                     licencee of the brand
Del 4463 (High    percentage of sales                     within a given territory,
Court of Delhi)   price, to Revlon                        expenditure would be
Mauritius Ltd. for                      revenue     in    nature
supply of technical                     because the ownership
know-how         to                     of the brand continued
manufacture                             to be with Revlon
goods.                                  Mauritius. That there
was nothing in the
agreement suggestive of
any vesting of the
know-how or part of it,
or the goodwill of the
brand, in the assessee.

16. We may also refer to some decisions of the Courts in England, with a view to
cull-out certain tests, which, although should not be treated as over-exacting, may
suggest some broad and general guidelines to ascertain as to which side of the line

52

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

the outlay in any particular case might reasonably be held to fall. 16.1. The City of
London Contract Corporation Ltd. vs. Styles, (1887) 2 TC 239 is the first of the line of
cases where courts in England considered the issue as to the categorisation of
expenditure, as capital or revenue. Bowen, L.J. broadly indicated that the outlay on
the "acquisition of the concern" would be capital while an outlay in "carrying on the
concern" is revenue.

16.2. In Vallambrosa Rubber Co. Ltd. vs. Farmer, (1910) 5 T.C. 529, Lord Dunedin observed that a
proposition could be stated “in a rough way”, to the effect that capital expenditure is a thing that is
going to be spent once and for all and income expenditure is a thing which will incur every year.

This test was adopted by Rowalatt J. in Ounsworth (Surveyor of Taxes) vs. Vickers Ltd., (1915) 3
K.B. 267 (“Vickers Ltd.”) wherein it was observed that the real test was between expenditure which
was made to meet a continuous demand for expenditure as opposed to an expenditure which was
made once and for all. In the course of the judgment however, it was suggested that what was
determinative was whether the particular expenditure could be put against any particular work or
whether it was to be regarded as an enduring expenditure to serve the business as a whole.

16.3. The latter guideline laid down in Vickers Ltd. served as the foundation for the test prescribed
by Viscount Cave L.C. in the oft-cited case on the subject, British Insulated Helsby Cables Ltd. vs.
Atherton, (1926) AC 205 (“Atherton”), wherein it was observed that when an expenditure is made,
not only once and for all, but with a view to bringing into existence an asset or an advantage for the
enduring benefit of trade, such an expenditure is property attributable to capital and not to revenue.

16.4. The expression "enduring benefit of a trade" was further explained as meaning not
"everlasting", but "in the way capital endures" vide Du Parcq, L.J., in Henriksen vs. Grafton Hotel
Ltd., (1942) 24 T.C. 453. In the said case, Lord Greene stated that if the sum payable is not in the
nature of revenue expenditure, it cannot be made so by permitting it to be paid by annual
instalments. The payments by instalments in respect of monopoly value do not have the quality of
annual payments or the grant of the annual excise licence, but are of a different character altogether.

16.5. Viscount Haldane however, in John Smith & Son vs. Moore, (1921) 12 T.C. 266, suggested
another test- the test of fixed or circulating capital. Fixed capital being what the owner turns to
profit by keeping in his possession; circulating capital is what the assessee makes profit from by
parting or letting the product/asset change hands. However, in the said case, it was observed that
the demarcation line between assets out of which profits were earned and the profit made upon
assets or with assets, was thin and difficult to draw in several cases.

16.6. It was clarified in Mallet vs. Staveley Coal and Iron Co., (1928) 2 K.B. 405 (“Mallet”) that where
the expenditure is to bring into the hands of the company a necessary ingredient of their existing
business, which is important but still ancillary to the business, the expenditure is to be debited to
the circulating capital rather than to the fixed capital, which is employed in and sunk in the
permanent assets of the business. 16.7. The test of fixed or circulating capital was also adopted by
Lord Hanworth, M.R. in Anglo-Persian Oil Co. vs. Dale, (1932) 1 K.B. 124 (“Dale”) wherein it was

53

observed:

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

“I am inclined to think that the question whether the money paid is provided from
the fixed or the circulating capital comes as near to accuracy as can be suggested.” In
further elucidation of the principle, it was laid down as follows:

a) The expenditure is to be attributed to capital if it be made “with a view” to bringing
an asset or advantage into existence, however, it is not necessary that it should always
achieve the intended result in order to be held to be capital in nature. Thus the sum
spent in trying to procure an agency agreement or a licence, may be capital
expenditure though the intended agency or licence may not be ultimately secured.

b) By ‘enduring’, it is meant “enduring in the way that fixed capital endures” and it
does not connote a benefit that endures in a sense that for a good number of years it
relieves the assessee of a revenue payment.

However, in Van Den Berghs, Limited vs. Clark (H.M. Inspector of Taxes), (1935) 19 T.C. 390, Lord
Macmillan veered round to the test of enduring benefit and expressed reservations regarding the
test of fixed and circulating capital. That “where the character of the expenditure shows that what
has resulted is something which is to be used in the way of business, the test may be useful; but in
cases close to the dividing line, the test seems useless.” 16.8. A third test was propounded in Robert
Addie & Sons Collieries Ltd. vs. Commissioners of Inland Revenue, (1924) 8 T.C. 671, while
determining whether a given expenditure is capital or revenue in nature:

"Is it part of the Company's working expenses, is it expenditure laid out as part of the
process of profit- earning? or, on the other hand, is it a capital outlay, is it
expenditure necessary for the acquisition of property or of rights of a permanent
character, the possession of which is a condition of carrying on its trade at all?"

The said test was adopted by the Privy Council in Tata Hydro- Electric Agencies Ltd., Bombay vs.
Commissioner of Income-tax, (1937) L.R. 64 IndAp 215 wherein it was stated that the expenditure
which is part of the working expenses in ordinary commercial trading was not capital but revenue. It
was further observed that the determinative question would be whether the expenditure is “a part of
the company's working expenses; is it expenditure laid out as part of the process of profit earning ?”
Referring to the facts of the said case, the Privy Council came to the conclusion that the obligation to
make the payments was undertaken by the appellants therein in consideration of their acquisition of
the right and opportunity to earn profits, i.e., of the right to conduct the business and not for the
purpose of producing profits in the conduct of the business. The distinction was thus made between
the acquisition of an income-earning asset and the process of the earning of the income.
Expenditure in the acquisition of that asset was capital expenditure and expenditure in the process
of the earning of the profits was revenue expenditure. It was further observed that on acquisition of
a business and when a liability to pay yearly sums is taken over, those yearly sums were not
deductible in computing future profits for tax purposes, as they form a part of the consideration for
the acquisition of the business.

54

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

16.9. A similar guideline was expressed in Sun Newspapers Limited and the Associated Newspapers
Limited vs. The Federal Commissioner of Taxation, (1938) 61 C.L.R. 337, wherein it was stated that
the expenditure incurred towards establishing, replacing and enlarging the profit yielding subject
must be contrasted with the continual flow of working expenses, which ought to be supplied
continually out of the returns of revenue. While the former category of expenditure would be capital
in nature, the latter would be revenue. It was further held that while applying the ‘enduring benefit’
test the words, ‘permanent’ or ‘enduring’ are not to be understood to mean ever- lasting. The
distinction which is drawn is that between more or less recurrent expenses involved in running a
business and an expenditure for the benefit of the business as a whole.

16.10. Certain supplementary tests have been laid down by the Judicial Committee in Mohanlal
Hargovind of Jubbulpore vs. Commissioner of Income Tax, (1949) L.R. 76 IndAp 235 wherein the
assessee had paid for purchasing tendu leaves from the forest, which right included the right of
entry and coppicing and pollarding. The said expenditure was for acquiring the raw materials for the
manufacturing business and thus a capital expenditure. In the said case, the assessee was a paid
manufacturer who had obtained short- term contracts with the Government and other forest owners
to obtain tendu leaves from the forests. The Judicial Committee held that these contracts were, in a
business sense, for the purpose of securing supplies to the manufacturers of one of the raw materials
of his business. They granted no interest in land or the plants or trees and therefore, the expense
incurred in this regard was not a capital expenditure.

17. A study of the aforesaid decisions of the Courts of England would reveal that the following
factors have guided the Courts in the said jurisdiction in determining the nature of transactions:

i. Periodicity of payments: In the broadest sense, capital expenditure is a thing that is
going to be spent once and for all and income expenditure is a thing which will incur
every year. However, expenditure which is not ‘once and for all’ may nevertheless be
capital. Expenditure of a recurring nature on the acquisition of assets which are
clearly fixed rather than circulating capital, remains capital. Moreover, an outgoing
does not cease to be of a capital nature merely because it is payable in instalments,
vide CIR vs. Adam, (1928) 14 T.C. 34. The test is therefore to determine, whether, the
payment is made as a matter of such frequent recurrence that it is a part of ordinary
working expenditure, Bonner vs. Basset Mines Ltd., (1912) 6 T.C. 145. ii. Object of the
expenditure: The Atherton test looks to the purpose or motive of expenditure. For
expenditure to be capital it must be spent for the acquisition, improvement or
disposal of a capital asset, vide Rolfe vs. Wimpy Waste Management Ltd., (1989) 62
T.C. 399; Tucker vs. Granada Motorway Services Ltd., (1979) 53 T.C. 92 (“Tucker”);
Mallet, respectively. However, the relationship between the expenditure and the
acquisition, improvement or disposal of a capital asset must be proximate and not
remote. For instance, payment made to staff could not be said to be payment made
for acquisition of goodwill and hence capital in nature, although, the staff by serving
well may help create the goodwill, vide Lawson vs. Johnson Matthey Plc., (1992) 65
T.C.

55

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

39.

iii. Identifiable asset test: It is necessary to identify a specific capital asset for which the expenditure
is incurred, vide Tucker. When the asset is an intangible benefit (licences, trading agreements etc.) it
will be necessary to ask whether the identifiable asset is of a sufficiently substantial and enduring
nature to count as capital, vide Dale; CIR vs. Carron Company, (1968) 45 T.C. 18; Heather vs. PE
Consulting Group Ltd., (1972) 48 T.C. 293. iv. Expenditure on commercial advantages generally:
Expenditure on commercial advantages dependent on a particular trading relationship is likely to be
capital only if a permanent advantage, such as the closing down of a potentially damaging
competitor, is secured by the payment, Walker vs. The Joint Credit Card Co., (1982) 55 T.C. 617.
However, expenditure which is incurred towards general business convenience (such as to facilitate
transport, supply-chain management, obtain temporary advantage over a competitor etc.) is of
revenue nature, CIR vs. Nchanga Copper Mines, (1964) 1 All ER 208 (“Nchanga Copper Mines”). v.
Effect, if any, of the expenditure on the profit-making structure: The question to consider is,
whether, the payment was made with a view to earn profit in a new form, or to structure the
assessee’s profit making apparatus. While the former category of expenditure would be revenue in
nature, the latter would be capital.

18. The test that was adopted, almost universally, in the early decisions in India, is akin to the one
laid down by Viscount Cave L.C. in Atherton.

18.1. In Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay vs. Century Spinning, Weaving and Manufacturing
Co., (1942) 10 ITR Suppl., M.C. Chagla J. observed that the legal touchstone which is most familiarly
applied in the Indian context is that of Viscount Cave in Atherton's case.

18.2. In Benarsidas Jagannath, In re, (1946) 15 ITR 185, a Full Bench of the Lahore High Court
attempted to reconcile the tests referred to hereinabove and deduced the following broad tests for
distinguishing capital expenditure from revenue expenditure:

“It is not easy to define the term 'capital expenditure' in the abstract or to lay down
any general and satisfactory test to discriminate between a capital and a revenue
expenditure. Nor is it easy to reconcile all the decisions that were cited before us for
each case has been decided on its peculiar facts. Some broad principles can, however,
be deduced from what the learned Judges have laid down from time to time. They are
as follows :-

1. Outlay is deemed to be capital when it is made for the initiation of a business, for
extension of a business, or for a substantial replacement of equipment : vide Lord
Sands in Commissioners of Inland Revenue v. Granite City Steamship Company
(1927) 13 T.C. 1, 14). In City of London Contract Corporation v. Styles ((1887) 2 T.C.
239), at page 243, Bowen, L.J. observed as to the capital expenditure as follows :

"You do not use it 'for the purpose of' your concern, which means, for the purpose of
carrying on your concern, but you use it to acquire the concern."

56

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

2. Expenditure may be treated as properly attributable to capital when it is made not only once and
for all, but with a view to bringing into existence an asset or an advantage for the enduring benefit of
a trade : vide Viscount Cave, L.C., in Atherton v. British Insulated and Helsby Cables Ltd. ((1925) 10
T.C. 155). If what is got rid of by a lump sum payment is an annual business expense chargeable
against revenue, the lump sum payment should equally be regarded as a business expense, but if the
lump sum payment brings in a capital asset, then that puts the business on another footing
altogether. Thus, if labour saving machinery was acquired, the cost of such acquisition cannot be
deducted out of the profits by claiming that it relieves the annual labour bill, the business has
acquired a new asset, that is, machinery. The expressions 'enduring benefit' or 'of a permanent
character' were introduced to make it clear that the asset or the right acquired must have enough
durability to justify its being treated as a capital asset.

3. Whether for the purpose of the expenditure, any capital was withdrawn, or, in other words,
whether the object of incurring the expenditure was to employ what was taken in as capital of the
business. Again, it is to be seen whether the expenditure incurred was part of the fixed capital of the
business or part of its circulating capital. Fixed capital is what the owner turns to profit by keeping it
in his own possession. Circulating or floating capital is what he makes profit of by parting with it or
letting it change masters. Circulating capital is capital which is turned over and in the process of
being turned over yields profit or loss. Fixed capital, on the other hand, is not involved directly in
that process and remains unaffected by it."

19. It may be useful at this juncture, to attempt to cull out the broad principles/tests that have been
forged and adopted by this Court from time to time, while determining whether a given expenditure
is capital or revenue in nature:

i. Capital expenditure is one met with a view to bring into existence an asset for the
enduring benefit of the trade. However, this rule is not applicable in every case. The
nature of the advantage acquired has to be considered in the commercial sense and
only when the advantage is in the capital field, deduction on the said expenditure
could be disallowed by applying the enduring benefit test. If the advantage consists
merely of facilitating trading operations or enabling the management or conduct of
business more effectively or profitably, while leaving the fixed capital untouched, the
said expenditure would be on revenue account, though the advantage may endure for
an indefinite period, vide Empire Jute Co. Ltd. Therefore, the enduring benefit test is
not conclusive and cannot be mechanically applied without considering the
commercial aspect of the transaction involving the expenditure in question. ii. Where
the expenditure is made for the initial outlay or for extension of a business, or a
substantial replacement of the equipment, it is capital expenditure. If the expenditure
is for running the business or working it with a view to produce profits, it is revenue
expenditure, vide Assam Bengal Cement Co. Ltd. What also follows from this test is
that expenditure which relates to the very framework or structure or edifice of the
taxpayer’s business is capital expenditure.

57

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

iii. The fixed and circulating capital test provides that where the expenditure is to
bring into the hands of the assessee a necessary ingredient of their existing business,
which is important but still ancillary to the business, the expenditure is to be debited
to the circulating capital (revenue account) rather than to the fixed capital (capital
account).

iv. Where there is no enlargement of the permanent structure or of capital assets and
the expenditure essentially relates to the operation or working of the existing
apparatus, such an expenditure would be on revenue account, vide Empire Jute Co.
Ltd.

v. The question as to whether an expenditure is capital or revenue in nature is to be
judged in every case in the context of business necessity or expediency. The first
aspect to be considered is whether, the expenditure is a part of the assessee’s working
expenditure or a part of profit earning. Further, an inquiry must be made as to,
whether, the expenditure was necessary to acquire a right of permanent character,
the possession of which is a condition precedent for carrying on a particular trade. In
the event that the answer to the first question is in the negative and the second
question is in the affirmative, the expenditure is inarguably capital in nature. In this
context, we are of the view that the decision of this Court in Alembic Chemical Works
Co. Ltd. must turn on its own peculiar facts.

vi. Thus, the aspect to be considered is whether the expenditure is incurred for the
purpose of the existing day-to-day business of the assessee, or with a view to
commence an entirely new venture. Where the expenditure incurred is merely to
enhance the productivity or profitability of an existing business, without making
significant changes to the structure of the assessee’s profit making apparatus, the
same is revenue in nature. Alembic Chemical Works Co. Ltd. was decided on the
above premise. vii. It is not necessary that in all cases, once and for all payment
would result in an enduring benefit, nor it is a firm rule that periodical payment
would not carry with it an enduring benefit. viii. Mere payment of an amount in
instalments does not convert or change a capital payment into a revenue payment.
Similarly, lump- sum payment can represent revenue expenditure if it is incurred for
acquiring circulating capital though payment is made once and for all. Likewise,
payment made in instalments can be for acquiring a capital asset, the price of which
is paid over a period of time. Therefore, what is relevant is the nature of the original
obligation and whether the subsequent payment made in instalments relates to or
has a nexus with such original obligation or not. Where the subsequent payments, are
towards a purpose which is identifiably distinct from the original obligation of the
assessee, the same would constitute revenue expenditure. However, where each of
the successive instalments relate to the same obligation or purpose, the cumulative
expenditure would be capital in nature. ix. The general principle that expenditure on
the creation of a capital asset is on capital account applies only where the capital
asset belongs to the assessee. An amount spent by the assessee may be deductible on

58

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

revenue account even if it results in the acquisition of a capital asset by a third party,
vide L.H. Sugar Factory and Oil Mills Pvt. Ltd. vs. Commissioner of Income Tax, U.P.,
(1980) 125 ITR 293.

x. Another pertinent question to consider is, whether, the expenditure is incurred towards purchase
of an asset, or merely of the right to use the asset for a given period of time on payment of a certain
consideration for the period of intended use, vide Devidas Vithaldas and Co. Where the asset is not
purchased or is not vested with the assessee, but the assessee has simply acquired a right to use the
asset, the payment would be of revenue nature, vide CIT vs. Modi Revlon Pvt. Ltd., 2012 SCC
OnLine Del 4463 (“Modi Revlon Pvt. Ltd.”).

Payment of royalty:

20. In the present case, before considering the issue as to categorisation of the variable licence fee
payable as a percentage of gross revenue, it is also necessary to understand the distinction between a
payment made to acquire a right, and payment of royalty in a broad sense. Stated in the most
simplistic manner, acquisition of a right would mean purchase of an asset, tangible or intangible, for
the enduring advantage of the purchaser. When a right is said to be acquired, it means that the
ownership of the said right vests with the purchaser. By contrast, payment of royalty is to use a right
or asset. The right or asset is not per se acquired by the person or entity authorised to use it but
continues to vest with the owner of the right. In case of royalty, payment is made merely to secure
the right to use an asset for a stipulated duration. When the payment of royalty ceases, in most
cases, the right to use the asset also ceases. Most often, the amount of royalty to be paid is
dependent on the annual sales vide Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay City I vs. CIBA India
Ltd., (1968) 69 ITR 692 (SC) (“CIBA India Ltd.”); Modi Revlon Pvt. Ltd.; annual profits vide
Travancore Sugars and Chemicals Ltd.; or such other variable. Further, in order to qualify as
royalty, the payment must have no nexus with the acquisition of a capital asset, vide Travancore
Sugars and Chemicals Ltd.; Mewar Sugar Mills Ltd.

20.1. The decision of this Court in Gotan Lime is highly instructive while attempting to draw a
distinction between payment made to acquire a right, and payment of royalty for use of a right or
asset. In the said case, this Court considered the issue as to the classification of the annual payment
made by the assessee therein, in lieu of the right to excavate limestone in a certain area. This Court,
while holding that the payment in question therein was revenue expenditure, reasoned that the
payment was not for securing an enduring advantage but was a royalty payment in order to obtain
raw material and hence, a revenue expenditure. The pertinent observations of this Court are
extracted hereinunder:

“We are of the opinion that in the present case the royalty payment is not a direct
payment for securing an enduring advantage; it has relation to the raw material to be
obtained. Ordinarily, a mining lease provides for a capital sum payment; but the fact
that there is no lumpsum payment here cannot by itself lead to the conclusion that
yearly payments to be made under the mining lease have relation to the acquisition of
the advantage. No material has been placed on the record as to how any part of the

59

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

royalty must, in view of the circumstances of the case, be treated as premium and be
referable to the acquisition of the mining lease.” The above dictum is clear on the
aspect of the distinction between payment made to acquire a right and payment of
royalty inasmuch as it lays down in express terms that if a payment is made, not
towards securing an enduring advantage or asset, but towards a right to use an asset,
the same would be royalty. It has further been stated in no unclear terms that where a
payment is not referrable to the acquisition of a capital asset (particularly, mining
lease in the said case), but only secures a right to use the asset, the same would be
royalty and hence classifiable as a revenue expenditure.

20.2. Relying on the decision in Gotan Lime, this Court in Mewar Sugar Mills Ltd.
while considering a transaction wherein the assessee therein paid: (a) Lump-sum
payment to acquire monopoly rights for manufacture of sugar in Udaipur; and (b)
payment to the ruler of Udaipur State, at the rate of 2% of the price of the sugar
manufactured, held that the payment of the 2% royalty on the price of sugar
manufactured by the appellant therein had no relationship with the payment
referable to the monopoly conferred under the grant and hence, it was in the nature
of revenue expenditure. 20.3. Another ingredient of payment as royalty is that in
most cases, it relates to and is dependent on the profit earned or sales made by
working an asset, rather than the acquisition of the asset itself. Such periodic
payments, particularly those which are based on turnover of profit and which are not
related to any predetermined lump-sum are towards royalty and correctly deductible
as revenue expenditure. 20.4. In CIBA India Ltd., this Court held that payments
made for the right to have access to technical knowledge and the fruits of continuing
research and experience of a foreign company and to use its patents and trademarks
would be chargeable on revenue account. This would demonstrate that even where
technical know-how is a capital asset, amounts paid for its mere use, or for the use of
a trademark, trade name or the right to manufacture and sell certain goods, are
allowable as revenue expenditure in the nature of royalty as the payment is made for
the use of the asset and not for its acquisition. In such cases, the payment of royalty,
has no relation to the capital value of the asset authorised to be used.

21. In our view, the following considerations are immaterial in determining the
question, as to, whether, a payment is a capital disbursement or in the nature of a
revenue expenditure:

i. Lump-sum and periodical payment: Lord Greene in Inland Revenue vs. Williams,
11 ITR Suppl. 84 famously remarked, “There is no magic in the distinction between a
lump-sum and periodic sums”. That the expense is a periodic expense or a lump- sum
payment is immaterial for the purpose of determining its nature. A lump-sum
payment may be revenue expenditure, for instance, when it represents the
commutation of a series of annual revenue payments; and a recurring periodic
payment may be capital expenditure, for instance when it represents the payments by
instalments of a capital sum, vide Assam Bengal Cement Co. Ltd.

60

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

ii. Magnitude of payment: The magnitude of a disbursement is immaterial for the
purpose of determining its nature, for, magnitude is a relative term, vide Prendergast
vs. Cameron, 8 I.T.R. Suppl. 75 (HL).

iii. Entries in books of accounts: That an item of expenditure is debited in an entity’s
books of account to revenue account is by no means conclusive of its nature.
Businesses frequently prefer to debit to the revenue account, payments which are in
their nature to be carried to capital account. Conversely, an assessee may be entitled
to a revenue deduction in respect of expenditure which is capitalised in the accounts,
vide India Cements vs. Commissioner of Income Tax, 60 I.T.R. 52 (SC).

22. In considering whether an item of expenditure is of a capital or revenue nature,
we reiterate that one must consider the nature of the concern, the ordinary course of
business usually adopted in that concern and the object with which the expenditure is
incurred, vide Assam Bengal Cement Co. Ltd. Attention must be paid not only to the
form of the transaction, but also its substance. Where the transaction takes the form
of a contract or other deed, it depends upon a proper construction of the terms of the
contract whether a payment made thereunder is a capital disbursement or revenue
expenditure.

The true nature of a transaction must be gathered by placing emphasis on the business aspect of the
transaction. What is an outgoing of capital and what is an outgoing on account of revenue depends
on what the expenditure is calculated to effect from the practical and business point of view. This
aspect of the transaction is then, to be reconciled with juristic classification of the legal rights, if any,
secured, employed, or exhausted in the process.

22.1. Therefore, what is material is the nature of right sought to be secured through the payment or
transaction in question. The purpose towards which the expenditure is incurred must guide any
attempt to categorise the expenditure. The structure or form of the transaction or the payment
schedule is hardly suggestive of the nature of the transaction. Therefore, it cannot be axiomatically
held that an expenditure which in its core, capital in nature, is actually to be treated as a revenue
expenditure simply because the payment is structured in instalments.

22.2. The determinative test to identify whether an expenditure structured in the form of
instalments is in the nature of a capital expenditure or revenue expenditure, would be to first assess
whether the payment made either in lump-sum or in instalments relates to the acquisition or
expansion of a capital asset, or by contrast, relates to the working of an asset to produce profits;
whether the consideration payable towards the acquisition or expansion of a capital asset has simply
been chopped up into smaller sums payable in instalments, for the sake of convenience. The dictum
of this Court in Pingle Industries Ltd., is relevant in this regard. In the said case, the majority
judgment stated that the payment in question therein was made with a view to acquire a long-term
lease and a right to mine stones, and the lease was conveyed to the assessee who had to extract the
stones and convert them as a stock-in-trade. That the expenditure was incurred towards securing a
capital asset from which, after extraction, stones could be converted into stock-in-trade. The

61

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

payment, though periodic, in fact, was neither rent nor royalty but a lump-sum payment in
instalments for acquiring a capital asset of enduring benefit to the assessee’s trade. According to this
Court “it was really the entire sum chopped into small payments for his convenience.” Hence, the
amount could not be described as a business expense, because the outgoings every month were not
to be taken as spent over purchase of stones but in discharge of a singular original obligation to the
jagir. These observations clearly establish the difference between a revenue expenditure on the one
hand and capital expenditure incurred in instalments on the other hand.

22.3. Similarly, in Jalan Trading Co., this Court while considering the issue as to classification of
periodic payments of 75% profit share, as consideration under a deed of assignment, for the right to
carry on business, held that the same would be capital expenditure. It was observed that the
assessee therein was a new company and it had acquired under the contract the right to carry on a
business on long- term basis subject to the renewal of the agreement on payment of 75% of its
annual net profits. That since the assessee had acquired a capital asset (right to carry out the
business of the assignor), any payment made towards securing such a right would be capital in
nature. This dictum would clearly demonstrate that when an expenditure is in its core capital in
nature, neither the fact that the same was paid in instalments, nor the fact that the quantum of
expenditure was dependent on the revenue or profit of the assessee, would warrant a change in the
classification of the transaction.

23. Before proceeding to consider the facts of the present case in light of the precedents discussed
hereinabove, it is necessary to preface our views by stating that it is perhaps one of the most familiar
arguments in Courts (particularly in matters involving an issue as to classification of expenditure or
receipts), that the case at hand bears close resemblance to another case falling on one or the other
side of the line, and must therefore be decided in the same manner. This thought was conveyed by
Lord Radcliffe in Nchanga Copper Mines wherein it was pointed out that “in considering allocation
of expenditure between capital and income accounts, it is almost unavoidable to argue from
analogy.” In that context, we must highlight the difficulty of relying on any single precedent in
search for the true classification, and attempting to draw similarities between the facts of the said
case and the facts of the case at hand. We think that the propositions made in earlier cases, if sought
to be applied to a different case which the authors of those propositions did not have in mind, could
lead to absurd results.

Further, it is trite that the words in a judgment must not be construed in the same manner as those
in a legislation. Hence, it is neither wise nor suitable to extend the dictum of one case, premised on
the facts of the said case, to another fact-situation which is seemingly similar but not really so. This
is particularly so when there is no precedent which has been rendered in an identical fact situation,
as is the case in the instant matters.

23.1. In such situations, the solution may not be found in any one precedent. It has to be derived
from many aspects of the whole set of circumstances some of which may point in one direction,
while some to the other. It is an appreciation of all guiding factors, premised in common business
sense, which must provide the ultimate answer, rather than mere analogy or comparison. It is with
such an approach that we shall proceed to consider the facts of the case at hand in light of certain

62

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

precedents referred to or/and relied upon by the High Court of Delhi as well as those cited at the
Bar.

23.2. We also wish to refer to the dictum of the King’s Bench Division in Commissioners of Inland
Revenue vs. Ramsay, 20 T.C. 79. The facts of the said case were that the assessee therein agreed to
purchase a dental practice for a primary consideration of £15,000 subject to increase or diminution
as therein provided. The primary price was to be satisfied by payment of £5000 on the exchange of
the agreement, and as to the balance, by payment each year for ten years of a sum equal to 25% of
the net profits of the practice for each year. If the amounts so paid over the ten years, were in the
aggregate, more or less than the balance of the primary purchase price, that price was to be treated
as correspondingly increased or diminished. The Court while considering an issue as to the
classification of the payments made each year held that the annual sums paid under the agreement,
were instalments of capital and were not admissible as revenue deductions. 23.3. Similarly, as
discussed hereinabove, this Court in Jalan Trading Co. had the occasion to consider the issue
pertaining to classification of an annual payment based on profit sharing towards the right to carry
on business. This Court concluded that since the annual payment of 75% profit share was paid by
the assessee in consideration of the right to carry on the business of the assignors, the payment
would be capital in nature. In doing so, this Court examined the contention of the assessee therein
that, since what was paid as consideration was not a pre-determined lump-sum amount but an
annual payment out of profits, such a payment should be held to be revenue in nature. The
three-Judge Bench of this Court rejected the said contention suggesting that when an expenditure is
in its core capital in nature, neither the fact that the same was paid in instalments, nor the fact that
the quantum of expenditure was dependent on the revenue or profit of the assessee, would warrant
a change in the classification of the transaction.

This judgment will apply on all fours in deciding the case at hand, since the annual payment of
variable licence fee is only towards licence fees and merely because it is paid in annual instalments
based on the AGR, the payment cannot be construed as revenue. The annual payments of licence fee
as also the entry fee relate to a singular purpose, i.e., the acquisition of the right to carry on the
business of rendering telecommunication services. This right being in the nature of a capital asset,
any payment(s) made towards the acquisition of the right, whether in lump-sum or in annual
instalments dependent on the AGR, would be in the nature of capital disbursement(s). 23.4. This
conclusion is also consistent with the view of this Court in Pingle Industries Ltd., wherein by a
majority of 2:1 held that the payment, towards acquisition of a long-term lease to win mine stones,
though periodic, was neither rent nor royalty but a lump-sum payment in instalments for acquiring
a capital asset of enduring benefit to trade. This Court refused to hold that the periodic payments
were towards purchase of stones, but instead opined that the payments were in discharge of a
singular original obligation to the jagir. Therefore, it emerges that where the periodic payments are
referrable to or have a nexus with the original obligation undertaken by the assessee as
consideration for acquisition of a right, the periodic payments would be in the nature of capital
expenditure, notwithstanding the fact that they are payable as a percentage of profits, gross revenue
or sales.

63

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

24. Hence, we are of the considered view that in the present case, since the entry fee as well as
variable licence fees are traceable to the same source, they would both have to be held to be capital
in nature, notwithstanding the fact that the variable licence fee is paid in a staggered manner. We
shall consider the case law sought to be relied upon by the learned senior counsel and learned
counsel for the respondents-assessees, so as to distinguish the same from the present case.

24.1. We shall first advert to the decision of this Court in Jonas Woodhead and Sons. Paragraph 2 of
the said judgment, in no unclear terms captures two underlying transactions arising out of the
agreement in the said case; the first transaction relating to the know- how and technical information
regarding setting up of the plant and the second transaction relating to the services to be rendered
to the assessee by the foreign firm, the consideration for the second prong being in the nature of
royalty. It is in that backdrop that the consolidated payment was apportioned and 25% thereof was
held to be in the nature of capital expenditure while 75%, payable on services, was held to be
revenue expenditure.

Further, it is also relevant to note that in the said case the exercise of apportionment into the
aforesaid fractions was carried out by the Madras High Court. Against the judgment of the High
Court, the Revenue did not prefer an appeal before this Court on the findings pertaining to
apportionment of 75% towards services. What was appealed against by the assessee was with regard
to categorisation of 25% of the consolidated expenditure as capital expenditure. The assessee alone
was the appellant before this Court. Therefore, the question as to apportionment of 75% towards
services, was not considered and decided by this Court in the said case. We are of the view that the
judgment of this Court in Jonas Woodhead and Sons would not come to the aid of the respondent-
assessees because the issue before this Court in the said case did not relate to a single right wherein
the payment made towards the same was held to be partly capital and partly revenue. The purpose
of payments in the said case was traceable to two different subject matters and therefore
apportionment between capital and revenue expenditure. However, in the present case, the entry fee
as well as variable licence fees are traceable to the same source. 24.2. Similarly, in Best and Co., this
Court decided the nature of expenditure on two separate transactions, though payments made were
consolidated in nature. The first transaction related to the compensation paid by the principal for
the termination of agency business, while the second was with respect to the payment made towards
the non-compete clause. On the first aspect, namely, the compensation received for the loss of
agency, it was held that what would be determinative was whether loss of agency would affect the
entire business structure, resulting in a loss of enduring nature, or, whether it was a loss due to an
ordinary incident in the course of business. If it was the former, it would be capital, and if it was the
latter, it would be revenue in nature. It was concluded vis-à-vis the first transaction that the loss of
the said agency by the assessee was only a normal trading loss and therefore the income received in
this regard was a revenue receipt. As regards the non-compete clause it was held that the same was a
restrictive covenant and was therefore, capital in nature. In paragraph 14 of the judgment of this
Court, it was recorded in unequivocal terms that the “compensation paid was in respect of two
distinct matters, one taking the character of a capital receipt and the other of a revenue receipt.”
Therefore, Best and Co. is a case where two independent transactions were considered, one of which
was held as capital and the other as revenue. This case did not decide the expenditure towards the
same right to be partly capital and partly revenue.

64

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

24.3. We shall now consider the decision of the Madras High Court affirmed by this Court in
Southern Switch Gear Ltd. Paragraph 2 of the judgment of the High Court records two distinct
transactions: one, for provision of technical know-how for the manufacture of switch gear products
and the second, was to share modern developments and also train necessary personnel in the factory
in United Kingdom. The consideration was fixed £20,000 payable in five instalments of £4000
each. Paragraph 5 of the judgement of the High Court referred to clause 6 of the agreement which
dealt with know-how and clause 7 thereof, which dealt with supervision and direction, besides
recommending appointment or dismissal of employees and also training them in the factory. In
paragraph 6, it was held that expenditure on technical know-how is capital in nature and should be
apportioned at 25% and the services rendered relatable to 75% of the consideration was revenue in
nature. When the assessee therein filed an appeal before this Court against the finding that technical
know-how is capital in nature and should be apportioned at 25%, the appeal was dismissed.

Therefore, it is clear that the said case also did not pertain to one source of expenditure being split,
partly as capital and partly as revenue in nature. In the said case, the Courts have examined two
different constituents of expenditure and held one component to be capital in nature while the other
to be revenue in nature. 24.4. Next, we advert to the facts in Sarada Binding Works on which heavy
reliance was placed by learned senior counsel Mr. Datar. The agreement relevant to the said case
envisaged conveyances of two aspects: first, the right to run the business of ‘Chandamama
Publications’ on payment of a fixed sum of Rs. 5000/- per annum; second, royalty to be paid
annually on sales equivalent to 10% of the annual net profits. The High Court held that the right to
run the business is capital in nature, whereas, the sharing of 10% profit per annum is revenue in
nature. In the concluding paragraph, the High Court made the following firm conclusions as to why
10% profit sharing would constitute a revenue expenditure:

i. That payments calculated as a certain percentage of profits of a business for an
indefinite period of time as royalty cannot be treated as payments by instalments of a
capital sum; ii. The payment of royalty was related to the future profits of the
assessee and had no nexus with the capital sum. In the said case, there are clear
findings to the effect that the payment of royalty in instalments, in the absence of any
definitive duration, cannot be linked to the right to carry on trade. That the payment
of royalty had no nexus with the capital sum. However, in the present case, it cannot
be said that the variable licence fee payable annually has no nexus with the
acquisition of the capital asset, i.e., the licence to render telecom services, as, it is the
payment of entry fee as well as the variable licence fees which together enable the
assessees to carry on the said business. Hence the aforesaid case would not apply to
the present case having regard to its distinct facts. 24.5. Sri Datar has also sought to
rely upon the decision of this Court in Mewar Sugar Mills Ltd. However, we do not
see how this judgment would bolster up the respondents’ case. In the said case, the
grant of licence by an agreement dated 05 April, 1932 contemplated two different
aspects: first, a monopoly right to cultivate sugarcane and produce sugar, and second,
payment of 2% royalty on the price of the sugar manufactured. In that backdrop, this
Court held that the payment of 2% royalty on the sugar manufactured was revenue
expenditure while the payment made in respect of the monopoly rights obtained was

65

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

of capital nature. It was observed that payment of the 2% royalty on the price of sugar
manufactured by the appellant therein had no relationship with the payment
referable to the monopoly conferred under the grant.

In the said case, this Court’s dictum is clear to the effect that royalty based on manufacture was in
no way connected to the acquisition of monopoly rights. But such a finding would be erroneous in
the facts of the present case since what is paid is only for acquisition of a right by way of licence fee.
Further, in the said case, royalty payment had been divorced from the payment for the right to carry
on business since any failure to pay royalty could not have, by any stretch, resulted in the
withdrawal of the right to carry on trade. The right to carry on trade would have remained
unaffected whether or not royalty payment was made. Failure to make royalty payment, could have
at the most, led to civil consequences, but not a revocation of the right to carry on trade, whereas, in
this batch of matters, the position is not the same. Admittedly, any failure to pay the annual variable
licence fee will inevitably lead to revocation of the licence under Section 8 of the Telegraph Act.
Further, the respondents will be disabled from carrying on the business of offering
telecommunication services, even for a day in the absence of a valid licence. Continuation of the
right to carry on the said business is contingent on the payment of both, entry fee, as well as variable
licence fee.

Therefore, we are unable to rely upon the dictum in Mewar Sugar Mills Ltd. to hold in favour of the
respondent-assessees in this batch of cases.

25. In light of the aforesaid discussion and having regard to the tests and principles forged by this
Court from time to time, as detailed in paragraphs hereinabove, we shall proceed to consider
whether the High Court of Delhi was right in apportioning the licence fee as partly revenue and
partly capital by dividing the licence fee into two periods, i.e. before and after 31 July, 1999 and
accordingly holding that the licence fee paid or payable for the period upto 31 July, 1999 i.e. the date
set out in the Policy of 1999 should be treated as capital and the balance amount payable on or after
the said date should be treated as revenue.

We answer the said question in the negative, against the assesses and in favour of the Revenue for
the following reasons:

i. Reliance placed by the High Court on the decisions of this Court in Jonas
Woodhead and Sons and Best and Co. and the decision of the Madras High Court in
Southern Switch Gear Ltd. as approved by this Court appear to be misplaced
inasmuch as the said cases did not deal with a single source/purpose to which
payments in different forms had been made. On the contrary, in the said cases, the
purpose of payments was traceable to different subject matters and accordingly, this
Court held that the payments could be apportioned. However, in the present case, the
licence issued under Section 4 of the Telegraph Act is a single licence to establish,
maintain and operate telecommunication services. Since it is not a licence for
divisible rights that conceive of divisible payments, apportionment of payment of the
licence fee as partly capital and partly revenue expenditure is without any legal basis.

66

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

ii. Perhaps, the decision of the High Court could have been sustained if the facts were
such that even if the respondents-operators did not pay the annual licence fee based
on AGR, they would still be able to hold the right of establishing the network and
running the telecom business. However, such a right is not preserved under the
s c h e m e   o f   t h e   T e l e g r a p h   A c t   w h i c h   w e   h a v e   d e t a i l e d   a b o v e .   H e n c e ,   t h e
apportionment made by the High Court is not sustainable.

iii. The fact that failure to pay the annual variable licence fee leads to revocation or
cancellation of the licence, vindicates the legal position that the annual variable
licence fee is paid towards the right to operate telecom services. Though the licence
fee is payable in a staggered or deferred manner, the nature of the payment, which
flows plainly from the licensing conditions, cannot be recharacterized. A single
transaction cannot be split up, in an artificial manner into a capital payment and
r e v e n u e   p a y m e n t s   b y   s i m p l y   c o n s i d e r i n g   t h e   m o d e   o f   p a y m e n t .   S u c h   a
characterisation would be contrary to the settled position of law and decisions of this
Court, which suggest that payment of an amount in instalments alone does not
convert or change a capital payment into a revenue payment.

iv. It is trite that where a transaction consists of payments in two parts, i.e.,
lump-sum payment made at the outset, followed up by periodic payments, the nature
of the two payments would be distinct only when the periodic payments have no
nexus with the original obligation of the assessee. However, in the present case, the
successive instalments relate to the same obligation, i.e., payment of licence fee as
consideration for the right to establish, maintain and operate telecommunication
services as a composite whole. This is because in the absence of a right to establish,
maintenance and operation of telecommunication services is not possible. Hence, the
cumulative expenditure would have to be held to be capital in nature.

v. Thus, the composite right conveyed to the respondents-assessees by way of grant of
licences, is the right to establish, maintain and operate telecommunication services.
The said composite right cannot be bifurcated in an artificial manner, into the right
to establish telecommunication services on the one hand and the right to maintain
and operate telecommunication services on the other. Such bifurcation is contrary to
the terms of the licensing agreement(s) and the Policy of 1999.

vi. Further, it is to be noticed that even under the 1994 Policy regime the payment of
licence fee consisted of two parts:

a) A fixed payment in the first three years of the licence regime;

b) A variable payment from the fourth year of the licence regime onwards, based on
the number of subscribers.

67

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

Having accepted that both components, fixed and variable, of the licence fee under the 1994 Policy
regime must be duly amortised, there was no basis to reclassify the same under the Policy of 1999
regime as revenue expenditure insofar as variable licence fee is concerned.

26. As per the Policy of 1999, there was to be a multi-licence regime inasmuch as any number of
licences could be issued in a given service area. Further, the licence was for a period of twenty years
instead of ten years as per the earlier regime. The migration to the Policy of 1999 was on the
condition that the entire policy must be accepted as a package and consequently, all legal
proceedings and disputes relating to the period upto 31 July, 1999 were to be closed. If the migration
to the Policy of 1999 was accepted by the assessees herein or the other service providers, then all
licence fee paid upto 31 July, 1999 was declared as a one time licence fee as stated in the
communication dated 22 July, 1999 which was treated to be a capital expenditure. The licence
granted under the Policy of 1999 was non-transferable and non- assignable. More importantly, if
there was a default in the payment of the licence fee, the entire licence could be revoked after sixty
days notice. The provisions of the Telegraph Act particularly Section 8 thereof are also to the same
effect. Having regard to the aforesaid facts and in light of the aforesaid conclusions, we hold that the
payment of entry fee as well as the variable annual licence fee paid by the respondents-assessees to
the DoT under the Policy of 1999 are capital in nature and may be amortised in accordance with
Section 35ABB of the Act. In our view, the High Court of Delhi was not right in apportioning the
expenditure incurred towards establishing, operating and maintaining telecom services, as partly
revenue and partly capital by dividing the licence fee into two periods, that is, before and after 31
July, 1999 and accordingly holding that the licence fee paid or payable for the period upto 31 July,
1999 i.e. the date set out in the Policy of 1999 should be treated as capital and the balance amount
payable on or after the said date should be treated as revenue. The nature of payment being for the
same purpose cannot have a different characterisation merely because of the change in the manner
or measure of payment or for that matter the payment being made on annual basis.

27. Therefore, in the ultimate analysis, the nomenclature and the manner of payment is irrelevant.
The payment post 31 July, 1999 is a continuation of the payment pre 31 July, 1999 albeit in an
altered format which does not take away the essence of the payment. It is a mandatory payment
traceable to the foundational document i.e., the license agreement as modified post migration to the
1999 policy. Consequence of non-payment would result in ouster of the licensee from the trade.
Thus, this is a payment which is intrinsic to the existence of the licence as well as trade itself. Such a
payment has to be treated or characterized as capital only.

28. In the result, the judgment of the Division Bench of the High Court of Delhi, dated 19 December,
2013 in ITA No. 1336 of 2010 and connected matters, is hereby set aside. The judgments passed by
the High Courts of Delhi, Bombay and Karnataka, following the judgment of the Division Bench of
the High Court of Delhi, dated 19 December, 2013, are also consequently set aside.

The appeals filed by the appellant(s)-Revenue are allowed. Parties to bear their respective costs.

Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of in the aforesaid terms.

68

C.I.T.,Delhi vs Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on 16 October, 2023

……………..………………….J. [B.V. NAGARATHNA] ……………..………………….J. [UJJAL BHUYAN] NEW
DELHI;

16th OCTOBER, 2023.

69