Cce, Aurangabad vs M/S Videocon Industries Ltd. Thr. Its ... on 29 March, 2023

Cce, Aurangabad vs M/S Videocon Industries Ltd. Thr. Its ... on
29 March, 2023

Author: S. Ravindra Bhat

Bench: S. Ravindra Bhat, Dipankar Datta

1

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 5622 OF 2009

CCE, AURANGABAD                                                     …APPELLANT(S)

VERSUS

M/S VIDEOCON INDUSTRIES LTD.
THR. ITS DIRECTOR                                                 …RESPONDENT(S)

WITH

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 8026 OF 2022

JUDGMENT

S. RAVINDRA BHAT, J.

1. These appeals, by the revenue, challenge two orders by the Customs, Excise and Service Tax
Appellate Tribunal (‘CESTAT’ hereafter).

2. In the first appeal1, the assessee is M/s Videocon International (hereafter “Videocon”). CESTAT,
by its impugned order 2 in the first appeal, allowed Videocon’s appeal and held that the LCD panels
imported by it are classifiable in Chapter Heading (“CH”) 9013.8010 [of the First Schedule to the
Customs 2 Dated 06.01.2009 in Order No. A/46/09/CSTB/C-II Tariff Act, 1975 (hereafter “CTA”)],
as Liquid Crystal Devices- as opposed to the revenue’s stand, that they are classifiable as 85.29
"parts of goods falling under heading 85.28" [television sets falling in heading 85.28]. Videocon
manufactures TV sets; the LCD panels are used by it, along with other items, such as printed boards,
decoders, etc.

1

Cce, Aurangabad vs M/S Videocon Industries Ltd. Thr. Its ... on 29 March, 2023

3. In the second appeal,3 the revenue is aggrieved by order of the CESTAT 4 whereby import of LCD
panels by the assessee i.e., M/S Harman International (India) Pvt. Ltd., (hereafter “Harman”) was
held to be classifiable under CH 9013.8010, rejecting the revenue’s contention that they were
classifiable as “Car Audio or Video Players” under either CTH 8519 or 8555. The LCD panels, in this
case, were used as part of audio systems in automobiles. Brief facts

4. In both appeals, the assesses had imported LCD panels/display boards. In Videocon appeal,
Videocon claimed that the imported goods fell in the relevant entry in CH 9013.8010. That entry
reads as follows:

“9013.8010 Liquid crystal devices (LCD)” The Chapter Heading read as follows:

“9013 Liquid crystal Devices not constituting articles provided for more specifically in
other headings; Lasers, other than Laser Diodes; other optical appliances and
instruments, not specified or included elsewhere in this chapter” Whereas, the
revenue contended that the LCD panels were to be classified as CH 8529, which reads
as follows:

4 Dated 09.11.2021 in Order No. A/87132/2021 in Customs Appeal No. 85003/2019
“Chapter 8529. "Parts suitable for use solely or principally with the apparatus of
heading 8525 to 8528” CH 8528 reads as follows:

“8528 Monitors and projectors, not incorporating Television reception apparatus,
reception apparatus for television, whether or not incorporating radio-broadcast
receivers or sound or video recording or reproducing apparatus”

5. The revenue claimed that the goods were improperly classified; a show cause notice was issued.
The Deputy Commissioner, who adjudicated them, ruled against the assessee and held that the
goods were classifiable under CH 8529. 9090. The assessee’s appeal succeeded, and the
Commissioner directed a remand. The Dy. Commissioner, after remand, confirmed the show cause
notice, and affirmed the classification proposed by it; the assessee appealed against this order,
unsuccessfully. The Commissioner (Appeals) rejected its appeal. It, therefore, approached the
CESTAT, which by the impugned order, set aside the demand, and upheld the assessee’s plea that
the proper classification of the goods was in CH 9013.8010.

6. In the Harman appeal too, the assessee claimed that the imported items i.e., LCD panels
[declared before the customs authorities as “Liquid Crystal Devices-TFT-LCD 4.8 in”] for car audio
assemblies, were properly classifiable in CH 9013.8010. Its contention was rejected by the revenue
authorities, who classified it as “Sound Recording or Reproducing Apparatus” in CH 8519, and fell
in CH 8522, item 8522.9000. CH 8522 reads as follows:

“8522 Parts and accessories suitable for use solely or principally with the apparatus
of headings 8519 or 8521” The litigation history in Harman’s case followed a
trajectory similar to Videocon’s; ultimately, by the impugned order, CESTAT upheld

2

Cce, Aurangabad vs M/S Videocon Industries Ltd. Thr. Its ... on 29 March, 2023

its contention that the goods, meant for use in car audio systems, were classifiable in
CH 9013.8010.

Contention of parties

7. Ms. Nisha Bagchi, learned counsel appearing for the revenue, argued that the findings of the
CESTAT are erroneous. She argued that the literature and other documents reveal that the LCD
panels have specific model numbers. She pointed to the fact that the websites of the manufacturers
of the imported articles are meant for use in LCD TVs. It was undeniable that the imported items
were used in the manufacture of LCD TVs. Some, however, were used in manufacturing monitors,
though they were not sold in the market. Therefore, the goods were LCD devices principally used in
the manufacture of LCD TVs. LCD TV is an apparatus covered specifically under heading 85.25 &
85.28.

8. Counsel argued that heading 90.13 covers only those articles which are not provided for more
specifically in other headings. In the present case, LCDs are specifically mentioned as parts of LCD
TVs in heading 85.29. Therefore, they cannot be classified under heading 90.13. Reliance was placed
on G.S. Auto International Ltd v Collector of Central Excise 5. It was emphasized that in G.S. Auto
(supra), this court held that the true test for classification is the test of commercial identity and not
functional test. Therefore, the correct question is 5 [2003] 1 S.C.R. 372: 2003 (152) ELT 3 (SC) how
the articles are referred to in the market by those who deal with them, whether for purchase, sale or
otherwise. The commercial parlance test, therefore, is determinative. Counsel submitted that the
court in GS Auto (supra) referred to Notes 2(b) and (3) of Section XVII and observed that a joint
reading of the notes would show that the expression "parts of general use" throughout the schedule,
meant, articles of Heading No. 7318 and similar articles of other base metal, and the expression 'part
and accessories' in Chapter Heading 87.08 did not apply to parts or accessories unsuitable for use
solely or primarily with articles of CH 87.08 which related to parts and accessories of motor vehicles
of CH 87.01 to 87.05. For the purposes of classification under CH 87.08, the test to be applied is
whether the goods are suitable for use solely or primarily with articles of CH Nos.87.01 to 87.05; if
the answer is in the affirmative, the goods will be classifiable under CH 87.08, but if the answer is in
the negative, they would have to be classified under CH 73.18.

9. It is urged that on an application of similar logic even if LCDs are covered by CH 90.13, yet, they
have to be classified under heading 85.29 since these are solely or principally used for manufacture
of LCD TVs and commercially known as parts of TVs.

10. Learned counsel referred to Chapter Note 2(b) (of Chapter 90) relating to classification of parts
and accessories if suitable for use solely or principally with a particular kind of machine, instrument
or apparatus or with a number of machines, are to be classified with that machine, instrument or
apparatus of that kind. In view of this note, LCDs for computer monitor are classifiable as part of
computer monitor, and the various general application and special application monitors will alone
be classifiable under Chapter Heading 90.13. The example given for such LCD panels were panel for
video games, medical monitoring and industrial test and control, etc., which are not part of any
particular equipment or machine but can be used in an assortment of machines. It was submitted

3

Cce, Aurangabad vs M/S Videocon Industries Ltd. Thr. Its ... on 29 March, 2023

that the assessee's plea about classification of different parts in various Chapter Headings other than
Chapter 84 and 85, is irrelevant as the various notes/explanatory notes of all sections, chapters, and
headings are unique to the respective sections or chapters or headings and cannot be generalized or
interchanged or applied to with other sections, chapters or headings, unless specified in the
tariff/explanatory notes or by any other legislation. The absence of explanatory note stating the
parts of LCD TVs will not be classifiable under Chapter Heading 85.29 if it is specifically specified
under any other chapter heading (in this case, Chapter Heading 90.13), the assessee cannot rely on
notes relating to other sections and chapters.

11. Lastly, Ms. Bagchi, anticipating reliance- by the assessee upon the judgment of this court, in
Secure Meters v Commissioner of Customs 6- submitted that the ratio of that case cannot be applied
to the facts of this case because, firstly, the competing entries (in that case) fell within the same
chapter, and secondly, that the factual basis in the present case, is stronger, because the 6 [2015] 6
S.C.R. 219: 2015 (14) SCC 239 websites of the manufacturers, clearly reveal that the imported goods
were meant principally to be used in television sets. Section note 2 (b) applies in this case because
the item in question was not specifically classifiable under its headings, because it is principally
meant for use in television sets.

12. In the second appeal7 concerning import by Harman International, the revenue argues that the
items are LCD attached with inseparable PCBs. Both were part of one equipment, though it was
declared as LCDs. Counsel pointed out that Harman, in its letter (dated 19.08.2016) stated that it
manufactured Car Audio/infotainment items and supplied them to auto manufacturers; the
shipment contained LCDs used in its manufacturing process of car audio assembly. Further, it was
stated that the items were assembled with the importer’s assembled PCBs to give different outputs
on car audio screen and was designed specifically to suit end product requirements and could not be
used separately as an accessory but was an essential part of its manufactured product. Thus, LCD
panels were specifically designed in a particular manner to be used only in car audio/infotainment
systems. They were, consequently, specific parts of car audio/infotainment systems and cannot be
used otherwise.

13. Counsel urged that the goods were articles described specifically as parts of 'Sound Recording
and Reproducing Apparatus' covered under CTH 8522 and because they are constituting articles
described more specifically in other headings, there was no scope of their being covered under CTH
9013 8010. It was urged, that like in Videocon, the manufacturer’s literature described the goods
specifically as 'LCD Module'.

14. Mr. Vivek Singh, learned Senior counsel (appearing in the Videocon appeal), submitted that the
view taken by CESTAT is correct. Goods are admittedly liquid crystal device; they are specifically
covered by the entry heading 90.13 as it is not described more specifically in any other heading. The
entry referred to by the revenue i.e., Chapter Heading 8529 relates to parts suitable for use solely or
principally with the parts of heading nos.85.25 to 85.28, which inter alia includes LCD TV, cannot
be considered as a specific heading.

4

Cce, Aurangabad vs M/S Videocon Industries Ltd. Thr. Its ... on 29 March, 2023

15. It was argued that Section Note 1(m) to Section XVI clearly excludes articles of Chapter 90.
Therefore, first, it has to be specifically held that the LCD panels are not covered by Chapter 90. The
revenue does not deny that LCD panels are covered by Chapter Heading 90.13. This heading,
according to the revenue, covers only LCD panels meant for general use and are interchangeable and
not what are principally meant for use in TVs. It is argued that tariff entry 90.13 refers to LCDs
which do not constitute articles provided for more specifically in other headings. The entry relied on
by the revenue is 8529, which deals with parts suitable for use “solely or principally with the
apparatus” of Heading 8525 to 8528. This entry is not confined to LCD panels meant for use in TVs
only but to several other parts which go into the making of LCD TV like TV tuners, PCB boards,
switches, connectors, speakers, etc., all of which will be classifiable under heading 8529. The
heading referring to parts cannot be treated as heading covering the LCDs more specifically.

16. It is submitted that the description under heading 8529 is general and not specific, whereas the
description under heading 90.13 is more specific. LCDs consist of items like LCD TV, (referred to
under Chapter Heading 8528.7218 and 8528.7510) and indicator panels incorporating LCDs
(referred to in entry 8531.2000) and other items which are specifically provided for. The Supreme
Court decision in G.S. Auto (supra) is in the context of Section XVII where Note 2 and 3 provides:

"2 The expression parts' and 'parts and accessories' do not apply to the following
articles, whether or not they are identifiable as for the goods this section:

(a) ********

(b) Parts of general use, as defined in Note 2 to Section XV, of base metal (Section
XV), or similar goods of plastics (Chapter 39)"

"3. References in Chapters 86 to 88 to parts or accessories do not apply to parts or
accessories which are not suitable for use solely or' principally with the articles of
those Chapters. A part or accessory which answers to a description in two or more of
the headings of those Chapters is to be classified under that heading which
corresponds to the principal se of that part of accessory."

17. It was argued that the section notes clearly provide that the word “parts and accessories” will not
apply to parts of general use as defined in Note 2 to Section XV of base metal, and it was in view of
this note that this Court held that parts which are suitable for use solely or principally with articles
of Chapters 86 to 88 are to be treated as parts and accessories of articles falling under Chapter 86 to
88 in terms of Note 3. These notes are missing from Section XVI and are, therefore, irrelevant.
Chapter notes/section notes and explanatory notes are unique to the respective section, chapters
and headings they deal with and cannot be generalized or interchanged. Consequently, classification
has reference to section and chapter notes of the section to which the goods belong, i.e., Section XVI.
Section Note 2(a) and 2(b) in Section XVI are different from Section Notes of Section XVII.
According to Section Note 2(a) of Section XVI the parts which are goods included in any of the
headings of Chapter 84 or 85 are, in all cases, to be classified in their respective headings, and it is
only when the parts are not classifiable as per Section Note 2(a) that Section Note 2(b) is attracted.

5

Cce, Aurangabad vs M/S Videocon Industries Ltd. Thr. Its ... on 29 March, 2023

Therefore, even though a part is suitable for use or solely with a particular kind of machine finds
mention under any headings in Chapter 84 or 85, it will then get classified under that heading and
not as a part of apparatus or a machine.

18. Learned senior counsel relied on the decision of this court in Secure Meters (supra) and urged
that the distinction sought to be made by the revenue, with this case, is on untenable grounds. It was
argued that though the competing entries were in Heading 90, nevertheless, the article was LC
Displays, but used in meters. This clearly undermined the revenue’s argument that LCD sets were
meant principally for TVs. They have multiple uses; if the revenue is correct, each such use would
then be a “principal” use. In that event, the Chapter Heading would be rendered redundant.

19. Mr. V. Lakshmikumaran, learned counsel appearing in Harman, adopted the submissions made
by Mr. Vivek Singh. He additionally relied on Rule 1 of the General Rules of Interpretation, which
provides that:

“Classification of goods in this Schedule shall be governed by the following principles:

The titles of Sections, Chapters and Sub-Chapters are provided for ease of reference
only; for legal purposes, classification shall be determined according to the terms of
the headings and any relative Section or Chapter Notes and, provided such headings
or Notes do not otherwise require, according to the following provisions.” It was
argued that in terms of Rule 1, since classification of a 'Liquid Crystal Device' is
specifically provided for by nomenclature under tariff item 9013 8010, the LCDs
imported by the assessee were correctly classifiable under tariff item 9013 8010, in
terms of the nomenclature of the item.

20. It was argued that Tariff Item 9013 8010 prescribes a more specific description and is to be
preferred over any other heading, whereas tariff heading 8522 provides a general description, as
parts and accessories suitable for use, “solely or principally” with the apparatus of CH 8519 or 8521.
The further submission of Mr. Laxmikumaran is that the expression “parts and accessories” used in
CH 8522 excludes articles covered under Chapter 90 of the Tariff, whether or not they are
identifiable as for the goods falling under Section XVI of the Tariff and that even if any article is
identifiable as a “part or/and accessories for the goods of Section XVI, it shall be excluded from the
term “parts and accessories”. Learned counsel relied upon the judgment reported in Collector of
Central Excise v Delton Cables Ltd & Anr 8 where, the court dealt with section Notes 2 (a) and 2 (b)
to Chapter 85 and held that Note 2 (b) applies only if the item is not specifically classifiable under
their respective headings. It was argued, therefore, in the present case, that Note 1 (m) to Chapter 85
specifically excluded from its operation, goods falling in Chapter 90. In such circumstances, LCD
panels were complete articles capable of multiple uses, and not solely or principally in some articles.
It was additionally urged that the facts found, clearly showed that the PCBs attached to the LCD
panels imported by the assessee were meant to act as voltage stabilizers.

The provisions

6

Cce, Aurangabad vs M/S Videocon Industries Ltd. Thr. Its ... on 29 March, 2023

21. First, it would be necessary to refer to the relevant norms of interpretation under First Schedule
of the CTA, i.e. “The General Rules of Interpretation of this Schedule”. Rules 1, 2 and 3 are relevant
and are extracted below:

THE FIRST SCHEDULE—IMPORT TARIFF (See Section 2) GENERAL RULES FOR
“THE INTERPRETATION OF THIS SCHEDULE Classification of goods in this
Schedule shall be governed by the following principles:

1. The titles of Sections, Chapters and Sub-Chapters are provided for ease of reference
only; for legal purposes, classification shall be determined according to the terms of
the headings and any relative Section or Chapter Notes and, provided such headings
or Notes do not otherwise require, according to the following provisions.

2. (a) Any reference in a heading to an article shall be taken to include a reference to
that article incomplete or unfinished, provided that, as presented, the incomplete or
unfinished article has the essential character of the complete or finished article. It
shall also be taken to include a reference to that article complete or finished (or
falling to be classified as complete or, finished by virtue of this rule), presented
unassembled or disassembled.

8 2005 (12) SCC 284

(b) Any reference in a heading to a material or substance shall be taken to include a
reference to mixtures or combinations of that material or substance with other
materials or substances. Any reference to goods of a given material or substance shall
be taken to include a reference to goods consisting wholly or partly of such material
or substance. The classification of goods consisting of more than one material or
substance shall be according to the principles of rule 3.

3. When by application of rule 2(b) or for any other reason, goods are, prima facie, classifiable under
two or more headings, classification shall be effected as follows:

(a) the heading which provides the most specific description shall be preferred to
headings providing a more general description. However, when two or more headings
each refer to part only of the materials or substances contained in mixed or
composite goods or to part only of the items in a set put up for retail sale, those
headings are to be regarded as equally specific in relation to those goods, even if one
of them gives a more complete or precise description of the goods.

(b) mixtures, composite goods consisting of different materials or made up of
different components, and goods put up in sets for retail sale, which cannot be
classified by reference to (a), shall be classified, as if they consisted of the material or
component which gives them their essential character, insofar as this criterion is
applicable.

7

Cce, Aurangabad vs M/S Videocon Industries Ltd. Thr. Its ... on 29 March, 2023

(c) when goods cannot be classified by reference to (a) or (b), they shall be classified
under the heading which occurs last in numerical order among those which equally
merit consideration.” Chapter 85 falls in Section XVI, the heading of which reads as
follows:

“CHAPTER 85 Machinery and Mechanical Appliances; Electrical Equipment; Parts
thereof; Sound Recorders and Reproducers, Television Image and Sound Recorders
and Reproducers, and Parts and Accessories of Such Articles NOTE 1. This Chapter
does not cover:

(a)xxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxx
(m) Articles of Chapter 90…
xxxxxx                         xxxxxx                         xxxxxx

1. Subject to Note 1 to this Section, Note 1 to Chapter 84 and to Note 1 to Chapter 85,
parts of machines (not being parts of the articles of heading 8484, 8544, 8545, 8546
or 8547) are to be classified according to the following rules:

(a) Parts which are goods included in any of the headings of Chapter 84 or 85 (other
than headings 8409, 8431, 8448, 8466, 8473, 8485, 8503, 8522, 8529, 8538, and
8548) are in all cases to be classified in their respective headings;

(b) other parts, if suitable for use solely or principally with a particular kind of
machine, or with a number of machines of the same heading (including a machine of
heading 8479 or 8543) are to be classified with the machines of that kind or in
heading 8409, 8448, 8466, 8473, 8503, 8522, 8529 or 8538 as appropriate.
However, parts which are equally suitable for use principally with the goods of
headings 8517 and 8525 to 8528 are to be classified in heading 8517

(c) all other parts are to be classified in heading 8409, 8431, 8448, 8466, 8473, 8503,
8522, 8529 or 8538 as appropriate or, failing that in heading 8485 or 8548” Chapter
Heading 90, which falls in Section XVII, reads as follows:

“CHAPTER 90 “Optical, Photographic, Cinematographic, Measuring, Checking,
Precision, Medical or Surgical Instruments and Apparatus; Parts and Accessories
Thereof” Note 2 to Chapter 90 reads as follows:

2. Subject to Note 1 above, parts and accessories for machines, apparatus,
instruments or articles of this Chapter are to be classified according to the following
rules:

(a) Parts and accessories which are goods included in any of the headings of this
Chapter or of Chapter 84, 85 or 91 (other than heading 4[8487], 8548 or 9033) are in
all cases to be classified in their respective headings;

8

Cce, Aurangabad vs M/S Videocon Industries Ltd. Thr. Its ... on 29 March, 2023

(b) Other parts and accessories, if suitable for use solely or principally with a
particular kind of machine, instrument or apparatus, or with a number of machines,
instruments or apparatus of the same heading (including a machine, instrument or
apparatus of heading 9010, 9013 or 9031) are to be classified with the machines,
instruments or apparatus of that kind;

(c) All other parts and accessories are to be classified in heading 9033.” Analysis and
Conclusions

22. On a reading of the General Interpretive rules and the notes to the concerned
chapters (85 and 90, in the present case), it is evident that:

(a) classification has to be in accord with “the terms of the headings and any relative
Section or Chapter Notes” (Note 1)

(b) Reference in a heading to “an article” includes “that article incomplete or
unfinished” provided, such incomplete or unfinished article has “the essential
character of the complete or finished article.” [Note 2(a)]

(c) If on an application of Rule 2(a), an article is classifiable in more than one
heading “the heading which provides the most specific description shall be preferred
to headings providing a more general description.” [Note 3 (a)]

23. Note 1 (m) to Chapter 85 excludes “(m) Articles of Chapter 90…” The revenue
relies on Note 2 (b) to Chapter 85, which says “other parts and accessories, “if
suitable for use solely or principally with a particular kind of machine, instrument or
apparatus, or with a number of machines, instruments or apparatus of the same
heading” and then enumerates heading 9013, to say that Chapter 85 would cover the
present case.

24. The correct manner of interpreting the notes, chapters, and the General rules of
interpretation was explained by this court, in Commissioner of Central Excise,
Nagpur v Simplex Mills Co. Ltd.,9 where the Court held that the Rules for the
Interpretation of the Schedule to the CET Act are framed pursuant to the powers
under Section 2 of that Act. The court observed:

“The Rules for the Interpretation of the Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act,
1985 have been framed pursuant to the powers under Section 2 of that Act. According
to Rule 1 titles of sections and chapters in the Schedule are provided for ease of
reference only. But for legal purposes, classification ‘shall be determined according to
the terms of the headings and any relevant section or chapter notes’. If neither the
heading nor the notes suffice to clarify the scope of a heading, then it must be
construed according to the other following provisions contained in the Rules. Rule 1
gives primacy to the section and chapter notes along with terms of the headings. They

9

Cce, Aurangabad vs M/S Videocon Industries Ltd. Thr. Its ... on 29 March, 2023

should be first applied. If no clear picture emerges then only can one resort to the
subsequent rules. The appellants have relied upon Rule

3. Rule 3 must be understood only in the context of sub-rule (b) of Rule 2 which says
inter alia that the classification of goods consisting of more than one material or
substance shall be according to the principles contained in Rule 3. Therefore when
goods are prima facie, classifiable under two or 9 [2005] 2 S.C.R. 441: (2005) 3 SCC
51 more headings, classification shall be effected according to sub-rules (a),

(b) and (c) of Rule 3 and in that order.”

25. The difficulty in accepting the revenue’s argument, in this case, is that it jumps
over interpretive instructions. One, General Note (1) states that classification has to
be in consonance with terms and headings in chapter notes.

Two, Rule 3 (a) categorically enjoins that in regard to classification, the heading providing for a
“more” specific description prevails over the general one. Three, Note 1 (m) – in Chapter 85 excludes
the application of articles falling in Chapter 90. In this court’s opinion, this note, along with the
General Note 3 (a) [of the General Rules of Interpretation] that headings that are specifically
provided, should be preferred over the general ones, is decisive. Thus, the revenue’s contention that
by virtue of Note 2 (b) to Chapter 85, the goods are to be classified based on their principal or sole
use is insubstantial because of the clear mandate of Note 1 (m), which excludes Chapter 90 goods
(which includes LCD panels). More importantly, Note 2 opens with the expression “subject to Note
1”. This subordinates the entire subject matter in Note 2; it is only where the article is a “part” which
acts as an accessory, that the enumerated portions of Chapter 85 come into play. Such an
interpretation is plainly untenable. In Commissioner of Central Excise, Delhi-III vs. UNI Products
India Ltd., 10 this court had to consider whether “car matting” fell within Chapter 57 of the I
Schedule to the CET Act per heading “Carpets and Other Textile Floor 10 [2020] 13 S.C.R. 295:
2020 (19) SCC 742 Coverings” or were to be classified under Chapter 87, as “vehicles other than
railway or tramway rolling-stock and parts and accessories thereof”. The court held that the item fell
within the description “car matting”:

“25. We do not find any error in such reasoning. Chapter 87 of the Central Excise
Tariff of India does not contain car mats as an independent tariff entry. We have
reproduced earlier the various parts and accessories listed against tariff entry 8708.
All of them are mechanical components, and revenue want car mats to be included
under the residuary sub-head "other" in the same list. The HSN Explanatory Notes
dealing with interpretation of the Rules specifically exclude "tufted textile carpets,
identifiable for use in motor cars" from 87.08 and place them under heading 57.03.
Revenue's argument is that the Explanatory Notes have persuasive value only. But
the level or quality of such persuasive value is very strong, as observed in the
judgments of this Court to which we have already referred. Moreover, the
Commissioner himself has referred to the Explanatory Notes in the order- in-original
while dealing with the Respondent's stand. Thus, we see no reason as to why we

10

Cce, Aurangabad vs M/S Videocon Industries Ltd. Thr. Its ... on 29 March, 2023

should make a departure from the general trend of taking assistance of these
Explanatory Notes to resolve entry related dispute. Now, on referring to these
Explanatory Notes, we find that one category of carpets [Textile carpets (Chapter 57)]
has been excluded specifically from parts and accessories. In our opinion, the
subject-item does not satisfy the third condition specified in Section XVII of the
Explanatory Notes in relation to "III-Parts and Accessories". A plain reading of
Clause (C) thereof, which we have quoted above, excludes "textile carpets" (Chapter
57).

26. The main argument of the Appellant is that because the car mats are made
specifically for cars and are used also in cars, they should be identified as parts and
accessories. But if we go by that logic, textile carpets could not have been excluded
from Parts and Accessories. We have referred to such exclusion in the preceding
paragraph. It has also been urged on behalf of the revenue that these items are not
commonly identified as carpets but are different products. The Tribunal on detailed
analysis on various entries, Rules and Notes have found they fit the description of
goods under chapter heading 570390.90. We accept this finding of the Tribunal.
Once the subject goods are found to come within the ambit of that sub-heading, for
the sole reason that they are exclusively made for cars and not for "home use" (in
broad terms), those goods cannot be transplanted to the residual entry against the
heading 8708. As we find the subject-goods come under the chapter-heading
570390.90, and the other entry under the same Chapter forming the subject of
dispute in the second order of the Commissioner, in our opinion, there is no necessity
to import the "common parlance" test or any other similar device of construction for
identifying the position of these goods against the relevant tariff entries.”

26. In the decision reported as Delton Cables Ltd (supra) too, this court had
emphasized on the rule of classification of the goods in accordance with a specific
description and observed that:

“3. There appears to be no dispute that were it not for Section Note 2(b), the item in
question would be classified under Tariff Heading 85.44 as contended by the
appellant. Sections Notes 2(a) and (b) respectively provide as follows:

“2. (a) Parts which are goods included in any of the headings of Chapter 84 or
Chapter 85 (other than Headings 84.85 and 85.48) are in all cases to be classified in
their respective headings.

(b) Other parts, if suitable for use solely or principally with a particular kind of
machine, or with a number of machines of the same heading (including a machine of
Heading 84.79 or Heading 85.43) are to be classified with the machines of that kind.
However, parts which are equally suitable for use principally with the goods of
Headings 85.17 and 85.25 to 85.28 are to be classified in Heading 85.17.”

11

Cce, Aurangabad vs M/S Videocon Industries Ltd. Thr. Its ... on 29 March, 2023

4. It is clear from a reading of the two clauses to the section note that clause

(b) would only apply once it was found that the items in question were not
specifically classifiable under their respective headings. As has been clearly said by
the Collector (Appeals) “from the sequence of the paragraphs given under Section
Note 2 it is clear that the question of switching over to Section Note 2(b) can arise
only after ensuring that the parts are not covered by Section Note 2(b) [sic Section
Note 2(a).] which begins with the expression “other parts” meaning thereby that the
parts which are not covered by Section Note 2(a) would be considered for coverage by
Section Note 2(b). One cannot therefore directly jump over to Section Note 2(b)
without exhausting the possibility of Section Note 2(a).”

27. M/S Intel Design Systems (India) (P) Ltd. vs. Commissioner of Customs and
Central Excise11 is a decision, where the goods were described as parts of tanks and
other armoured and motorized fighting vehicles, under Heading 8710 was held to fall
within Chapter 85. The reasoning of this court, in that case, was as below:

“4. As per Rule 1 on Interpretive Rules, classification of excisable goods is to be
determined according to the terms of the Heading and in terms of Section/Chapter
notes. Note 2(f) to Section XVII (which governs Chapter

87) excludes the goods viz. electrical machinery and equipment (Chapter

11 [2008] 2 S.C.R. 686: 2008 (3) SCC 258

85). The goods in question i.e. contractors, switches, control box etc. are the goods used for
switching, protecting electrical circuits or for making connections to or in electric circuit. These
parts/components are specifically covered under CSH 8536.90. The CBEC Circular relied upon by
the assessee is not relevant.

5. As per the Explanatory Notes to HSN the parts falling under Chapter Heading 8710 would be
covered under the said chapter, provided they fulfill both the conditions i.e. they must be
identifiable as being suitable for use solely or principally for such vehicles and that they must not be
excluded by the provisions of Notes to Section XVII. The identifiable parts under the said heading
bodies of armoured vehicles and parts thereof, cover special road wheels for armoured cars,
propulsion wheels for tanks, tracts etc. As per this requirement, the goods should not only be
identifiable to be armoured vehicles, but it should so not have been excluded by Notes to Section
XVII. The Chapter note 2(f) excludes electrical machinery and equipment falling under Chapter 85.
Explanatory Notes to HSN relating to the parts and accessories excluded by Note 2 specify items
with reference to specific Chapter Heading as per (7) (a), (k) which excludes photographs and other
current collectors for electric traction vehicles, fuses, switches and other electric apparatus of
Heading No.85.35 or 85.36. The items, therefore, manufactured by the appellants are identifiable or
are in the nature of goods falling under Chapter Heading 85.36. Since these fall under the category
of excluded goods under Chapter Notes, even though they are used specifically solely or principally

12

Cce, Aurangabad vs M/S Videocon Industries Ltd. Thr. Its ... on 29 March, 2023

with the armoured vehicles of Chapter Heading 8710, they are classifiable under Chapter Heading
8536.90 only as held by the adjudicating authority.”

28. It is, therefore, clear that when goods are excluded from a particular chapter, the “pull in”
through a note has to be narrowly construed, as otherwise, the basis of exclusion would be defeated,
and the earlier note (of exclusion) rendered redundant. Finally, Secure Meters (supra) is decisive on
the question that LCDs are not articles provided “more specifically in other headings”, i.e., other
than 90.13. Furthermore, the fact that LCDs could be used for purposes other than television sets or
audio sets is also concluded because, in that decision, its use in meters was in issue. This court held,
pertinently, as follows:

“17. Keeping in mind the aforesaid nature of product in question, we revert to the
tariff entries. It cannot be disputed that LCDs are specifically provided in Tariff Item
9013. The only condition is that such LCDs should not constitute “articles” provided
more specifically in other headings. In the present case, it is also not in dispute that
LCDs imported by the appellant did not constitute any such “article” which is more
specifically provided in other headings. On the contrary, the Revenue wants to
include in the same chapter i.e. Chapter 90, though under Entry 9028.90.10 as “parts
and accessories”. The only reason for including the goods under Chapter Heading
9028 is that the LCDs were to be used in the electricity supply meters. However,
Entry 9028 does not pertain to LCDs but gas, liquid, etc. and includes electricity
supply meters as well. Merely because these LCDs are to be used as parts in the said
electricity supply meters, can it be said that they are to be included in Entry 9028?
Here, Note 2 of this Chapter Notes becomes important since LCDs are used in the
electricity supply meters only as parts thereof. Note 2(a) stipulates that parts and
accessories which are goods included in the heading of the said chapter i.e. Chapter
90, are to be classified in their respective headings. Going by the plain reading of
Note 2(a) it is clear that LCDs, which are goods and are used as parts in the final
product mentioned in Chapter 90, namely, electricity supply meters, are to be
classified in its respective heading. Respective heading, which is specifically provided
is 9013.

18. It was sought to be argued by Ms Kiran Suri that as per Note 2(b), when these
LCDs are used solely for particular instrument, namely, electricity supply meter, it
has to be classified with the said meter and, therefore, Chapter Entry 9028 would get
attracted. However, this argument loses sight of the fact that Note 2(b) relates to
“other parts and accessories”, namely, it would apply to those parts and accessories
for which Note 2(a) is inapplicable. Once we find that in the present case Note 2(a)
squarely applies, the irresistible conclusion is that the goods will be classified in
Tariff Item 9013, which is the specific heading for these goods.”

29. In view of the above decisions and the foregoing reasoning, the CESTAT’s reasoning and
conclusions, in both cases, that the LCD sets were under Chapter 90, Entry 9013.8010, is sound and
unexceptionable. Consequently, the appeals have to fail and are dismissed, without order on costs.

13

Cce, Aurangabad vs M/S Videocon Industries Ltd. Thr. Its ... on 29 March, 2023

.....................................................J. [S. RAVINDRA BHAT] .....................................................J.
[DIPANKAR DATTA] New Delhi, March 29, 2023.

ITEM NO.1501                COURT NO.14                   SECTION XVII-A

S U P R E M E   C O U R T    O F   I N D I A
RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

Civil Appeal   No(s).   5622/2009

CCE, AURANGABAD                                         Appellant(s)

VERSUS

M/S VIDEOCON INDUSTRIES LTD. THR. ITS DIRECTOR          Respondent(s)

([HEARD BY : HON'BLE S. RAVINDRA BHAT AND HON'BLE DIPANKAR DATTA, JJ. ] IA No.
2/2009 - STAY APPLICATION) WITH C.A. No. 8026/2022 (XVII-A) (IA FOR STAY APPLICATION
ON IA 144515/2022 FOR EXEMPTION FROM FILING C/C OF THE IMPUGNED JUDGMENT ON
IA 144516/2022 IA No. 144516/2022 - EXEMPTION FROM FILING C/C OF THE IMPUGNED
JUDGMENT IA No. 144515/2022 - STAY APPLICATION) Date : 29-03-2023 These matters were
called on for hearing today.

For Appellant(s)    Ms. Alka Agrawal, Adv.
Mr. Mukesh Kumar Maroria, AOR

For Respondent(s)     Mr. S. S. Shroff, AOR
Mr. V Lakshmikumaran, Adv.
Ms. Charanya Lakshmikumaran, AOR
Ms. Apeksha Mehta, Adv.
Ms. Falguni Gupta, Adv.
Ms. Neha Choudhary, Adv.

Hon’ble Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat pronounced the reportable judgment of the Bench comprising
His Lordship and Hon’ble Mr. Justice Dipankar Datta.

The Civil Appeals are dismissed with no order as to costs in terms of the signed reportable
judgment.

14

Cce, Aurangabad vs M/S Videocon Industries Ltd. Thr. Its ... on 29 March, 2023

Pending application(s), if any, are disposed of.

(HARSHITA UPPAL)                                        (MATHEW ABRAHAM)
SENIOR PERSONAL ASSISTANT                               COURT MASTER (NSH)
(Signed reportable judgment is placed on the file)

15