Gudivada Seshagiri Rao vs Gudiavada Ashalatha on 7 February, 2025

Gudivada Seshagiri Rao vs Gudiavada Ashalatha on 7 February,
2025

Author: B.R. Gavai

Bench: B.R. Gavai

2025 INSC 195
                                                                     Non-reportable

                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                            CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS.                       OF 2025
                   (@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRL.) NOS. 6954-6955 of 2023)

             Gudivada Seshagiri Rao                                     …Appellant
                                                 -Versus-
             Gudivada Ashalatha & Anr.                                …Respondents
                                                 WITH

                              CIVIL APPEAL NO.                     OF 2025
                            (@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO. 1555 of 2024)

                                             JUDGMENT

K. VINOD CHANDRAN, J.

Leave granted.

2. The appellant is the husband and the respondent is the wife, who have spent a fair share of their
life fighting in courts. Allegations and counter-allegations galore, are raised despite the fact that they
have had a matrimonial life for just about four months. One of the appeals is filed against the
common order in the two Criminal 09:53:14 IST Reason:

Revision Petitions filed before the High Court against the order granting
maintenance of Rs. 10,000/- to the wife. The husband challenged the grant while the
wife sought enhancement, to double the amount in the revisions filed. After
enhancement in the revision filed by the wife, the maintenance awarded stood at Rs.
15,000/- per month. The other appeal is against the order of remand made by the
High Court, from an order rejecting the prayer of the husband for a divorce on the
ground of desertion and cruelty.

3. The High Court in the appeal from the order rejecting divorce, framed two issues for

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66850575/

1

Gudivada Seshagiri Rao vs Gudiavada Ashalatha on 7 February, 2025

consideration. First, whether the trial court was in error in treating the divorce petition as one filed
on the ground only of desertion and not on the ground of cruelty and then, whether the trial court
erred in finding the marriage between the appellant and the respondent as one performed under
Christian customs and rites; thus, making inapplicable the provisions of the Hindu Marriage Act,
1955, under which the Divorce Petition was filed. The High Court found that the trial court seriously
erred in considering only the case of desertion put forth by the husband and rejecting the claim for
divorce; while glossing over the ground of cruelty. It was held that mere failure to prove desertion
cannot be taken as a failure to prove the ground of cruelty. On the question of the marriage having
been performed as per Christian rites, it was found that the trial court egregiously misdirected itself
in having considered an averment in the bail application; that the husband wanted to be released on
bail prior to Christmas, while ignoring the oral evidence proffered by the husband and the caste
certificate produced, as also the document indicating the auspicious time for the marriage as
prepared by a Purohit, which documents clearly proved the fact that the husband was a Hindu. That
the wife is a Hindu is not disputed at all. The High Court hence ordered a remand setting aside the
Judgment and Decree rejecting the HMOP providing a further opportunity to the parties to adduce
evidence on the two points on which the trial court order was set aside.

4. On facts, suffice it to notice that the marriage between the parties happened, on 27.05.1999 and
soon thereafter the couple travelled to the husband’s place of work at Assam. As we notice from the
allegations and counter allegations made; regarding what transpired prior to the marriage and after
a brief tumultuous period of four months, the couple separated. On their separation, they had
different versions; with the husband claiming that the wife left him abruptly on 01.11.1999 and the
wife asserting that the husband unceremoniously evicted her from the matrimonial home on
31.10.1999. The fact remains that they have been separated from then, after which commenced the
series of litigation. As of now, both have passed their prime and we were of the opinion that there
should be a quietus in the matter which would also release both the parties from the trauma of an
agonizing marriage; which was a non-starter.

5. We were of the opinion that a quietus would be possible only by severing the marriage ties but at
the same time ensuring that the wife, who was in an employment before marriage and presumably
left it to move out with her husband to his work place, is not left in the lurch. We are fortified in this
view by Shilpa Sailesh Vs. Varun Sreenivasan1 which expounded on the ambit and scope of Article
142 of the Constitution of India, which enables ‘complete justice’ in a ‘cause or matter’, in relation to
matrimonial matters; specifically, the provision to sever marital ties on mutual consent under the
Hindu Marriage Act. The legislative intent behind incorporating sub-section (2) to Section 13-B of
the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 was found, to enable time to the parties to introspect and consider
their decision to separate, before a second motion is moved; when a decree of divorce is sought on a
joint petition filed by the parties. The Constitutional Bench noticed cases of exceptional hardship
where after some years of acrimonious litigations and prolonged suffering, parties [2023] 5 S.C.R.
165 jointly pray for dissolution of marriage and seek a waiver of the need to make a second motion;
where it could be allowed when the divorce is inevitable on account of irreconcilable differences
evident from the allegations and aspersions made against each other and in certain cases by reason
of the multiple litigations making the continuation of the marital relationship an impossibility. The
said finding was on the powers of the Court in a joint application for divorce on mutual consent.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66850575/

2

Gudivada Seshagiri Rao vs Gudiavada Ashalatha on 7 February, 2025

6. The Bench also dwelt upon the question whether Article 142 of the Constitution of India could be
invoked, even upon the prayer of one of the spouses, when the Court is satisfied that there is
complete and irretrievable breakdown of marriage notwithstanding the opposition to a divorce by
the other spouse. It was held that though grant of divorce on the ground of irretrievable breakdown
of marriage is not a matter of right, but a discretionary remedy which has to be exercised with great
care and caution, keeping in mind several factors ensuring that ‘complete justice’ is done to both
parties. Though the Bench refused to codify the various factors, which could curtail the exercise of
jurisdiction, sufficient guidelines have been laid down to invoke the powers under Article 142 to do
‘complete justice’ to both the parties when the Court is fully convinced and satisfied that the
marriage is totally ‘unworkable, emotionally dead and beyond salvation’ [sic].

7. We have considered the matter in the light of the observations made by the Constitution Bench. In
the present case the marriage was held way back in the year 1999 and the couple remained together
for only about four months. Long separation has not resulted in an attitude of ‘forget and forgive’;
but on the contrary has fueled into further acrimony. Though living apart, the bitterness has
continued and escalated to spread over in the form of litigations. There are no children involved,
fortunately, and both the parties are educated. The husband is working in a public sector
undertaking and the wife though unemployed is a post graduate. We cannot but notice that despite
her educational qualification, it is too late in life to establish herself in a profession and employment
to ensure a decent livelihood. We are of the opinion, looking at the facts of the case and on a bare
reading of the allegations and counter allegations that come forth in the pleadings, that there is no
salvation possible and the relationship is practically dead and emotionally irretrievable. We are only
concerned with providing adequate alimony for the wife to ensure that the wife is not left to fend for
herself and both parties are not saddled again with the existing or further litigations. We, hence, on
the totality of the circumstances direct that the parties be granted divorce on grounds of
irretrievable breakdown of marriage; but subject to the condition that the appellant husband pays
an amount of Rs.25,00,000 (Rupees Twenty Five lacs only) within a period of six months from
today. The amount of Rs.2,00,000/- (Rupees Two lacs only) deposited before this Court as per
order issued on 23.01.2024 in Civil Appeal No._________ of 2025@Special Leave Petition (Civil)
No.1555/2024 shall be over and above Rs.25,00,000 (Rupees Twenty Five lacs only) awarded to the
respondent-wife and she shall be entitled to withdraw the same with interest accrued, immediately.
On the further payment of Rs.25,00,000 (Rupees Twenty Five lacs only), there shall be effective a
divorce between the parties, on the grounds stated hereinabove and either of the spouses would be
entitled to produce the aforesaid judgment with proof of payment of the directed amounts before
any court before which either criminal or civil proceedings are pending, in relation to the marriage,
so as to bring a quietus to the same; which the concerned court shall direct to be closed on the
settlement directed by this Court.

8. We dispose of the appeals with the above directions setting aside both the impugned orders.
Though the matters are disposed of, the matters shall be placed before the Court after six months to
ensure compliance of the orders passed by us.

9. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66850575/

3

Gudivada Seshagiri Rao vs Gudiavada Ashalatha on 7 February, 2025

…..…………..……..………..,J.

[B.R. GAVAI] …..…………..……..………..,J.

[K. VINOD CHANDRAN] NEW DELHI;

FEBRUARY 07, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66850575/

4

