Central Bureau Of Investigation vs Aryan Singh Etc. on 10 April, 2023

Central Bureau Of Investigation vs Aryan Singh Etc. on 10 April,
2023

Author: M.R. Shah

Bench: C.T. Ravikumar, M.R. Shah

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 1025-1026_OF 2023
(@ SLP (CRL.) NOS. 12794-12795 OF 2022)

Central Bureau of Investigation              …Appellant(s)

Versus

Aryan Singh Etc.                              …Respondent(s)

JUDGMENT

M.R. SHAH, J.

1. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned common judgment and order passed by the
High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh in Criminal Misc. Application Nos. 54107 of 2021
and 8233 of 2022 by which the High Court, in exercise of the powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C., has
quashed the criminal proceedings of the FIR No. RC0512020S0001 dated 29.04.2020 registered at
Police Station State Grime Branch, Chandigarh under Sections 452, 323, 365, 342, 186, 225, 506
and 120-B IPC (earlier registered as FIR No.195 dated 30.08.2014 under Sections 452, 323, 365,
342, 225, 186, 506, 120-B IPC at Police Station Phase-1, Mohali) as well as all the subsequent
proceedings arising out of the same, the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) has preferred the
present appeals.

2. Shri K.M. Nataraj, learned ASG appearing on behalf of the CBI has vehemently submitted that
pursuant to the directions issued by the Hon’ble High Court, investigation of the aforesaid was
handed over to the CBI, pursuant to which the FIR in question was registered on 29.04.2020 at
Police Station, Crime Branch, Chandigarh for the aforesaid offences.

2.1 It is submitted that initially, the accused Aryan Singh was not named in the fresh FIR. However,
thereafter, after conclusion of the investigation, the chargesheet came to be filed against the said
Aryan Singh also and he has been included as one of the accused.

1

Central Bureau Of Investigation vs Aryan Singh Etc. on 10 April, 2023

2.2 It is submitted that thereafter both the accused Aryan Singh and Gautam Cheema filed discharge
applications before the learned Trial Court, which came to be dismissed on merits. It is submitted
that thereafter by the impugned judgment and order, in exercise of the powers under Section 482
Cr.P.C., the High Court has quashed the entire criminal proceedings, as if, the High Court was
conducting a mini trial.

2.3 It is vehemently submitted that in the facts and circumstances of the case, the High Court has
exceeded in its jurisdiction while quashing the entire criminal proceedings against the accused
Aryan Singh and Gautam Cheema. It is vehemently submitted that while quashing the criminal
proceedings, the High Court has observed that the allegations / charges against the accused have not
been proved and that the prosecution is malicious. It is submitted that at the stage of deciding the
quashing petitions against the order passed by the learned Trial Court, refusing to discharge the
accused, the High Court ought not to have considered and/or observed that the charges are not
proved. It is submitted that the charges are required to be proved during the trial and on the basis of
the evidence led. It is further submitted that even the High Court has materially erred in observing
that the prosecution is malicious. It is submitted that the investigation was handed over to the CBI,
pursuant to the directions issued by the High Court and, thereafter, after conclusion of the
investigation, the accused came to be chargesheeted and therefore, the initiation of the criminal
proceedings / proceedings cannot be said to be malicious. It is submitted that whether any criminal
proceedings is malicious, is also required to be considered at the conclusion of the trial and not at
this stage, namely, at the stage of exercise of powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C.

2.4 Number of submissions have been made on merits also by Shri Nataraj, learned ASG, however,
for the reasons stated hereinabove, we are inclined to set aside the impugned common judgment
and order passed by the High Court by relegating the accused to face the trial and thereafter the trial
is to proceed against the accused, we are not considering the submissions made on behalf of the CBI
as well as on behalf of the accused on merits.

3. Present appeals are vehemently opposed by Shri R.P. Bhatt, learned senior counsel appearing on
behalf of the accused Aryan Singh and Shri Mahesh Jethmalani, learned senior counsel appearing
on behalf of the accused Gautam Cheema.

3.1 Both the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respective accused have made submissions
on merits of the allegations made against each accused. However, all those submissions are the
defences, which are required to be considered during the trial. Therefore, we are not elaborately
dealing with and/or considering the submissions made on behalf of the CBI as well as the accused
on merits on the allegations against the accused as any observation of this Court may affect either of
the parties during the trial.

4. Having gone through the impugned common judgment and order passed by the High Court
quashing the criminal proceedings and discharging the accused, we are of the opinion that the High
Court has exceeded in its jurisdiction in quashing the entire criminal proceedings in exercise of the
limited powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C. and/or in exercise of the powers under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India.

2

Central Bureau Of Investigation vs Aryan Singh Etc. on 10 April, 2023

4.1 From the impugned common judgment and order passed by the High Court, it appears that the
High Court has dealt with the proceedings before it, as if, the High Court was conducting a mini trial
and/or the High Court was considering the applications against the judgment and order passed by
the learned Trial Court on conclusion of trial. As per the cardinal principle of law, at the stage of
discharge and/or quashing of the criminal proceedings, while exercising the powers under Section
482 Cr.P.C., the Court is not required to conduct the mini trial. The High Court in the common
impugned judgment and order has observed that the charges against the accused are not proved.
This is not the stage where the prosecution / investigating agency is/are required to prove the
charges. The charges are required to be proved during the trial on the basis of the evidence led by
the prosecution / investigating agency. Therefore, the High Court has materially erred in going in
detail in the allegations and the material collected during the course of the investigation against the
accused, at this stage. At the stage of discharge and/or while exercising the powers under Section
482 Cr.P.C., the Court has a very limited jurisdiction and is required to consider “whether any
sufficient material is available to proceed further against the accused for which the accused is
required to be tried or not”.

4.2 One another reason pointed by the High Court is that the initiation of the criminal proceedings /
proceedings is malicious. At this stage, it is required to be noted that the investigation was handed
over to the CBI pursuant to the directions issued by the High Court. That thereafter, on conclusion
of the investigation, the accused persons have been chargesheeted. Therefore, the High Court has
erred in observing at this stage that the initiation of the criminal proceedings / proceedings is
malicious. Whether the criminal proceedings was/were malicious or not, is not required to be
considered at this stage. The same is required to be considered at the conclusion of the trial. In any
case, at this stage, what is required to be considered is a prima facie case and the material collected
during the course of the investigation, which warranted the accused to be tried.

5. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, when the High Court has exceeded in its
jurisdiction in quashing the entire criminal proceedings and applying the law laid down by this
Court in catena of decisions on exercise of the powers at the stage of discharge and/or quashing the
criminal proceedings, the impugned common judgment and order passed by the High Court
quashing the criminal proceedings against the accused is unsustainable and the same deserves to be
quashed and set aside.

5.1 In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, present appeals succeed. The impugned
common judgment and order passed by the High Court quashing and setting aside the criminal
proceedings against the accused Aryan Singh and Gautam Cheema is/are quashed and set aside. The
accused to face the trial for which they are chargesheeted. However, it is observed that all the
contentions and defences, which are available to the respective parties are kept open, to be
considered by the learned Trial Court during the trial.

Considering the fact that the allegations in the FIR relates back to the year 2014 and as more than
eight years have passed, we direct the learned Trial Court to conclude the trial at the earliest, but not
later than 12 months from the date of the receipt of the present order. CBI to produce the present
order before the concerned Magistrate at the earliest. All concerned are directed to cooperate with

3

the learned Trial Court in concluding the trial within the time prescribed mentioned hereinabove.

Central Bureau Of Investigation vs Aryan Singh Etc. on 10 April, 2023

Present appeals are allowed accordingly.

………………………………….J.
[M.R. SHAH]

NEW DELHI;                      ………………………………….J.
APRIL 10, 2023.                    [C.T. RAVIKUMAR]

4