Central Council For Research In ... vs Bikartan Das on 16 August, 2023

Central Council For Research In ... vs Bikartan Das on 16
August, 2023

Author: Dhananjaya Y. Chandrachud

Bench: Dhananjaya Y. Chandrachud

2023INSC733                                                                             REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3339 of 2023

CENTRAL COUNCIL FOR RESEARCH IN                           …APPELLANTS
AYURVEDIC SCIENCES & ANR.

VERSUS

BIKARTAN DAS & ORS.                                      …RESPONDENTS

JUDGMENT

J. B. Pardiwala, J.:

1. This appeal by special leave is at the instance of the Central Council for Research in
Ayurvedic Sciences (CCRAS), Ministry of Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani,
Siddha and Homeopathy (AYUSH), Government of India (appellant No. 1) and its
Director General (appellant No. 2). The two appellants before us were the original
respondents before the High Court of Orissa. This appeal is directed against the
judgment and order dated 17.12.2020 passed by the High Court of Orissa, Cuttack in
W.P. (C) No. 30620 of 2020 by which the High Court allowed the writ application
filed by the original petitioner (respondent No. 1) before us, setting aside the order
passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT), Cuttack Bench, Cuttack and
thereby holding that the respondent No. 1 herein, namely, Dr. Bikartan Das is
entitled to the benefit of enhancement of retirement age from 60 to 65 years as
applicable to the AYUSH doctors working under the Ministry of AYUSH.

NIRMALA NEGI Date: 2023.08.16 17:58:23 IST Reason:

FACTUAL MATRIX

2. The respondent No. 1 herein was appointed by the Council as a Research Assistant w.e.f.
07.10.1985. The Office Order No. 183 of 1985 dated 11.10.1985 reads thus:

“No. P.1-67/86-CRIA/DDSR/Estt./748(5) Dt 11.10.85 Dr. Bikartan Das is appointed

1

Central Council For Research In ... vs Bikartan Das on 16 August, 2023

as a Research Assistant (AY) with effect from the forenoon of the 7th October, 1985
until further orders in the Central Research Institute (AY), Unit, Bhubaneshwar-9.
He will be on probation for a period of two years from this date. He will draw a basic
pay of Rs. 425/- per month in the scale of Rs. 425-15-500 PB-15-560-20-700 with
usual allowance admissible under the rules.

(Dr. PREM KISHORE ) ASSISTANT DIRECTOR (AY) I/C”

3. The Government of India in its Ministry of Health and Family Welfare vide letter
dated 01.12.1998 addressed to the Council, approved the decision of the Council to
enhance the benefit of extension in age of retirement from 58 years to 60 years in
respect of employees of the Council w.e.f. 31.05.1998 in accordance with the
guidelines issued by the Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT) vide O.M. No.
25012/8/98-Estt. (A) dated 13.05.1998.

4. On 27.09.2017, the Union Cabinet took a decision to enhance the age of
superannuation up to 65 years for the AYUSH doctors working under the Ministry of
AYUSH (respondent No. 2 herein) and in the Central Government Health Scheme
(for short, ‘the CGHS’) Hospitals.

5. By way of letter dated 31.10.2017, the Ministry of AYUSH clarified that the effect of
the Cabinet decision referred to above would be applicable only to the AYUSH
doctors directly working under the Ministry of AYUSH and in the CGHS Hospitals. It
was clarified that the decision to enhance the age of superannuation up to 65 years
would not be applicable to the autonomous bodies functioning under the Ministry of
AYUSH. The letter dated 31.10.2017 addressed by the Ministry of AYUSH to the
Director General, CCRAS and CCRUM, reads thus:

Ministry of Ayurvedic, Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha & Homoeopathy
(AYUSH) (Research Desk) ‘B’ – Block, GPO Complex, AYUSH Bhawan, Behind the
INA Market, New Delhi – 110023 Dated: 31st October, 2017 To The Director General,
CCRAS and CCRUM 61-65, Institutional Area, Opposite “D” Block, Janakpuri, New
Delhi – 110058.

Subject: Enhancement of superannuation age to 65 years

-reg.

Sir, I am directed to say that the Ministry has been receiving a number of
representations from various officials of the Councils regarding enhancement of
superannuation age to 65 years. It is stated that as per Press Information Bureau the
Union Cabinet has taken the following decision:-

2

Central Council For Research In ... vs Bikartan Das on 16 August, 2023

“The superannuation age has been enhanced to 65 years in respect of doctors under
the administrative control of the respective Ministry/Department [M/o AYUSH
(AYUSH Doctors), Department of Defence (civilian doctors under Directorate
General of Armed Forces Medical Service), Department of Defence Production
(Indian Ordnance Factories Health Service Medical Officers), Dental Doctors under
D/o Health & Family Welfare, Dental doctors under Ministry of Railways and of
doctors working in Higher Education and Technical Institutions under Department
of Higher Education]”.

2. The decision of the Cabinet is applicable to the AYUSH doctors directly working
under the administrative control of Ministry of AYUSH i.e. AYUSH doctors working
under CGHS.

The decision of the Union Cabinet is not applicable to autonomous bodies functioning under
Ministry of AYUSH i.e. Research Councils/National Institutes.

3. All such representations are therefore being sent to the respective Councils. It is requested that
the Councils may inform them accordingly.

Yours faithfully, N. K. Lakhanpal Senior Consultant”

6. By order dated 24.11.2017, the Ministry of AYUSH enhanced the age of superannuation to 65
years for the AYUSH doctors working in the Ministry of AYUSH and in CGHS Hospitals w.e.f.
27.09.2017. The order dated 24.11.2017 reads thus:

“              F.NO. D.14019/4/2016-E-I(AYUSH)
Government of India

Ministry of Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy AYUSH Bhawan, 'B’
Block, GPO Complex, INA, New Delhi - 110023 Dated, the 24th November, 2017.

ORDER The President is pleased to enhance the age of superannuation of the AYUSH doctors under
the Ministry of AYUSH and working in CGHS Dispensaries/Hospitals to 65 years with effect from
27.09.2017, i.e. the date of the approval of the Union Cabinet.

2. The doctors shall hold the administrative posts only till the date of attaining the age of 62 years
and thereafter their services shall be placed in non-administrative positions.

(ROSHAN JAGGI) Joint Secretary to the Government of India Tel.24651953”

7. By notification dated 05.01.2018, the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions,
DoPT notified the Fundamental (Amendment) Rules, 2018 whereby Rule 56(bb) in the
Fundamental Rules, 1922 (FRs) was substituted and the age of superannuation of AYUSH doctors
was enhanced to 65 years. The notification reads thus:

3

Central Council For Research In ... vs Bikartan Das on 16 August, 2023

“ M I N I S T R Y   O F   P E R S O N N E L ,   P U B L I C   G R I E V A N C E S   A N D   P E N S I O N S
(Department of Personnel and Training) NOTIFICATION New Delhi, the 5th
January, 2018 G.S.R. 27(E).—In exercise of the powers conferred by the proviso to
article 309 of the Constitution, the President hereby makes the following rules
further to amend the Fundamental Rules, 1922, namely :— (1) These rules may be
called the Fundamental (Amendment) Rules, 2018.

(2) In the Fundamental Rules, 1922, in rule 56, for clause (bb), the following shall be
substituted, namely:— "(bb) The age of superannuation in respect of General Duty
Medical Officers and Specialists included in Teaching, Non-

Teaching and Public Health sub-cadres of Central Health Service, AYUSH doctors, Civilian doctors
under Directorate General of Armed Forces Medical Services, Medical officers of Indian Ordnance
Factories Health Services, dental doctors working under Ministry of Health and Family Welfare,
doctors of Indian Railways Medical Service and dental doctors under Ministry of Railways, doctors
of General Duty Medical Officers sub-cadre of Central Armed Police Forces and Assam Rifles and
Specialist Medical officers of Central Armed Police Forces and Assam Rifles shall be sixty-five years:

Provided that notwithstanding anything contained in any other rules, above doctors
except in Central Armed Police Forces and Assam Rifles shall hold the administrative
posts till the date of attaining the age of sixty-two years and thereafter their services
shall be placed in Non-Administrative positions."

[F.No.25012/4/2016-Estt.(A-IV)] GYANENDRA DEV TRIPATHI, Jt.

Secy.”

8. By letter dated 25.01.2018, the appellant Council circulated the clarification letter issued by the
Ministry of AYUSH dated 31.10.2017 referred to in para 5 as above. The letter reads thus:

“F 3-8/2017-CCRAS/Vig/3094 Dated: 25 JAN 2018 To All the Heads of
Institutes/Centres/Units functioning under this Council.

Sub: - Enhancement of superannuation age of 65 years.

Sir/Madam The undersigned is directed to circulate herewith the clarification on the
subject mentioned above received from Ministry of AYUSH vide letter FTS
No.32797/2017 dated 31.10.2017 for information. The contents of Ministry’s letter
may be circulated among all officers working under your control.

Yours faithfully (SB MISRA) Administrative Officer (Vigilance) For Director General” It is pertinent
to note that the letter issued by the appellant Council dated 25.01.2018 referred to above was never
made a subject matter of challenge.

4

Central Council For Research In ... vs Bikartan Das on 16 August, 2023

9. The respondent No. 1 herein preferred a representation dated 22.03.2018 addressed to the
appellant No. 2 herein with an appeal to enhance his age of superannuation up to 65 years i.e., up to
30.04.2023 instead of 30.04.2018. It appears from the materials on record that the representation
preferred by the respondent No. 1 herein before the above was rejected and a notification dated
04.04.2018 was issued by the Council stating that the respondent No. 1 herein would retire w.e.f.
30.04.2018 upon attaining the superannuation age of 60 years. The notification dated 04.04.2018
reads thus:

Date: 04.04.2018 Notification It is hereby notified that Dr. Bikartan Das, Assistant
Director (AYUSH), Central Ayurvedic Research Institute for Hepatobiliary Disorder,
Bhubaneswar is retiring from Council service on attaining the age of superannuation
at 60 years on 30.04.2018 (pm). His date of birth is 04.04.1958.

Accordingly, his name will be removed from the list of C.C.R.A.S. Signature in
English Illegible R.K. Ahluwalia Dated 27.03.2018 Dy. Director (Administration)
Through Director General”

10. The respondent No. 1 being dissatisfied with the aforesaid went before the CAT,
Cuttack Bench, Cuttack by way of Original Application No. 210 of 2018 and prayed
for the following reliefs:

“The Hon’ble Tribunal may be graciously pleased to admit the Original Application,
call for the records and issue notice to the Respondents and upon hearing the parties
declare the impugned letter of clarification of Ministry of AYUSH dtd.

31.10.2017 as under Annexure-4 Series and the letter dtd. 04.04.2018 under Annexure 3 directing
the Applicant to retire on 30.04.2018 on attaining age of 60 years, to be illegal, arbitrary
unreasonable and discriminatory and quash the same and direct the Respondent to allow the
Applicant to continue in the service upto 65 years as per amended rules.

x x x Pending finalization of the Original Application, the Applicant prays to stay the order under
Annexure-3 and allow the Applicant to continue in the service.”

11. By order dated 17.04.2018 the CAT issued notice, however, declined to grant any interim relief as
prayed for by the respondent No. 1 herein. As CAT declined to grant any interim relief and the
respondent No. 1 was to retire on 30.04.2018, he went before the High Court of Orissa, Cuttack by
filing W. P. (C) No. 6663 of 2018 questioning the order passed by the CAT declining to grant any
interim relief. The High Court passed the following order dated 25.04.2018:

Date of Order- 25.04.2018 Heard Mr. B. Senapati, learned counsel for the petitioner
and Mr. Bose, learned Asst. Solicitor General.

This Writ Petition has been filed by the petitioner challenging the order dated
17.04.2018 passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Cuttack Bench, Cuttack in

5

Central Council For Research In ... vs Bikartan Das on 16 August, 2023

O.A. No. 260/210/2018 wherein the Tribunal while issuing notice directed the
opposite parties to file their reply on the interim prayers and regular counter.

As it appears that the Central Government has taken a decision under the Ministry of
AYUSH to enhance the age of retirement of the Doctors up to 65 years. However, so
far as the petitioner is concerned, since the notice of superannuation was issued to
him, he has approached the Tribunal. Since the Original Application is pending
before the Tribunal, without expressing any opinion on the merits of the case, we
dispose of this Writ Petition with an observation that since the Doctors who are
similarly after continuing the age of 65 years after attaining the age of 60 years, let
the Petitioner continue in the service and let the notice of superannuation under
Annexure-3 shall remain stayed till disposal of the Original Application.

Mr. Bose, learned Assistant Solicitor General submitted that the central government
will file their counter within a period of two weeks from today before the Tribunal, in
such event the Tribunal may dispose of the Original Application at the earliest,
preferably by end of June, 2018. Accordingly, we request the Tribunal may dispose of
the Original Application at the earliest/as per its schedule. However, the petitioner
shall not claim any equity.

Sd.- S. Panda, J.

Sd.-K.R. Mohapatra”

12. Thus, from the aforesaid, it appears that the High Court protected the respondent No. 1 till the
disposal of the original application by the CAT.

By virtue of the aforesaid order, the respondent No. 1 continued in service beyond 30.04.2018.

13. CAT ultimately adjudicated the original application filed by the respondent No. 1 herein and vide
its order dated 02.11.2020 rejected the same holding that the respondent no. 1 is not entitled to seek
parity with AYUSH doctors in regard to the age of superannuation.

14. The sum and substance of the findings recorded by the CAT may be summarised as under:

(i) The Fundamental Rules notified under Article 309 of the Constitution of India are
applicable to the employees working directly under the Government of India. Its
applicability to the employees of the Council is on account of Clauses 34 and 35
respectively of the Bye-Laws. This issue was considered by the Hyderabad Bench of
the CAT vide order dated 04.09.2020, wherein it was observed that-

“Clause 34 of the bye-law makes it crystal clear that the Governing Body has to take a decision in
regard to the enhancement of the retirement age. The Governing body has no necessity to take a
decision in the context of the Ministry of AYUSH, Govt. of India having made it clear that

6

Central Council For Research In ... vs Bikartan Das on 16 August, 2023

enhancement of retirement age is not applicable to an autonomous body like CCRAS. Therefore, the
G.O.I. rule of not extending the enhancement of retirement age to CCRAS compliments the clauses
35 & 47 of the byelaws. We do not find any error in the decision taken by the respondents in terms of
the bye laws.” (Emphasis supplied)

(ii) CAT did not accept the respondent No. 1’s argument of Clause 35 and application of the
Fundamental Rules mutatis mutandis to the employees of the Council saying that the clause relates
to the general applicability of FRs, Supplementary Rule (SRs) and General Financial Rules (GFRs)
to the Council employees; the same is subject to the provision specific to Clause 34 governing
superannuation of the employees of the Council. There is nothing in Clause 35 of the Bye-Laws to
have an overriding effect on Clause 34 regarding retirement age.

(iii) Clause 47 of the Bye-Laws makes it clear that for the matters not specifically provided in the
Bye-Laws, the rules applicable to the government employees would apply. But since there is a
specific provision regarding superannuation in Clause 34, the rules governing government servants
in respect of superannuation will not be applicable to the employees of the Council unless it is in
accordance with Clause 34 of the Bye-Laws.

(iv) There is nothing in the Cabinet resolution in question and in the amended FR-56(bb) to show
that these decisions are applicable to the employees of the autonomous institutions. The assumption
of the respondent No. 1 that the FR-56, as amended from time to time, is automatically applicable to
the Council employees is not correct since it is subject to the provisions of Clauses 34 & 35
respectively of the Bye-Laws.

(v) There is nothing wrong with the clarification letter dated 31.10.2017. It cannot be stated to be
overriding the Cabinet decision in question, and the objection to the letter on that ground is not
sustainable. The clarification letter was circulated by the Council by a subsequent letter dated
25.01.2018 among its officers, after issuance of the first amendment to FR-56. This implies that the
Council, which is the employer of the respondent No.1, had consciously accepted the clarification of
the Ministry. The respondent No. 1 had not challenged the Council’s letter dated 25.01.2018 but had
only challenged the AYUSH Ministry’s letter dated. 31.10.2017.

(vi) There is nothing in the pleadings of the respondent No.1 to show that the amended FR-56(bb) is
applicable to the employees of the Council, except for citing the provisions of the Bye-Laws. As per
Clause 34 of the Bye-Laws, the rules governing the retirement of the government employees will be
applicable to the employees of the Council as adopted by the Governing Body. This means that the
unless the Governing Body adopts the changes in rules for the retirement of government servants,
such changes are not automatically applicable to the employees of the Council.

(vii) The CAT placed reliance on the decision of this Court in DDA v. Joint Action Committee,
Allottee of SFS Flats, reported in (2008) 2 SCC 672 to hold that there are certain specific grounds on
which a policy decision can be subjected to judicial review, and in this situation there was no valid
ground to challenge the policy decision of the AYUSH Ministry as per the clarification letter dated
31.10.2017.

7

Central Council For Research In ... vs Bikartan Das on 16 August, 2023

(viii) In the last, the CAT considered that even if the respondent No.1’s contention that he had
treated patients was to be accepted, such acceptance could not have negated the decision taken by
the Ministry of AYUSH in its clarification letter dated 31.01.2017, which was further accepted by the
Council in its subsequent letter dated 25.01.2018.

15. The respondent No. 1 feeling dissatisfied with the aforesaid order passed by the CAT challenged
the same before the High Court in W.P.(C) No. 30620 of 2020. The High Court allowed the writ
application filed by the respondent No. 1 holding as under:

“On the analysis of the above factual matrix, we find that though the petitioner is
functioning as Researcher under the Research Council/ National Institute, but as a
requirement for upgrading the research skill, he treats patients in the OPD and IPD.
In fact, he performs similar nature of duties like AYUSH doctor. Though his service
condition is covered by different laws, but for all practical purposes, the petitioner is
performing like a doctor. Though there is a clear-cut distinguishing features between
the AYUSH doctor and that of the petitioner. The petitioner herein is also treating the
patients like AYUSH doctors in the OPDs and IPDs on regular basis.

The Clause-34 and 35 of the bye-laws extends the force of the argument of the
petitioner to be treated as AYUSH doctor, even though he has been appointed as
Researcher.

Clauses-34 & 35 of the said bye-laws deal with superannuation which read as under:

“34. The rules governing the retirement of employees of the Government of India as
amended from time to time or as desired by the Governing Body shall apply to the
employees of the Central Council. Provided that an employee can be retained in
service after prescribed age of superannuation if he continues to be physically fit and
efficient and it is in the interest of the Central Council to retain him in service.

35. The Fundamental and Supplementary Rules and General Financial Rules of
Government of India as amended from time to time shall apply mutatis mutandis to
employees of the Central Council.” In view of the above, we are of the opinion that the
view taken by the learned Tribunal vide its decision dated 02.11.2020 is erroneous.

The learned CAT, Cuttack Bench, Cuttack has failed to consider the petitioner’s duty and devotion in
treating the OPD and IPD patients. Hence, the order dated 02.11.2020 passed by the learned CAT,
Cuttack Bench, Cuttack is liable to be quashed and accordingly, it is quashed.” (Emphasis supplied)

16. Thus, the plain reading of the impugned order passed by the High Court referred to above would
indicate that what weighed with the High Court was that the respondent No. 1 herein used to treat
patients like AYUSH doctors in the Out-Patient Departments (OPDs) and In-Patient Departments
(IPDs) on regular basis and the duty and devotion exhibited by the respondent No. 1 in treating the
OPD and IPD patients would entitle him to claim the benefit of the enhanced age of superannuation

8

Central Council For Research In ... vs Bikartan Das on 16 August, 2023

i.e., up to 65 years. The High Court recorded the said finding despite acknowledging that the
respondent No. 1 was appointed as a researcher under the Research Council and his service
conditions were governed by different laws. Of course, the High Court also took support of Clauses
34 and 35 respectively of the Bye-Laws while granting relief to the respondent No. 1.

17. In such circumstances referred to above, the appellants are here before this Court with the
present appeal.

SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANTS

18. Mr. Aman Lekhi, the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellants made the following
submissions:

a. The issue involved in the present case is the entitlement to seek extension in
superannuation age as per FR 56(bb) and its applicability to the appellant Council
which is an autonomous body. The said FR has been amended from time to time and
the rule applicable in the present case i.e. at the time of the retirement of the
respondent No. 1 is of 05.01.2018.

b. The respondent No. 1 was an employee of CCRAS having joined as Research Assistant and his
terms of service were governed under the Rules of CCRAS. Subsequently, he was promoted to the
post of Research Officer and at the time of superannuation he was holding the post of an Assistant
Director.

c. The relevant clauses of CCRAS which are applicable to the facts of the present case are Clauses
25(b), 34, 35 and 47 of CCRAS Bye- Laws which are extracted herein for the sake of convenience:

“Appointments

25.(a)...

(b) Recruitments, appointments and promotions to all posts shall be made according to the
recruitment rules laid down by the Governing Body or designated competent authority for the posts.

Selection shall be made through the Selection Committees/Departmental Promotion Committees
duly constituted with the approval of the respective appointing authority.

Superannuation

34. The rules governing the retirement of employees of Government of India as amended from time
to time or as desired by the Governing Body shall apply to the employees of the Central Council.
Provided that an employee can be retained in service after the prescribed age of superannuation if
he continues to be physically fit and efficient and it is in the interest of the Central Council to retain
him in service.

9

Central Council For Research In ... vs Bikartan Das on 16 August, 2023

35. The Fundamental and Supplementary Rules and General Financial Rules of Government of
India as amended from time to time shall apply mutatis mutandis to employees of the Central
Council.

Xxx                       xxx                       xxx

Other Conditions of Service

47. In respect of matters not provided for in these regulations the rules as applicable to Central
Government servants regarding the general conditions of service, pay, allowances T.A. and daily
allowances, foreign service terms, deputation in India and abroad, etc. and orders and decisions
issued in this regard by the Central Government from time to time shall apply mutatis mutandis to
the employees of the Central Council.” (Emphasis supplied) d. A bare perusal of the aforesaid rules
indicates that the employees are recruited through a selection committee of the Council and the FRs
will not directly apply where the Governing Body finalises the rules of superannuation.

e. In terms of Clause 34, the Governing Body had decided to fix the age of superannuation to be 60
years on 01.12.1998. The said decision was ratified on 27.01.2000 in the 14th Meeting of the
Governing Body of CCRAS as Agenda Item No. GB 14.4.

f. The decision of the Governing Body as aforementioned applied on 30.04.2018 i.e. the date of
superannuation of the Respondent.

g. No reference has been made by the respondent No. 1 to the aforementioned decision of the
governing body in his representation. In fact, the Respondent relied on Clause 34 of the Bye-Laws
which on its terms indicates that the rules governing the retirement of employees of Government of
India will not apply in the instant case.

h. Reliance placed by the respondent No. 1 in its representation on the case of Salma Khatoon is
equally inapt as the relevant rule in the said case was different from the Clause 34 of Bye-Laws
herein. The said case pertained to the Central Council for Research in Unani Medicine (‘CCRUM’)
which is governed by its own rules and regulation and the applicable rule in that case was worded
differently. Moreover, the said case is still pending before the High Court of Delhi. The interim order
in favour of Salma Khatoon was vacated by this Court in the case of Central Council for Research in
Unani Medicine v. Dr. Salma Khatoon and Others reported as 2020 SCC OnLine SC 1332.

i. The Central Administrative Tribunal, Cuttack Bench (‘CAT’) rightly held that the assumption of
the respondent No. 1 that FR 56 is automatically applicable is not correct as it is subject to Clause 34
of the Bye-Laws of CCRAS.

j. The very same grounds as aforesaid were urged by the Appellants in the Counter Affidavit filed by
them before the High Court of Orissa.

10

Central Council For Research In ... vs Bikartan Das on 16 August, 2023

k. While passing the impugned order, the High Court acknowledges that the respondent No. 1 was
working as a Researcher and his service conditions were covered by a different clause. Strangely,
however, the High Court makes no reference to Clause 34 of the Bye-Laws. This is despite the fact
that the appellants had clearly pleaded that the respondent was not entitled to relief in terms of
Clause 34 and that FR 56 was not applicable to him. Pertinently, this submission has been recorded
by the High Court itself as also the clarification of 31.10.2017 and the separate method of
recruitment. These factors were not considered while passing the impugned order.

l. The impugned order of the High Court is unsustainable as it is against the following settled
propositions of law:

(i) Even a Constitutional Court cannot substitute the existing service conditions of an
employee. V.M. Gadre v. M.G. Diwan and Others, (1996) 3 SCC 454 para 10 at page
459.

(ii) A writ in the nature of mandamus cannot be issued to frame a policy in a
particular manner. Census Commissioner and Others v. R. Krishnamurthy, (2015) 2
SCC 796 para 25-26 at page 806-807.

(iii) The Court cannot fasten monetary liability on State instrumentality unless it
emerges from the rights and liabilities canvassed in the lis itself. State of Himachal
Pradesh and Others v. Rajesh Chander Sood and Others, (2016) 10 SCC 77 para 88 at
page 160.

(iv) Employees of autonomous bodies are governed by their own rules and Bye-Laws
and they cannot claim parity with government employees. T.M. Sampath and Others
v. Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources and Others, (2015) 5 SCC 333 para 3 at
page 336 & para 15 at page 345; State of Maharashtra and Another v.

Bhagwan and Others, (2022) 4 SCC 193 para 24-26 at page 203-

204. m. The reliance placed by the respondent No. 1 on the judgment of this Court North Delhi
Municipal Corporation v. Dr. Ram Naresh Sharma and Others reported in 2021 SCC Online SC 540
is completely misplaced. The issue in the said case pertained to different dates of enhancement of
age of superannuation of AYUSH and CHS doctors of NDMC. In the said case, the policy decision of
enhancing the age of superannuation to 65 years was adopted by NDMC for AYUSH doctors but it
was applied from a later date which was found to be discriminatory. Whereas, in the present case
the appellant is an autonomous body with its own service rules and the government decision was
never adopted by the Governing Body at any point of time.

n. The reference made to the appointment of Director of the Institute of Teaching and Research in
Ayurveda (‘ITRA’) in context with the retirement age of 65 years is wholly misplaced. The
appointments to ITRA are made as per the provisions of the Institute of Teaching and Research in
Ayurveda Act, 2020. Section 5(e) of the Act, 2020 provides for the tenure of the Director of 5 years

11

Central Council For Research In ... vs Bikartan Das on 16 August, 2023

or until the age of 65 years whichever is earlier. Hence, the respondent No. 1 who is not covered
under the provisions of the said Act cannot claim parity with the employees of ITRA.

19. Mr. Col. R. Balasubramanian, the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the respondent No. 1
made the following submissions:

a. His client is an AYUSH Doctor being fully and duly qualified in Bachelor of
Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery (BAMS). The fact that his client is an AYUSH
Doctor is admitted by the appellants in their counter affidavit filed before the CAT. As
per the existing rule, those who have completed BAMS from any University of India,
which is recognised by the Central Council for Indian Medicine (CCIM) and who have
registered under any State Council of Indian Medicine or CCIM, New Delhi are
AYUSH Doctors. This is also admitted by AYUSH in their RTI reply.

b. That being a duly qualified AYUSH doctor, the respondent No. 1 was appointed as
a Research Associate in the Central Research Institute (Ayurveda), Bhuvaneshwar
under the Control of the Ministry of AYUSH, vide appointment letter dated
03.10.1985. The terms of appointment specifically stated inter alia, in para 2 (vi) &
(vii) thereof, that “Private or Consultancy service is strictly prohibited” and that
“Other terms and conditions of service will be governed by the rules and instruction
applicable to similar personnel under the Government of India” respectively. Further
it was stated that the pay and dearness allowances etc. will be as applicable to the
Central Government servants of equivalent status and will be governed by the CCS
Rules as amended by the Government of India from time to time.

c. The fact that the Institute where the respondent No. 1was serving is under the
‘pervasive control’ of the Government/Ministry is admitted by the appellants in their
counter affidavit filed before the CAT and also in the Counter affidavit filed before the
High Court. Therefore, two factual aspects are admitted and it is beyond any doubt
that (i) the respondent No. 1 is an AYUSH Doctor and (ii) the Institute is under the
administrative control of the Ministry of AYUSH.

d. In view of the aforesaid admitted facts, it is evident more particularly from the
Union Cabinet decision of the appellants that the Government of India had approved
the enhancement of age of superannuation from 60 to 65 years. This decision of the
Cabinet was applicable to the respondent No. 1. In terms of the said decision at “iii.
that the superannuation age has been enhanced to 65 years in respect of doctors
under their administrative control of the respective Ministries/ Departments [M/o of
AYUSH (AYUSH Doctors,………”.

e. The Cabinet has not made any distinction or difference in treatment between the
AYUSH Doctors working under the administrative control of the Ministry of AYUSH
in the matter of enhancement of retirement age up to 65 years. It is reiterated that
only two conditions are required to be satisfied to avail the enhanced age of

12

Central Council For Research In ... vs Bikartan Das on 16 August, 2023

superannuation up to 65 years of age viz., (i) AYUSH Doctor and (ii) being under the
Administrative Control of the Ministry. Therefore, the respondent No. 1 is squarely
covered by the Cabinet’s decision and is entitled to the enhanced age of retirement of
65 years.

f. That accordingly, Rule 56(bb) of the Fundamental Rules, 1922, which is a statutory rule framed
under the Proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India, was amended vide Gazette Notification
dated 05th January, 2018 in terms of which the age of superannuation inter alia of the AYUSH
doctors [3rd line of amended Rule (bb) shall be sixty-five years. This was further amended vide the
Gazette Notification dated 11.08.2018 categorically laying down that the age of superannuation of
doctors belonging to various cadres including AYUSH and working under the Ministry of AYUSH
shall be 62 years unless they opt to continue in teaching, consultancy, etc in which case it shall
extend up to 65 years. Therefore, even in the 2nd Gazette all the AYUSH doctors working under the
Ministry of AYUSH were included without any distinction whether working in the Ministry or in any
autonomous body.

g. That contrary to the Cabinet decision, the impugned letter dated 31.10.2017 was issued denying
the extension of age up to 65 years to the AYUSH doctors working in autonomous bodies like the
respondent No.

1. Para 2 of said letter is not sustainable in law and on facts for the following amongst other
reasons:-

i. That the decision was a Cabinet decision and the same could not have been diluted
or misinterpreted by the impugned letter of a subordinate functionary viz., a Senior
Consultant working in the Ministry of AYUSH by excluding the AYUSH Doctors
working in the autonomous bodies under the administrative control of the Ministry
of AYUSH.

ii. That there is no Cabinet approval to exclude the AYUSH doctors working in
autonomous bodies. Therefore, the impugned letter is contrary to the Cabinet
decision and on this count alone the same cannot be enforced against the respondent
No. 1.

iii. The letter dated 31.10.2017 in any case stood overruled/superseded in view of the
subsequent Gazettes dated 05.01.2018 and 11.08.2018 respectively.

iv. That the sub classification introduced by the impugned letter besides being
contrary to the Cabinet decision, is a suspect classification, and it is directly violative
of Articles 14, 16 and 21 respectively of the Constitution of India. The reason being
first, there is no rationale or nexus with the object which it seeks to achieve i.e,
exclusion of the AYUSH Doctors working in autonomous bodies and secondly, it
creates an artificial distinction of AYUSH doctors working in the Ministry and
elsewhere, although both are similarly qualified and discharge functions of OPD/IPD

13

Central Council For Research In ... vs Bikartan Das on 16 August, 2023

treatment of patients including surgery etc, albeit at different places. The respondent
No. 1 also drew NPA (Non-Practicing Allowance). These facts have not been disputed.

v. That it is well settled in law where the classification has no nexus with the object it
seeks to achieve and that there is artificial distinction the same would fall foul of
Articles 14 and 21 in the matter of conditions of service of an employee.

vi. That even otherwise, the respondent No. 1 is entitled to the benefit of enhanced
age of retirement of 65 years on the strength of plain reading of Clause 34 of the
Society Rules extracted @ Pg 12 of the Judgement by the High Court, on which
extensive reliance is placed by the appellants contending that the applicability of the
extension of age is dependent upon the decision to be taken by the Governing Body of
the autonomous body, and hence the Central Govt rule of age of superannuation is
not automatic. This contention is not correct for the following reasons:

- Clause 34 is in two parts. The first part is that the rules governing the retirement of
employees of the Government of India as amended from to time shall apply to the
employees of the Central Council. The plain and simple reading of this part makes it
clear and unambiguous that the rules governing the retirement of Central
Government employees as amended from time to time shall apply.

- The second part of Clause 34 “or as desired by the Governing Body” is merely an
enabling provision to enable the Governing Body to take a decision regarding
retention of an employee beyond the prescribed age of superannuation. In other
words, the ‘desire’ of Governing Body is to extend the age of an employee even
beyond prescribed age if he continues to be physically fit and efficient and it is in the
interest of the Council to retain him in service.

- Therefore, the second part of Clause 34 really gives power to the Governing Body to
retain an employee even after the prescribed age of superannuation provided the
conditions for grant of such retention is met. This power cannot be negatively read to
clothe the Governing Body with power to prescribe less age of superannuation than
what is prescribed by the Central Government from time to time.

- While the age of superannuation of an employee of the Central Council shall be at
par with the age of superannuation prescribed by the Central Government, the
Governing body has the enabling power to retain the employee even beyond the age
of superannuation in organisational interest.

- It is submitted that Clause 34 cannot be read negatively to deny the age of increase
given by the Cabinet to AYUSH Doctors by wrongly interpreting Clause 34.

vii. That the terms and conditions of service of employees of the Council on all other
aspects like Provident Fund/ GPF, Pension, Gratuity, Leave Rules, Scales of Pay,

14

Central Council For Research In ... vs Bikartan Das on 16 August, 2023

Conduct Rules, and other conditions of service are the same as applicable to Central
Government employees as set out in Clauses 31, 32, 33, 42, 44, and 47 respectively of
the Rules. Therefore, in the matter of age of superannuation the respondent No. 1
cannot be treated differently. viii. That the appellants on one hand claim that the
AYUSH doctors working in autonomous bodies are not entitled to increase in age of
superannuation up to 65 years whereas other AYUSH doctors working in the
Ministry of AYUSH and other autonomous institutions have been granted extension
of age up to 65 years.

ix. That similarly, AYUSH doctors working in CGHS have been granted increase in
age up to 65 years vide letter dated 24.11.2017. Therefore, the letter not to grant
identical benefit to the respondent No. 1 is not only arbitrary but it is discriminatory
and hence it is unsustainable.

h. This Court has dealt with the issue of extension of age of superannuation of similar AYUSH
doctors working in the NDMC in Dr. Ram Naresh Sharma (supra), where in paras 23 and 24 it was
held as follows:

“23. The common contention of the appellants before us is that classification of
AYUSH doctors and doctors under CHS in different categories is reasonable and
permissible in law. This however does not appeal to us and we are inclined to agree
with the findings of the Tribunal and the Delhi High Court that the classification is
discriminatory and unreasonable since doctors under both segments are performing
the same function of treating and healing their patients. The only difference is that
AYUSH doctors are using indigenous systems of medicine like Ayurveda, Unani, etc.
and CHS doctors are using Allopathy for tending to their patients. In our
understanding, the mode of treatment by itself under the prevalent scheme of things,
does not qualify as an intelligible differentia. Therefore, such unreasonable
classification and discrimination based on it would surely be inconsistent with Article
14 of the Constitution. The order of AYUSH Ministry dated 24.11.2017 extending the
age of superannuation to 65 Years also endorses such a view. This extension is in tune
with the notification of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare dated 31.05.2016.

24. The doctors, both under AYUSH and CHS, render service to patients and on this
core aspect, there is nothing to distinguish them. Therefore, no rational justification
is seen for having different dates for bestowing the benefit of extended age of
superannuation to these two categories of doctors.

Hence, the order of AYUSH Ministry (F. No. D. 14019/4/2016- E-I (AYUSH)) dated 24.11.2017 must
be retrospectively applied from 31.05.2016 to all concerned respondent-doctors, in the present
appeals. All consequences must follow from this conclusion.” i. The appeal deserves to be dismissed
with costs and directions be issued to the appellants to release the consequential benefits including
arrears of salary for the period from 01.05 2018 to 30.04.2023 which would cover the entire period
of 5 years of increase in age of superannuation. The respondent No. 1 worked from 25.04.2018

15

Central Council For Research In ... vs Bikartan Das on 16 August, 2023

following the order of stay grated by the High Court till 05.04.2021 when stay was granted by this
Court following which the services of the respondent No. 1 were abruptly ended.

SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE INTERVENORS/APPLICANTS IN I.A. NO. 90789 OF 2022
IN SLP (C) NO. 4110 OF 2021

20. It is the case of the intervenors/applicants that their W.P.(C) Nos. 9554 of 2018 and 9584 of
2018 respectively are pending adjudication before the High Court of Delhi and one Original
Application No. 272 of 2020 before CAT, Lucknow Bench. They submitted that the final outcome of
the present appeal will have a direct impact on the aforesaid litigations. The intervenors claim that
they are doctors under another corporation of AYUSH, namely, CCRUM.

21. Submissions canvassed on their behalf are as under:

a. That the Intervenors/applicants are qualified Unani Doctors by qualification and
are equivalent to any other qualified Doctors, be it MBBS Doctors or otherwise.

b. The Intervenors/applicants are working under the Direct Administrative Control
of Ministry of AYUSH and their service conditions are governed by the Ministry in
spite of them performing the duties in CCRUM.

c. The Intervenors/applicants have been receiving the Non-Practicing Allowance
while working under CCRUM which clearly indicates that the Intervenors/applicants
are indeed qualified doctors at par with the other Doctors who also get the same
allowances.

d. The Recruitment Rules which apply to the Intervenors/applicants are:

“for functional purpose, a medical officer (Ayurveda) when posted in the Ministry of
AYUSH will be designated as Research officer (Ayurveda) and thus the medical
officer and Research officer are one and the same and there cannot be any distinction
between the two”.

e. That the Government of India (Cabinet) vide its order has granted the benefit of
enhancement of superannuation age to 65 years to the doctors under the
administrative control of the respective Ministries/Department (Ministry of AYUSH)
(AYUSH doctors) which is fully applicable to the doctors working under the appellant
council but the Ministry of AYUSH erroneously by their mis-interpretation has
excluded the benefits to doctors working under autonomous bodies like the council.
It is because of the wrong interpretation made by the Ministry of AYUSH, the said
b e n e f i t   w a s   e r r o n e o u s l y   d e n i e d   t o   t h e   A Y U S H   d o c t o r s   l i k e   t h e
Intervenors/applicants.

16

Central Council For Research In ... vs Bikartan Das on 16 August, 2023

f. That the Govt. of India vide its own order dated 02.11.2020 has given the said
benefit to the Director of ITRA and enhanced the age of superannuation to 65 years.
Therefore, as per own interpretation made by the Ministry of AYUSH, the benefit of
enhancement of superannuation of age is fully applicable to all doctors (working in
any capacity including researcher) who are under the administrative control of
AYUSH and when Govt. of India (Cabinet) did not exclude the autonomous
institution like Intervenors/applicants council then the Ministry of AYUSH has no
r i g h t   t o   d i f f e r e n t i a t e   a n d   d e n y   t h e   b e n e f i t   o f   s u p e r a n n u a t i o n   t o   t h e
Intervenors/applicants.

g. It is submitted that Clauses-34 & 35 of the Bye-Laws issued by the CCRAS, deals
with superannuation and prescribes that the Fundamental and Supplementary Rules
and General Financial Rules of the Government of India as amended from time to
time shall apply mutatis mutandis to the employees of the Central Council.

h. It is submitted that the Intervenors/applicants during their entire tenure
performed duties like treating patients in OPD and IPD along with research activities
which would clearly establish that the Intervenors/applicants have been attending
the patients, both, the OPDs and IPDs. The Intervenors/applicants have worked for
prestigious hospitals like the RML & DDU while performing duties which include
treating the patients along with Research work.

i. It is submitted that Non-Practicing Allowance has been given to the doctors
working under Intervenor/applicants council and the said benefit was given to the
Intervenor/applicants as well which clearly contradicts the stand of council that the
Intervenors/applicants were not performing the duties of doctors. In fact, the
Non-Practicing Allowance has been sanctioned only on the basis that the
Intervenors/applicants are qualified doctors and are performing the duties of Clinical
Doctor which includes the OPD & IPD duties and thus are not allowed to practice
outside the scope of their official duties and in lieu were given the Non-Practicing
Allowance.

j. It is submitted that those doctors are considered as AYUSH doctors who have
completed the degree course either in BAMS, BHMS, BUMS, BNYS & BSM in
Ayurveda, Homeopathy, Unami, Siddha, Yoga and Naturopathy and are at par with
any other qualified Doctors. k. The Intervenors/applicants Council is an autonomous
body under the Ministry of AYUSH, Government of India and the Council has a
Governing Body comprising of the Union Minister-In-Charge of AYUSH as its
President and Secretary, Ministry of AYUSH as its Vice President. Its Bye-Laws
reveal the pervasive control of the Union Government over the Central Council.

l. The aforesaid is clearly depicted from the Bye-Laws of Intervenor/applicants
council. That the Clauses - 34 and 35 of the Bye- Laws deal with the superannuation
of the employees of the Council which are quoted herein below: Clauses-34 & 35 of

17

Central Council For Research In ... vs Bikartan Das on 16 August, 2023

the said Bye-Laws deal with superannuation which read as under:

“34. The rules governing the retirement of employees of the Government of India as
amended from time to time or as desired by the Governing Body shall apply to the
employees of the Central Council. Provided that an employee can be retired in service
after prescribed age of superannuation if he continues to be physically fit and
efficient and it is in the interest of the Central Council to retain him in service.

35. The Fundamental and Supplementary Rules and General Financial Rules of
Government of India as amended from time to time shall apply mutatis mutandis to
employees of the Central Council.” m. That, the clarification of Ministry of AYUSH
vide its letter dated 31.10.2017 is not only misconceived but also uncalled for,
arbitrary and discriminatory. The same is also contrary to the object for which the
Central Council is established. The aforesaid clarification would rather frustrate the
objectives for which the Central Council was established.

The same is against Public Policy and liable to be struck down and the High Court of Orrisa rightly
gave decision in favour of the respondent in the instant appeal.

n. That the Intervenor/applicants though were appointed as researcher but along with that they
have been performing duties of doctors like treating patient in OPD, IPD etc. and for which requisite
certificate was issued to them time to time.

ANALYSIS

22. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having gone through materials
placed on record the only question that falls for our consideration is whether the High Court
committed any error in passing the impugned judgment?

23. The appellant Council is an autonomous body registered under the Society Registration Act,
1860 and is administratively controlled by the Ministry of AYUSH, Government of India. It is a body
constituted for the purpose of undertaking, cooperating, formulating, developing and promoting the
research on scientific guidelines in Ayurvedic Sciences. The recruitment rules, procedure and the
service conditions of these employees are governed by the Bye-Laws and Memorandum of
Association of the Council.

24. With a view to appreciate the rival contentions raised by the litigating parties before us, we must
look into the Clauses 25(b), 34, 35 and 47 of the Bye-Laws in the Memorandum of Association of the
Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences:

“Appointments

25. (a)...

18

Central Council For Research In ... vs Bikartan Das on 16 August, 2023

(b) Recruitments, appointments and promotions to all posts shall be made according to the
recruitment rules laid down by the Governing Body or designated competent authority for the posts.
Selection shall be made through the Selection Committees/Departmental Promotion Committees
duly constituted with the approval of the respective appointing authority.

Superannuation

34. The rules governing the retirement of employees of the Government of India as amended from
time to time or as desired by the Governing Body shall apply to the employees of the Central
Council. Provided that an employee can be retained in service after the prescribed age of
superannuation if he continues to be physically fit and efficient and it is in the interest of the Central
Council to retain him in service.

35. The Fundamental and Supplementary Rules and General Financial Rules of Government of
India as amended from time to time shall apply mutatis mutandis to employees of the Central
Council.

Other Conditions of Service

47. In respect of matters not provided for in these regulations the rules as applicable to Central
Government servants regarding the general conditions of service, pay, allowances T.A. and daily
allowances, foreign service terms, deputation in India and abroad, etc. and orders and decisions
issued in this regard by the Central Government from time to time shall apply mutatis mutandis to
the employees of the Central Council.” (Emphasis Supplied)

25. A plain reading of the aforesaid clauses of the Bye-Laws would indicate that the employees are
recruited through a selection committee of the Council. It further indicates that the Fundamental
Rules, 1922 will have no direct application in cases where the governing body finalises the rules of
superannuation. In terms of Clause 34 of the Bye-Laws, the governing body had decided the age of
superannuation to be 60 years on 01.12.1998. The said decision was ratified on 27.01.2000, in the 14
th meeting of the governing body of the Council.

26. In our view, the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellants is right in his submission
that the decision of the governing body dated 27.12.2000 applied on 30.04.2018 i.e., the date of
superannuation of the respondent No. 1. It is not in dispute that the respondent No. 1 was working
as a researcher and the service conditions of a Research Assistant are altogether different compared
to the AYUSH Doctor. It is also not in dispute that the method of recruitment of the respondent No.
1 is different compared to that with the AYUSH doctors.

27. The principal argument canvassed by the learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the
respondent No. 1 is that the provisions of FR 56(bb) would apply to the respondent No. 1 in his
capacity as an employee of the Council in view of Clause 35 of the Bye-Laws of the Council referred
to above, by which the provisions of the FR and SR would apply to the employees of the Council
mutatis mutandis. On the other hand, the case put up by the appellants is that the said provisions

19

Central Council For Research In ... vs Bikartan Das on 16 August, 2023

are not applicable to the employees of the Council in view of the clarification of the Ministry dated
31.10.2017. In regard to the clarification of the Ministry vide its letter dated 31.10.2017, the stance of
the respondent No. 1 is that such clarification cannot override the decision of the Cabinet or the
provisions of the FR 56 as amended.

28. The aforesaid aspect was duly considered by the CAT. The CAT rightly took the view that the
argument canvassed on behalf of the respondent No. 1, that the Council failed to consider the Clause
35 of the Bye-Laws referred to above, which states that the FR, SR and (GFR) as amended from time
to time shall apply mutatis mutandis to employees of the Council, was without any merit and
deserved to be rejected. The CAT in our opinion rightly rejected such argument. We say so because
the applicability would be subject to the provision specific to the Clause 34 governing
superannuation of the employees of the Council.

29. There is nothing in Clause 35 of the Bye-Laws referred to above on the basis of which, it could be
said that the same will have an overriding effect on Clause 34 as regards the age of retirement.
Clause 47 of the Bye-Laws makes it abundantly clear that for the matters not specifically provided in
the Bye-Laws, the rules applicable to the government employees would apply. However, as there is a
specific provision regarding superannuation in Clause 34, the rules governing the government
services in respect of superannuation are not applicable to the employees of the Council unless it is
in accordance with Clause 34 of the Bye-Laws.

30. We shall now deal with one another submission canvassed by Mr. R. Balasubramanian, the
learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent No. 1. It was submitted that Clause 34
of the Bye-Laws should be read in two parts. The first part states that the Rules governing the
retirement of employees of the Government of India as amended from time to time would apply to
the employees of the Central Council.

According to the learned Senior Counsel, the second part of the Clause 34 which reads “or as desired
by the governing body” is merely an enabling provision empowering the governing body to take a
decision whether an employee deserves to be retained beyond the prescribed age of superannuation.
According to the learned Senior Counsel such power should not be read in a negative form to clothe
the governing body with the power to prescribe lesser age of superannuation than what has been
prescribed by the Central Government from time to time. We are afraid, we are not in a position to
accept such an argument. The language of Clause 34 is very clear. What is important to note while
reading the Clause 34 is the word “or”. Thereafter, there is a proviso which says that an employee
can be retained in service after prescribed age of superannuation if he continues to be physically fit
and efficient and it is in the interest of the Central Counsel to retain him in the service.

31. The expression “the rules governing the retirement of employees of Government of India as
amended from time to time” is separated from the rest of the part of the Bye-Law by the word “or”
which is disjunctive and giving natural meaning to the said word separates the rules that may be
framed by the Government of India and the rules that the Council may desire to frame as regards
the age of retirement of the employees of the Council.

20

Central Council For Research In ... vs Bikartan Das on 16 August, 2023

32. It is a well-established principle of statutory interpretation that the word “or” is normally
disjunctive and the word “and” is normally conjunctive. Both of them can be read as vice-versa, but
that interpretation is adopted only where the intention of the legislature is manifest.

33. Justice G.P. Singh in the Principles of Statutory Interpretation (Thirteenth Edition 2012) page
485 has stated as follows:

“The word ‘or’ is normally disjunctive and ‘and’ is normally conjunctive but at time
they are read as vice versa to give effect to the manifest intention of the Legislature as
disclosed from the context. As stated by SCRUTTON, L.J.: “You do sometimes read
“or” as ‘and’ and in a statute. But you do not do it unless you are obliged because ‘or’
does not generally mean ‘and’ and ‘and’ does not generally mean ‘or’. And as pointed
out by LORD HALSBURY the reading of ‘or’ as ‘and’ is not to be resorted to, “unless
some other part of the same statute or the clear intention of it requires that to be
done”. Where provision is clear and unambiguous the word ‘or’ cannot be read as
‘and’ by applying the principle of reading down. But if the literal reading of the words
produces an unintelligible or absurd, result ‘and’ may be read for ‘or’ and ‘or’ for ‘and’
even though the result of so modifying the words is less favourable to the subject
provided that the intention of the Legislature is otherwise quite clear. Conversely if
reading of ‘and’ and ‘or’ produces grammatical distortion and makes no sense of the
portion following ‘and’, ‘or’ cannot be read in place of ‘and’. The alternatives joined by
‘or’ need not always be mutually exclusive.”

34. Thus, in view of the aforesaid discussion, we reject the submission canvassed on behalf of the
respondent No. 1 as regards the interpretation of the Clause 34 of the Bye-Laws. In this context, we
may only say that the governing body of the Council is not obliged to take a decision in tune with the
decision of the Ministry of AYUSH regarding superannuation more particularly having made it clear
that enhancement of retirement age is not applicable to an autonomous body like CCRAS.

35. We are also not impressed by the submission canvassed on behalf of the respondent No. 1 that as
the terms and conditions of the services of the employees of the Council on all other aspects like the
Provident Fund/GPF, Pension, Gratuity, Leave Rules, Scales of Pay, Conduct Rules and other
conditions of services are the same as applicable to the employees of the Central Government as set
out in Clauses 31, 32, 33, 42, 44 and 47 respectively of the Bye-Laws, the matter of age of
superannuation of the respondent No. 1 should not be treated differently. What should be the age of
superannuation is a matter of policy. It is not within the domain of the court to legislate. It is only if
a policy decision or a notification is arbitrary it may invite the frowns of Article 14 of the
Constitution. In any case, the question of age of retirement stands on a different footing from the
service conditions relating to pay and allowances and revision of pay.

36. We may at this stage, refer to the following decision in Tamil Nadu Education Department
Ministerial and General Subordinate Services Association and Others v. State of Tamil Nadu and
Others reported in (1980) 3 SCC 97 : [ SCC pp. 99 SCC (L&S) p. 296, para 7] “7. In Service
Jurisprudence integration is a complicated administrative problem where, in doing broad justice to

21

Central Council For Research In ... vs Bikartan Das on 16 August, 2023

many, some bruise to a few cannot be ruled out. Some play in the joints, even some wobbling, must
be left to government without fussy forensic monitoring, since the administration has been
entrusted by the Constitution to the executive, not to the court. All life, including administrative life,
involves experiment, trial and error, but within the leading strings of fundamental rights, and,
absent unconstitutional ‘excesses’, judicial correction is not right. …..”

37. It is too late in the day for the respondent No. 1 to raise all such issues including infringement of
Article 14 of the Constitution on the ground of artificial distinction between the Research Assistant
and AYUSH Doctors. The respondent No. 1 knew from day one i.e., from the date of his appointment
that he was being appointed as a Research Assistant. His service conditions and mode of
recruitment are different compared to the AYUSH Doctors. It is a different thing that he might have
treated the patients but that by itself would not entitle him to claim that his age of superannuation
should be at par with the AYUSH Doctors.

38. In the aforesaid context, we may refer to and rely upon a decision of this Court in the case of
State of Bihar and Another v. Teachers’ Association of Govt. Engineering College and Others,
reported in (2000) 10 SCC 527 wherein, the respondents were teachers of three engineering colleges
owned by the State of Bihar. They were recruited through the Bihar Public Service Commission.
Their service conditions were governed by the Bihar Service Code. Under the relevant provisions of
the Bihar Service Code, the age of superannuation up to 1989, was 58 years. However, with effect
from 01.10.1989 it was raised to 60 years. They claimed that their age of retirement should be the
same as the age of retirement of Bihar Engineering College which was a college of the Patna
University. Its teachers were recruited through the University Service Commission. Their service
conditions were governed under the Patna University Act. At the relevant time, the age of retirement
for university teachers was 62 years. However, with effect from 15.08.1992 the age of retirement was
reduced to 60 years. The respondent’s claim was upheld by the High Court. Allowing the State’s
appeal, this Court held:

“5. The respondents contend that their age of retirement should be the same as the
age of retirement of university teachers employed in Bihar Engineering College,
Patna. But the terms and conditions of service of teachers in the three engineering
colleges of the State are different from the terms and conditions of service of the
university teachers employed in Bihar Engineering College at Patna. The authority
responsible for recruitment is also different. The method of recruitment is different
and service conditions are prescribed under different rules and regulations and/or
under a separate Act. We fail to see how in respect of the teachers who are
government servants, governed by the Bihar Service Code, the age of superannuation
should be different from the age of superannuation for all other government servants
governed by the Bihar Service Code. The High Court ought not to have equated the
service conditions in the three State colleges with the service conditions in a
University college. Application of Article 14, in these circumstances, is misconceived,
when there are valid criteria for differentiating between the service conditions in the
two sets of colleges. In the premises the impugned judgment of the High Court
insofar as it directs that the age of superannuation of teachers working in the three

22

Central Council For Research In ... vs Bikartan Das on 16 August, 2023

engineering colleges other than Bihar College of Engineering, Patna should be
brought on par with the age of superannuation of those working in Bihar College of
Engineering at Patna, is set aside. The further direction to pay arrears or give benefits
flowing from the extended age of superannuation is also set aside. The appeals are
allowed accordingly.”

39. The only idea with which we have referred to and relied upon the aforesaid decision is to convey
that the case on hand is not one of discrimination. Article 14 of the Constitution has no application
having regard to the facts of the present case.

40. Mr. Lekhi, the learned Senior Council appearing for the appellants placed strong reliance on two
decisions of this Court: (i) T.M. Sampath (supra) and (ii) Bhagwan (supra). Both these decisions
have been relied upon to fortify the contention that the employees of autonomous bodies are
governed by their own rules and Bye-Laws and they cannot claim parity with the government
employees. We must look into both these decisions. Paras 3, 15, 16 and 17 respectively of T.M.
Sampath (supra) are as follows:

“3. The facts of these appeals are briefly stated hereinafter. The appellants herein are
the employees of National Water Development Agency (“NWDA”) which was
established as a society in July 1982 and was registered under the Societies
Registration Act, 1860. The Society NWDA, which falls under the aegis and control,
both administrative and financial, of the Ministry of Water Resources, is fully funded
by the Government of India, headed by the Union Minister for Water Resources as
the President. NWDA framed rules and regulations for its smooth functioning.
Whatever emoluments have been prescribed for the government servants by the
Central Government Office Memorandum (“the OM”, for short) the same apply
mutatis mutandis to the employees of NWDA. Bye-law 28 of NWDA also mandates
that the rules and orders applicable to the Central Government employees shall apply
mutatis mutandis to the employees of NWDA subject to modification by the
Governing Body concerning service conditions and only in case of any doubt, the
matter has to be referred to the Governing Body for a decision. Bye-

law 26(a) provides for the emoluments structure for all employees that will be adopted by NWDA,
with the approval of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure). Bye-law 28 provides that
till such time NWDA frames its rules governing service conditions of the employees, rules and
orders applicable to the Central Government employees shall apply mutatis mutandis, subject to
such modifications as made by NWDA from time to time.

xxx xxx xxx

15. In light of the facts and circumstances of this case and the submissions made by the learned
counsel on both sides, it can be concluded that NWDA had framed its regulation: the CPF Rules,
1982 and they were duly approved by the Governing Body of NWDA. As NWDA is an autonomous
body under the Ministry of Water Resources, it has framed its own bye-laws governing the

23

Central Council For Research In ... vs Bikartan Das on 16 August, 2023

employees. It has been time and again reiterated that the court must adopt an attitude of total non-
interference or minimal interference in the matter of interpretation of rules framed by autonomous
institutions. In Kerala SRTC v. K.O. Varghese [(2007) 8 SCC 231 : (2007) 2 SCC (L&S) 862] , this
Court held : (SCC pp. 240-41, paras 18 & 21) “18. … KSRTC is an autonomous corporation
established under the Road Transport Corporations Act, 1950. It can regulate the services of its
employees by making appropriate regulations in that behalf.

* * *

21. The High Court … is not correct in thinking that there is any compulsion on KSRTC on the mere
adoption of Part III of KSR to automatically give all enhancements in pension and other benefits
given by the State Government to its employees.” Thus, as the appellants are governed by the CPF
Rules, 1982, the OM applicable to the Central Government employees is not applicable to them.”

16. On the issue of parity between the employees of NWDA and Central Government employees,
even if it is assumed that the 1982 Rules did not exist or were not applicable on the date of the OM
i.e. 1-5-1987, the relevant date of parity, the principle of parity cannot be applicable to the employees
of NWDA. NWDA cannot be treated as an instrumentality of the State under Article 12 of the
Constitution merely on the basis that its funds are granted by the Central Government. In Zee
Telefilms Ltd. v. Union of India [(2005) 4 SCC 649], it was held by this Court that the autonomous
bodies having some nexus with the Government by itself would not bring them within the sweep of
the expression “State” and each case must be determined on its own merits. Thus, the plea of the
employees of NWDA to be treated on a par with their counterparts in the Central Government under
sub-rule (6)(iv) of Rule 209 of the General Financial Rules, merely on the basis of funding is not
applicable.

17. Even if it is presumed that NWDA is “State” under Article 12 of the Constitution, the appellants
have failed to prove that they are on a par with their counterparts, with whom they claim parity. As
held by this Court in UT, Chandigarh v. Krishan Bhandari [(1996) 11 SCC 348 : 1997 SCC (L&S)
391], the claim to equality can be claimed when there is discrimination by the State between two
persons who are similarly situated. The said discrimination cannot be invoked in cases where
discrimination sought to be shown is between acts of two different authorities functioning as State
under Article 12. Thus, the employees of NWDA cannot be said to be “Central Government
employees” as stated in the OM for its applicability.” (Emphasis supplied)

41. The decision in the case of T.M. Sampath (supra) was later referred to and relied upon by this
Court in the case of Bhagwan (supra). This Court in the Bhagwan (supra) observed in para 26 as
under:

“26. As per the law laid down by this Court in a catena of decisions, the employees of
the autonomous bodies cannot claim, as a matter of right, the same service benefits
on a par with the government employees. Merely because such autonomous bodies
might have adopted the Government Service Rules and/or in the Governing Council
there may be a representative of the Government and/or merely because such

24

Central Council For Research In ... vs Bikartan Das on 16 August, 2023

institution is funded by the State/Central Government, employees of such
autonomous bodies cannot, as a matter of right, claim parity with the State/Central
Government employees. This is more particularly, when the employees of such
autonomous bodies are governed by their own Service Rules and service conditions.
The State Government and the autonomous Board/body cannot be put on a par.”
(Emphasis Supplied)

42. We must also look into the decision of this Court in the case of Kerala Assistant Public
Prosecutors Associations v. State of Kerala and Others reported in AIR 2018 SC 2652, wherein the
Assistant Public Prosecutors were seeking parity with respect to the age of superannuation to that of
Public Prosecutors. This Court took notice of the fact that the method of selection between the two
posts is very different and that the former are considered to be government employees, whereas the
latter are not. The Court thereafter, proceeded to hold that merely because the nature of work
between the two is similar, the same does not imply that the age of superannuation ought to be
similar as well. The relevant portion is produced hereunder:

“6. … The fact that the nature of duties and functions of Assistant Public Prosecutors
and Public Prosecutors are similar, per se, cannot be the basis to claim parity with
Public Prosecutors in respect of age of superannuation.” (Emphasis supplied)

43. In Union of India and Others v. Lieut (Mrs) E. Iacats, reported in (1997) 7 SCC 334, the
respondent therein had filed a writ petition in the Guahati High Court challenging her retirement at
the age of 55 years on the ground that in other nursing services under the military establishment the
age of retirement was 58 years. It was argued before the High Court that it was discriminatory to
retire the nurses who were appointed for local service only at the age of 55 years. The Petition was
allowed by the High Court. The UOI came before this Court in appeal. This Court while allowing the
appeal filed by the UOI, observed as under:

“ 3. … If different nursing services are constituted under separate army instructions
carrying their own separate terms and conditions of service, one cannot complain of
discrimination if the ages of retirement prescribed under these different services are
different. Each will be governed by its own rules and regulations. The respondent is,
therefore, not justified in claiming that she has been discriminated against because
she has retired at the age of 55.” (Emphasis supplied)

44. The age of superannuation is always governed by the statutory rules governing appointment on a
particular post. Hence, even if it is averred that the nature of work involved in the two posts is
similar, the same cannot be a ground to increase or alter the service conditions of an employee as
each post is governed by its own set of rules. The same was held in the case of New Okhla Industrial
Development Authority and Another v. B D Singhal and Others, reported in AIR 2021 SC 3457,
wherein this Court held as under:

“24. … Since the enhancement of the age of superannuation is a 'public function'
channelised by the provisions of the statute and the service regulations, the doctrine

25

Central Council For Research In ... vs Bikartan Das on 16 August, 2023

of promissory estoppel cannot be used to challenge the action of NOIDA.” (Emphasis
supplied)

45. We shall now look into the decision of this Court in Dr. Ram Naresh Sharma (supra). This
decision of this Court has been relied upon by Mr. R. Bala, the learned Senior Counsel appearing for
the respondent No. 1. He has relied upon paras 23 and 24 respectively which read thus:

“23. The common contention of the appellants before us is that classification of
AYUSH doctors and doctors under CHS in different categories is reasonable and
permissible in law. This however does not appeal to us and we are inclined to agree
with the findings of the Tribunal and the Delhi High Court that the classification is
discriminatory and unreasonable since doctors under both segments are performing
the same function of treating and healing their patients. The only difference is that
AYUSH doctors are using indigenous systems of medicine like Ayurveda, Unani, etc.
and CHS doctors are using Allopathy for tending to their patients. In our
understanding, the mode of treatment by itself under the prevalent scheme of things,
does not qualify as an intelligible differentia. Therefore, such unreasonable
classification and discrimination based on it would surely be inconsistent with Article
14 of the Constitution. The order of AYUSH Ministry dated 24.11.2017 extending the
age of superannuation to 65 Years also endorses such a view. This extension is in tune
with the notification of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare dated 31.05.2016.

24. The doctors, both under AYUSH and CHS, render service to patients and on this
core aspect, there is nothing to distinguish them. Therefore, no rational justification
is seen for having different dates for bestowing the benefit of extended age of
superannuation to these two categories of doctors.

Hence, the order of AYUSH Ministry (F. No. D. 14019/4/2016EI (AYUSH)) dated 24.11.2017 must
be retrospectively applied from 31.05.2016 to all concerned respondent doctors, in the present
appeals. All consequences must follow from this conclusion.”

46. The aforesaid decision of this Court in the case of Dr. Ram Naresh Sharma (supra) upon which
strong reliance has been placed on behalf of the respondent No. 1 is of no avail for the simple reason
that in the said case, the only question that arose was whether the benefit of enhancement of age of
retirement from 60 years to 65 years granted in favour of allopathy doctors was available even for
ayurveda doctors or not? The said decision was based upon an order of the Ministry of AYUSH
dated 24.11.2017.

47. As seen from paragraph 23 of the said decision referred to above, the age of retirement of
allopathy doctors was enhanced by an order dated 31.05.2016 issued by the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare. This was followed by consequential amendment of the Fundamental Rules and
Supplementary Rules, 1922. Since, Ayurveda doctors were not covered by the Ministry’s order dated
31.05.2016, the Ayurveda doctors filed applications before the Administrative Tribunal. The
Administrative Tribunal allowed the applications by an order dated 24.08.2017. The North Delhi

26

Central Council For Research In ... vs Bikartan Das on 16 August, 2023

Municipal Corporation (Employer) filed writ petitions before the High Court of Delhi challenging
the decision of the Tribunal. During the pendency of the writ petitions, the Ministry of AYUSH
issued an order dated 24.11.2017 enhancing the age of retirement of AYUSH doctors also to 65 years,
but w.e.f. 27.09.2017. It is in that context that this Court held as aforesaid in Dr. Ram Naresh
Sharma (supra). Thus, this decision is in no manner helpful to the respondent No. 1.

48. We may only say that the entire approach of the High Court towards the present litigation was
incorrect. We are a bit disappointed to observe that the High Court dealt with the present litigation
in a very casual manner. First, the High Court went to the extent of granting interim relief extending
the period of service beyond 60 years till the disposal of the Original Petition by the CAT. By virtue
of such interim order which the High Court ordinarily should not grant, the respondent No. 1
although was to retire in 2018 yet continued in service till 2021. It is only when this Court stayed the
operation of the impugned order passed by the High Court while issuing notice that the service of
the respondent No. 1 came to an end. The Court or the Tribunal should, therefore, be slow and
circumspect in granting interim relief for continuation in service, unless prima facie evidence of
unimpeachable character is produced because if the public servant succeeds, he can always be
compensated. But if he fails, he would have enjoyed undeserved benefit of extended service and
merely caused injustice to his immediate junior. At the cost of repetition, we may state that the High
Court was conscious of the fact as very much recorded in the impugned order that the respondent
No. 1 was appointed as a Research Assistant and was functioning as a Researcher under the
Research Council and his service conditions were also different compared to the AYUSH doctors
serving with the Ministry of AYUSH. The High Court misdirected itself saying that the benefit of
enhanced age of superannuation can also be granted if the duties performed are the same like
AYUSH doctors. We fail to understand how can the Court fix the age of superannuation of an
employee saying that he is very much devoted towards his job. The age of superannuation is always
governed by statutory rules & other service conditions.

49. Before we close this matter, we would like to observe something important in the aforesaid
context:

Two cardinal principles of law governing exercise of extraordinary jurisdiction under
Article 226 of the Constitution more particularly when it comes to issue of writ of
certiorari.

50. The first cardinal principle of law that governs the exercise of extraordinary jurisdiction under
Article 226 of the Constitution, more particularly when it comes to the issue of a writ of certiorari is
that in granting such a writ, the High Court does not exercise the powers of Appellate Tribunal. It
does not review or reweigh the evidence upon which the determination of the inferior tribunal
purports to be based. It demolishes the order which it considers to be without jurisdiction or
palpably erroneous but does not substitute its own views for those of the inferior tribunal. The writ
of certiorari can be issued if an error of law is apparent on the face of the record. A writ of certiorari,
being a high prerogative writ, should not be issued on mere asking.

27

Central Council For Research In ... vs Bikartan Das on 16 August, 2023

51. The second cardinal principle of exercise of extraordinary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the
Constitution is that in a given case, even if some action or order challenged in the writ petition is
found to be illegal and invalid, the High Court while exercising its extraordinary jurisdiction
thereunder can refuse to upset it with a view to doing substantial justice between the parties. Article
226 of the Constitution grants an extraordinary remedy, which is essentially discretionary, although
founded on legal injury. It is perfectly open for the writ court, exercising this flexible power to pass
such orders as public interest dictates & equity projects. The legal formulations cannot be enforced
divorced from the realities of the fact situation of the case. While administering law, it is to be
tempered with equity and if the equitable situation demands after setting right the legal
formulations, not to take it to the logical end, the High Court would be failing in its duty if it does
not notice equitable consideration and mould the final order in exercise of its extraordinary
jurisdiction. Any other approach would render the High Court a normal court of appeal which it is
not.

52. The essential features of a writ of certiorari, including a brief history, have been very
exhaustively explained by B.K. Mukherjea, J. in T.C. Basappa v. T. Nagappa and Another, reported
in AIR 1954 SC 440. The Court held that a writ in the nature of certiorari could be issued in ‘all
appropriate cases and in appropriate manner’ so long as the broad and fundamental principles were
kept in mind. Those principles were delineated as follows:

“7. … In granting a writ of ‘certiorari’, the superior court does not exercise the powers
of an appellate tribunal. It does not review or reweigh the evidence upon which the
determination of the inferior tribunal purports to be based. It demolishes the order
which it considers to be without jurisdiction or palpably erroneous, but does not
substitute its own views for those of the inferior tribunal …..

8. The supervision of the superior court exercised through writs of certiorari goes on
two points, as has been expressed by Lord Summer in King v. Nat Bell Liquors
Limited [(1922) 2 AC 128, 156]. One is the area of inferior jurisdiction and the
qualifications and conditions of its exercise; the other is the observance of law in the
course of its exercise. ….

9. Certiorari may lie and is generally granted when a court has acted without or in
excess of its jurisdiction.”

53. Relying on T.C. Basappa (supra), the Constitution Bench of this Court in the case of Hari Vishnu
Kamath (supra), laid down the following propositions as well established:

“(1) Certiorari will be issued for correcting errors of jurisdiction, as when an inferior
court or tribunal acts without jurisdiction or in excess of it, or fails to exercise it. (2)
Certiorari will also be issued when the court or tribunal acts illegally in the exercise of
its undoubted jurisdiction, as when it decides without giving an opportunity to the
parties to be heard, or violates the principles of natural justice. (3) The court issuing a
writ of certiorari acts in exercise of a supervisory and not appellate jurisdiction. One

28

Central Council For Research In ... vs Bikartan Das on 16 August, 2023

consequence of this is that the court will not review findings of fact reached by the
inferior court or tribunal, even if they be erroneous.”

54. This Court explained that a court which has jurisdiction over a subject matter has jurisdiction to
decide wrong as well as right, and when the Legislature does not choose to confer a right of appeal
against that decision, it would be defeating its purpose and policy if a superior court were to rehear
the case on the evidence and substitute its own finding in certiorari.

55. In Syed Yakoob v. K.S. Radhakrishnan and Others, reported in AIR 1964 SC 477, P.B.
Gajendragadkar, CJ., speaking for the Constitution Bench, placed the matter beyond any position of
doubt by holding that a writ of certiorari can be issued for correcting errors of jurisdiction
committed by inferior courts or tribunals. The observations of this Court in para 7 are worth taking
note of:

“7. The question about the limits of the jurisdiction of High Courts in issuing a writ of
certiorari under Art. 226 has been frequently considered by this Court and the true
legal position in that behalf is no longer in doubt. A writ of certiorari can be issued for
correcting errors of jurisdiction committed by inferior courts or tribunals: these are
cases where orders are passed by inferior courts or tribunals without jurisdiction, or
is in excess of it, or as a result of failure to exercise jurisdiction. A writ can similarly
be issued where in exercise of jurisdiction conferred on it, the Court or Tribunal acts
illegally or improperly, as for instance, it decides a question without giving an
opportunity to be heard to the party affected by the order, or where the procedure
adopted in dealing with the dispute is opposed to principles of natural justice. There
is, however, no doubt that the jurisdiction to issue a writ of certiorari is a supervisory
jurisdiction and the Court exercising it is not entitled to act as an appellate Court.
This limitation necessarily means that findings of fact reached by the inferior Court
or Tribunal as result of the appreciation of evidence cannot be reopened or
questioned in writ proceedings. An error of law which is apparent on the face of the
record can be corrected by a writ, but not an error of fact, however grave it may
appear to be. In regard to a finding of fact recorded by the Tribunal, a writ of
certiorari can be issued if it is shown that in recording the said finding, the Tribunal
had erroneously refused to admit admissible and material evidence, or had
erroneously admitted inadmissible evidence which has influenced the impugned
finding. Similarly, if a finding of fact is based on no evidence, that would be regarded
as an error of law which can be corrected by a writ of certiorari. In dealing with this
category of cases, however, we must always bear in mind that a finding of fact
recorded by the Tribunal cannot be challenged in proceedings for a writ of certiorari
on the ground that the relevant and material evidence adduced before the Tribunal
was insufficient or inadequate to sustain the impugned finding. The adequacy or
sufficiency of evidence led on a point and the inference of fact to be drawn from the
said finding are within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Tribunal, and the said points
cannot be agitated before a writ Court. It is within these limits that the jurisdiction
conferred on the High Courts under Art. 226 to issue a writ of certiorari can be

29

Central Council For Research In ... vs Bikartan Das on 16 August, 2023

legitimately exercised…..”

56. In Surya Dev Rai v. Ram Chandra Rai and Others, reported in 2003 (6) SCC 675, a Bench of two
Judges held that the certiorari jurisdiction though available, should not be exercised as a matter of
course. The High Court would be justified in refusing the writ of certiorari if no failure of justice had
been occasioned. In exercising the certiorari jurisdiction, the procedure ordinarily followed by the
High Court is to command the inferior court or tribunal to certify its record or proceedings to the
High Court for its inspection so as to enable the High Court to determine, whether on the face of the
record the inferior court has committed any of the errors as explained by this Court in Hari Vishnu
Kamath v. Ahmad Ishaque and Others, AIR 1955 SC 233 occasioning failure of justice.

57. From the aforesaid, it could be said in terms of a jurisdictional error that want of jurisdiction
may arise from the nature of the subject matter so that the inferior court or tribunal might not have
the authority to enter on the inquiry. It may also arise from the absence of some essential
preliminary or jurisdictional fact. Where the jurisdiction of a body depends upon a preliminary
finding of fact in a proceeding for a writ of certiorari, the court may determine, whether or not that
finding of fact is correct. The reason is that by wrongly deciding such a fact, the court or tribunal
cannot give itself jurisdiction.

58. In Anisminic Ltd. v. Foreign Compensation Commission and Another, reported in (1969) 2 AC
147, the House of Lords has given a very broad connotation to the concept of ‘jurisdictional error’. It
has been laid down that a tribunal exceeds jurisdiction not only at the threshold when it enters into
an inquiry which it is not entitled to undertake, but it may enter into an enquiry within its
jurisdiction in the first instance and then do something which would deprive it of its jurisdiction and
render its decision a nullity. In the words of Lord Reid:

“But there are many cases where, although the tribunal had jurisdiction to enter on
the enquiry, it has done or failed to do something in the course of the enquiry which
is of such a nature that its decision is a nullity. It may have given its decision in bad
faith. It may have made a decision which it had no power to make. It may have failed
in the course of the enquiry to comply with the requirements of natural justice. It
may in perfect good faith have misconstrued the provisions giving it power to act so
that it failed to deal with the question remitted to it and decided some question which
was not remitted to it. It may have refused to take into account something which it
was required to take into account. Or it may have based its decision on some matter
which, under the provisions setting it up, it had no right to take into account. I do not
intend this list to be exhaustive.”

59. So far as the errors of law are concerned, a writ of certiorari could be issued if an error of law is
apparent on the face of the record. To attract the writ of certiorari, a mere error of law is not
sufficient. It must be one which is manifest or patent on the face of the record. Mere formal or
technical errors, even of law, are not sufficient, so as to attract a writ of certiorari. As reminded by
this Court time and again, this concept is indefinite and cannot be defined precisely or exhaustively
and so it has to be determined judiciously on the facts of each case. The concept, according to this

30

Central Council For Research In ... vs Bikartan Das on 16 August, 2023

Court in K.M. Shanmugam v. The S.R.V.S. (P) Ltd. and Others, reported in AIR 1963 SC 1626, ‘is
comprised of many imponderables… it is not capable of precise definition, as no objective criterion
could be laid down, the apparent nature of the error, to a large extent, being dependent upon the
subjective element.’ A general test to apply, however, is that no error could be said to be apparent on
the face of the record if it is not ‘self-evident’ or ‘manifest’. If it requires an examination or argument
to establish it, if it has to be established by a long drawn out process of reasoning, or lengthy or
complicated arguments, on points where there may considerably be two opinions, then such an
error would cease to be an error of law. (See : Satyanarayan Laxminarayan Hegde and Others v.
Mallikarjun Bhavanappa Tirumale, reported in AIR 1960 SC 137.)

60. However, in our opinion, such a test should not be applied in a straitjacket formula and may fail
because what might be considered by one Judge as an error self-evident, might not be considered so
by another Judge.

61. At this stage, it may not be out of place to remind ourselves of the observations of this Court in
Syed Yakoob (supra) on this point, which are as follows:

“Where it is manifest or clear that the conclusion of law recorded by an inferior court
or tribunal is based on an obvious misinterpretation of the relevant statutory
provision, or something in ignorance of it, or may be even in disregard of it, or is
expressly founded on reasons which are wrong in law, the said conclusion can be
corrected by a writ of certiorari. Certiorari would also not lie to correct mere errors of
fact even though such errors may be apparent on the face of the record. The writ
jurisdiction is supervisory and the court exercising it is not to act as an appellate
court. It is well settled that the writ court would not re-appreciate the evidence and
substitute its own conclusion of fact for that recorded by the adjudicating body, be it
a court or a tribunal. A finding of fact, howsoever erroneous, recorded by a court or a
tribunal cannot be challenged in proceedings for certiorari on the ground that the
relevant and material evidence adduced before the court or the tribunal was
insufficient or inadequate to sustain the impugned finding.

It is also well settled that adequacy or sufficiency of evidence led on a point and the
inference of fact to be drawn from the said finding are within the exclusive
jurisdiction of the tribunal and these points cannot be agitated before the writ court.”

62. In the aforesaid context, it will be profitable for us to refer to the decision of this Court in the
case of Indian Overseas Bank v. I.O.B. Staff Canteen Workers' Union and Another, reported in AIR
2000 SC 1508. This Court observed as under:

“… The findings of fact recorded by a fact-finding authority duly constituted for the
purpose and which ordinarily should be considered to have become final, cannot be
disturbed for the mere reason of having been based on materials or evidence not
sufficient or credible in the opinion of the writ Court to warrant those findings at any
rate, as long as they are based upon such materials which are relevant for the purpose

31

Central Council For Research In ... vs Bikartan Das on 16 August, 2023

or even on the ground that there is yet another view which can be reasonably and
possibly undertaken. …”

63. However, we may clarify that findings of fact based on ‘no evidence’ or purely on surmises and
conjectures or which are perverse points could be challenged by way of a certiorari as such findings
could be regarded as an error of law.

64. Thus, from the various decisions referred to above, we have no hesitation in reaching to the
conclusion that a writ of certiorari is a high prerogative writ and should not be issued on mere
asking. For the issue of a writ of certiorari, the party concerned has to make out a definite case for
the same and is not a matter of course. To put it pithily, certiorari shall issue to correct errors of
jurisdiction, that is to say, absence, excess or failure to exercise and also when in the exercise of
undoubted jurisdiction, there has been illegality. It shall also issue to correct an error in the decision
or determination itself, if it is an error manifest on the face of the proceedings. By its exercise, only a
patent error can be corrected but not also a wrong decision. It should be well remembered at the
cost of repetition that certiorari is not appellate but only supervisory.

65. A writ of certiorari, being a high prerogative writ, is issued by a superior court in respect of the
exercise of judicial or quasi-judicial functions by another authority when the contention is that the
exercising authority had no jurisdiction or exceeded the jurisdiction. It cannot be denied that the
tribunals or the authorities concerned in this batch of appeals had the jurisdiction to deal with the
matter. However, the argument would be that the tribunals had acted arbitrarily and illegally and
that they had failed to give proper findings on the facts and circumstances of the case. We may only
say that while adjudicating a writ-application for a writ of certiorari, the court is not sitting as a
court of appeal against the order of the tribunals to test the legality thereof with a view to reach a
different conclusion. If there is any evidence, the court will not examine whether the right
conclusion is drawn from it or not. It is a well-established principle of law that a writ of certiorari
will not lie where the order or decision of a tribunal or authority is wrong in matter of facts or on
merits. (See: King v. Nat Bell Liquors Ltd., (1922) 2 AC 128 (PC))

66. We may quote with profit a decision of this Court in the case of Satyanarayan Laxminarayan
Hegde (supra) to understand the true purport and meaning of an error apparent on the face of the
record or an error which could be termed as self-evident. The facts of that case were as below:

67. The respondent made an application in the Revenue Court of the Mamlatdar of Sirsi praying for
the delivery of possession of property which the appellant was on that date possessing as the tenant
under him on the basis of a ‘Mulegeni’ deed executed by the respondent's predecessor-in-interest in
favour of the appellant's predecessor-in- interest. The case was governed by the Bombay Tenancy
and Agricultural Lands Act, 1948, and one of the questions in controversy was whether before
applying for the delivery of possession, it was incumbent upon the respondent to have given a notice
terminating the tenancy. The Mamlatdar made an order for possession in favour of the respondent.
The Collector allowed the appeal and set aside the order of the Mamlatdar. The Bombay Revenue
Tribunal, to whom the matter was taken up on appeal, held that as the respondent had failed to
terminate the tenancy by notice before instituting the action for ejectment, he was not entitled to

32

entertain the application for recovery of possession.

Central Council For Research In ... vs Bikartan Das on 16 August, 2023

68. Thereafter, the respondent made an application to the High Court of Bombay under Article 227
of the Constitution of India for the quashing of the order of the Revenue Tribunal and the Collector
and for the restoration of the order of the Mamlatdar. The High Court was of the opinion that the
Tribunal had committed an error which was apparent on the face of the record in holding that an
order of possession could not be made unless a notice terminating the tenancy had been given
before the institution of the proceeding and it issued a writ of certiorari quashing the order of the
Tribunal and restoring that of the Mamlatdar.

69. An appeal was filed against the order of the High Court and this Court reversed that order on the
ground that the alleged error in the judgment of the Bombay Revenue Tribunal, namely that an
order for possession should not be made unless a previous notice required by Section 14 of the
Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1948, had been given, was not an error apparent on
the face of the record so as to be capable of being corrected by a writ of certiorari and the following
observations were made by this Court:

“17.…. An error which has to be established by a long drawn process of reasoning on
points where there may conceivably be two opinions can hardly be said to be an error
apparent on the face of the record. As the above discussion of the rival contentions
show the alleged error in the present case is far from self-evident and if it can be
established, it has to be established by lengthy and complicated arguments. We do
not think such an error can be cured by a writ of certiorari according to the rule
governing the powers of the superior court to issue such a writ. .…”

70. We may also quote with profit one more decision of this Court explaining the true scope of issue
of a writ of certiorari and what is an error apparent on the face of the record, which could be
corrected by issue of a high prerogative writ like certiorari. In the case of Ebrahim Aboobakar and
Hawabai Aboobakar v. The Custodian General of Evacuee Property, New Delhi, reported in (1952) 1
SCC 798, this Court made the observations in paras 12, 13, 14 and 15, which we quote below:

“12. The remaining three questions canvassed before us, unless they are of such a
nature as would make the decision of the respondent dated 13-5-1950, a nullity,
cannot be the subject-matter of a writ of certiorari. It is plain that such a writ cannot
be granted to quash the decision of an inferior court within its jurisdiction on the
ground that the decision is wrong. Indeed, it must be shown before such a writ is
issued that the authority which passed the order acted without jurisdiction or in
excess of it or in violation of the principles of natural justice. Want of jurisdiction
may arise from the nature of the subject-matter, so that the inferior court might not
have authority to enter on the inquiry or upon some part of it. It may also arise from
the absence of some essential preliminary or upon the existence of some particular
facts collateral to the actual matter which the court has to try and which are
conditions precedent to the assumption of jurisdiction by it. But once it is held that
the court has jurisdiction but while exercising it, it made a mistake, the wronged

33

Central Council For Research In ... vs Bikartan Das on 16 August, 2023

party can only take the course prescribed by law for setting matters right inasmuch as
a court has jurisdiction to decide rightly as well as wrongly. The three questions
agitated before us do not seem to be questions which bear upon the jurisdiction of the
court of appeal, or its authority to entertain them.

13. It was contended that no court of limited jurisdiction can give itself jurisdiction by
a wrong decision on a point collateral to the merits of the case upon which the limit of
its jurisdiction depends and that the questions involved in the appeal before the
respondent were collateral to the merits of the case. As pointed out by Lord Esher,
M.R., in R. v. CIT [R. v. CIT, (1888) LR 21 QBD 313 (CA)] , the formula enunciated
above is quite plain but its application is often misleading. The learned Master of the
Rolls classified the cases under two categories thus : (QBD pp. 319-20) “… When an
inferior court or tribunal or body, which has to exercise the power of deciding facts, is
first established by Act of Parliament, the legislature has to consider what powers it
will give that tribunal or body. It may in effect say that, if a certain state of facts exists
and is shown to such tribunal or body before it proceeds to do certain things, it shall
have jurisdiction to do such things, but not otherwise.

There it is not for them conclusively to decide whether that state of facts exists, and, if they exercise
the jurisdiction without its existence, what they do may be questioned, and it will be held that they
have acted without jurisdiction. But there is another state of things which may exist. The legislature
may entrust the tribunal or body with a jurisdiction which includes the jurisdiction to determine
whether the preliminary state of facts exists as well as the jurisdiction, [and] on finding that it does
exist, to proceed further or do something more. When the legislature are establishing such a tribunal
or body with limited jurisdiction, they also have to consider, whatever jurisdiction they give them,
whether there shall be any appeal from their decision, for otherwise there will be none. In the
second of the two cases, I have mentioned it is erroneous application of the formula to say that the
tribunal cannot give themselves jurisdiction by wrongly deciding certain facts to exist, because the
legislature gave them jurisdiction to determine all the facts including the existence of the
preliminary facts on which the further exercise of their jurisdiction depends; and if they were given
jurisdiction so to decide, without any appeal being given, there is no appeal from such exercise of
their jurisdiction.”

14. The tribunal constituted to hear appeals under Section 24 has been constituted in these terms:

“Any person aggrieved by an order made under Section 7, Section 16, Section 19 or
Section 38 may prefer an appeal in such manner and within such time as may be
prescribed —

(a) to the Custodian, where the original order has been passed by a Deputy or
Assistant Custodian;

(b) to the Custodian General, where the original order has been passed by the
Custodian, an Additional Custodian or an authorised Deputy Custodian.”

34

Central Council For Research In ... vs Bikartan Das on 16 August, 2023

15. Like all courts of appeal exercising general jurisdiction in civil cases, the respondent has been
constituted an appellate court in words of the widest amplitude and the legislature has not limited
his jurisdiction by providing that such exercise will depend on the existence of any particular state of
facts. Ordinarily, a court of appeal has not only jurisdiction to determine the soundness of the
decision of the inferior court as a court of error, but by the very nature of things it has also
jurisdiction to determine any points raised before it in the nature of preliminary issues by the
parties. Such jurisdiction is inherent in its very constitution as a court of appeal. Whether an appeal
is competent, whether a party has locus standi to prefer it, whether the appeal in substance is from
one or another order and whether it has been preferred in proper form and within the time
prescribed, are all matters for the decision of the appellate court so constituted. Such a tribunal falls
within Class 2 of the classification of the Master of the Rolls [R. v. CIT, (1888) LR 21 QBD 313 (CA)]
. In these circumstances, it seems to us that the order of the High Court of Punjab that a writ of
certiorari could not be issued to the respondent quashing the order of 13-5-1950, was right. We are
further of the opinion that none of the contentions raised has any merit whatsoever.”

71. This Court in Parry and Company Limited v. Commercial Employees’ Association, Madras and
Another (1952) 1 SCC 449 : AIR 1952 SC 179, held:

“14. The records of the case do not disclose any error apparent on the face of the
proceeding or any irregularity in the procedure adopted by the Labour Commissioner
which goes contrary to the principles of natural justice. Thus there was absolutely no
grounds here which would justify a superior court in issuing a writ of certiorari for
removal of an order or proceeding of an inferior tribunal vested with powers to
exercise judicial or quasi-judicial functions. What the High Court has done really is to
exercise the powers of an appellate court and correct what it considered to be an
error in the decision of the Labour Commissioner. This obviously it cannot do. The
position might have been different if the Labour Commissioner had omitted to decide
a matter which he was bound to decide and in such cases a mandamus might
legitimately issue commanding the authority to determine questions which it left
undecided [Board of Education v. Rice, 1911 AC 179 (HL)] ; but no certiorari is
available to quash a decision passed with jurisdiction by an inferior tribunal on the
mere ground that such decision is erroneous. The judgment of the High Court,
therefore, in our opinion, is plainly unsustainable.

(Emphasis supplied)

72. In another case, the same Court held:

““A certiorari cannot be granted to quash the decision of the appellate tribunal on
these points on the ground that the decision is wrong” - ‘Ebrahim Aboobakar v. The
Custodian General of Evacuee Property’, 1952 Mad W.N. 502 (SC).”

73. It is, therefore, clear that in all findings on matters of fact and interpretation of law except in
cases of defective jurisdiction, the decision of the tribunal must be deemed to be final.

35

Central Council For Research In ... vs Bikartan Das on 16 August, 2023

74. The position is authoritatively summed up in Halsbury's Laws of England Vol.IX in para 1493
where it is laid down thus:

“1493. Where the proceedings are regular upon their face and the magistrates had
jurisdiction, the superior court will not grant the writ of certiorari on the ground that
the Court below has misconceived a point of law. When the Court below has
jurisdiction to decide a matter, it cannot be deemed to exceed or abuse its
jurisdiction, merely because it incidentally misconstrues a statute, or admits illegal
evidence, or rejects legal evidence, or misdirects itself as to the weight of the
evidence, or convicts without evidence. Nor will certiorari be granted to quash the
decision of an inferior court within its jurisdiction on the ground that the decision is
wrong in matters of fact, and the Court will not hear evidence impeaching the
decision on the facts. ….”

75. Similarly in the case reported in - ‘Colonial Bank of Australasia v. Willan’, (1874) LR 5 PC 417, it
is observed by their Lordships thus: “The question is whether the inferior court has jurisdiction to
enter upon the enquiry and not whether there has been miscarriage of the procedure in the course of
enquiry.” At page 443 of the same case, the learned Judges observed - “An adjudication by a Judge
having jurisdiction over the subject-matter is, if no defect appears on the face of it, to be taken as
conclusive of facts stated therein. “The case in (1874) LR 5 PC 417 has been approvingly cited by Fazl
Ali, J. who held - ‘Rai Brij Raj Krishna and Another v.

Messrs S.K. Shaw and Brothers’, AIR 1951 SC 115 that an error of law does not constitute an error of
jurisdiction and that a wrong decision on facts or law cannot be questioned in a civil Court.

76. It being open to the tribunals to come to one or the other conclusion on the materials before
them, it cannot by any means be said that the decisions are incorrect so as to attract the
extraordinary jurisdiction for interference by a writ of certiorari. In a King's Bench decision in R. v.
Brighton and Area Rent Tribunal, (1950) 1 All England Reporter 946, Lord Goddard, CJ. observed
that:

“… As the tribunal had observed all the formalities of the Act, had offended against
none of its provisions or against the regulations made under it, there was no ground
for holding that the tribunal's determination was not in accordance with law, and,
therefore, the motions for certiorari and mandamus should be refused”.

77. The purpose of certiorari, as we understand, is only to confine the inferior tribunals within their
jurisdiction, so as to avoid the irregular exercise, or the non-exercise or the illegal assumption of it
and not to correct errors of finding of fact or interpretation of law committed by them in the exercise
of powers vested in them under the statute. The accepted rule is that where a Court has jurisdiction
it has a right to decide every question which crops up in the case and whether its decision is correct
or otherwise, it is bound to stand until reversed by a competent Court. This Court in G. Veerappa
Pillai v. Messrs Raman and Raman Ltd. Kumbakonam, Tanjore District and Others, (1952) 1 SCC
334 observed:

36

Central Council For Research In ... vs Bikartan Das on 16 August, 2023

“26. Such writs as are referred to in Article 226 are obviously intended to enable the
High Court to issue them in grave cases where the subordinate tribunals or bodies or
officers act wholly without jurisdiction, or in excess of it, or in violation of the
principles of natural justice, or refuse to exercise a jurisdiction vested in them, or
there is an error apparent on the face of the record, and such act, omission, error, or
excess has resulted in manifest injustice. However extensive the jurisdiction may be,
it seems to us that it is not so wide or large as to enable the High Court to convert
itself into a court of appeal and examine for itself the correctness of the decision
impugned and decide what is the proper view to be taken or the order to be made.”

78. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we have reached to the conclusion that the impugned order
passed by the High Court is not sustainable in law and the same deserves to be set aside.

79. In the result, the present appeal is allowed. The impugned order passed by the High Court dated
17.12.2020 in the Writ Petition (C) No. 30620 of 2020 is set aside.

80. No order as to costs.

81. The interim application filed by the intervenors also stands disposed.

……………………………….. CJI.

(Dr. Dhananjaya Y. Chandrachud) ……………………………….. J.

(J.B. Pardiwala) New Delhi;

August 16, 2023.

37