Commissioner Of Customs, Central ... vs M/S Suzlon Energy Ltd. on 10 April, 2023

Commissioner Of Customs, Central ... vs M/S Suzlon Energy
Ltd. on 10 April, 2023

Author: M.R. Shah

Bench: Krishna Murari, M.R. Shah

REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NOS.11400-11401/2018

COMMISSIONER OF CUSTOMS, CENTRAL
EXCISE & SERVICE TAX        …APPELLANT

Versus

M/S SUZLON ENERGY LTD.                  …RESPONDENT

JUDGMENT

M.R. SHAH, J.

1. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment and order dated 02.05.2018
passed by the Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal, West Zonal Bench at Mumbai
(hereinafter referred to as the ‘CESTAT’) in Appeal Nos. ST/87589 & 87590/2013, by which the
CESTAT has allowed the said appeals preferred by the respondent – M/s Suzlon Energy Limited
(hereinafter referred to as the ‘respondent’) and has held that “Engineering Design & Drawings” of
various models imported by the respondent for the purpose of manufacturing of Wind Turbine
Generator (for short, ‘WTG’) are not leviable to service tax under the category of “Design Services”
as defined under Section 65(35b) read with Section 65(105)(zzzzd) of the Finance Act, 1994 during
the period June, 2007 to September, 2010, the Revenue has preferred the present appeals.

2. That the respondent herein was providing various taxable services. The respondent was also in
the manufacture of WTG. It has three subsidiary companies situated in Germany and Netherlands
with whom product development and purchase agreement had been entered into.

2.1 The respondent had entered into an agreement dated 01.04.2007 (w.e.f. 01.01.2007) with M/s
Suzlon Energy GmbH, Germany, a sister concern for the product development and purchase
agreement to be used exclusively for manufacturing of WTG in the territory of India. The products
were exclusively defined in para 1.10 of the said agreement.

1

Commissioner Of Customs, Central ... vs M/S Suzlon Energy Ltd. on 10 April, 2023

2.2 The respondent, while importing these designs filed Bill of Entry with the Custom authorities
and classified the same as “Paper” under Chapter Sub-heading No. 49119920 of the Customs Tariff
and claimed benefit of ‘Nil’ rate of customs duty under Notification No. 021/2002 for BCD and
Notification No. 020/2006 for CVD. That respondent claimed that since the designs and drawings
received by it vis customs route by filing the Bill of Entry were “goods” and not “services”, it was not
required to pay the service tax.

2.3 During the course of audit, it was noticed that the respondent had not paid service tax on
“Engineering Design & Drawings” of various models, used in the manufacturing of WTG, which was
classifiable under the category of “Design Services” for the period from June, 2007 to September,
2010.

2.4 The appellant herein – Commissioner of Customs, Central Excise and Service Tax, Pune issued a
show cause notice dated 15.12.2001 to the respondent calling upon it to show cause as to why the
service tax to the tune of Rs.18,42,99,652/- on the value of taxable services provided by it under the
provisions of Section 73 of Chapter V of the Finance Act and cess under Section 85 of Chapter VI of
the Finance Act be not demanded. The respondent was also called upon to pay the interest leviable
under Section 75 and penalty under Section 76 and 78 of the Finance Act. For the subsequent period
, i.e., October, 2010 to September, 2011, another show cause notice was issued on 20.04.2012
demanding service tax of Rs.3,36,28,515/- on the value of “design service” from M/s SEG and M/s
Suzlon Blade Technology, Netherlands.

2.5 Vide Order-in-original dated 25.03.2012, the Commissioner – appellant herein confirmed the
demands made in the show cause notices as provider of “design services” taxable under Section
65(105)(zzzzd) and in accordance with the definition of the services in Section 65(35b) of the
Finance Act, 1994. The Commissioner also levied interest as well as the penalty. 2.6 Aggrieved by the
Order-in-original passed by the Commissioner confirming the demands of service tax and also
levying the interest and penalty, the respondent filed appeals before the CESTAT. By the impugned
common order, the CESTAT has allowed the said appeals, relying upon its earlier decision in the
case of Sojitz Corporation v. Commissioner of Service Tax, New Delhi, reported in 2009 (14) STR
642 (Tri. Delhi) and has held that the said design and drawings are ‘goods’ and not ‘service’. The
CESTAT has also observed and held that the taxation of goods and that of services are mutually and
explicitly conceived levies, and therefore the same activity cannot be taxed as goods and as services.
Consequently, the CESTAT has set aside the Order-in-original on the ground that “drawing and
design” are to be treated as goods and therefore it cannot be treated as service. 2.7 Feeling aggrieved
and dissatisfied with the impugned common order passed by the CESTAT, the Revenue has
preferred the present appeals.

3. Shri N. Venkataraman, learned Additional Solicitor General of India appearing on behalf of the
Revenue has submitted that the substantial question of law arises for the consideration of this Court
is, “whether “Engineering Design & Drawings” of various models imported by the respondent for the
purpose of manufacturing of WTG are leviable to service tax under the category of “Design Services”
as defined under section 65(35b) r/w section 65(105)(zzzzd) of the Finance Act, 1994 during the
period June, 2007 to September, 2010?

2

Commissioner Of Customs, Central ... vs M/S Suzlon Energy Ltd. on 10 April, 2023

3.1 Shri N. Venkataraman, learned ASG has submitted that the contentions of the respondent that
any intellectual property put in a media at all times would only get classified as ‘goods’ and never as
‘services’ may not be the correct statement of law. It is submitted that merely because the
intellectual property put in a media, it would not per se make them goods. It would depend on
whether the contracting parties have understood it as a transfer or a sale of goods. It is submitted
that importation of a set of tailor made or readymade drawings will constitute a sale of goods,
whereas if a person engages a painter to draw a picture of his choice and to his specifications and the
delivery of the painting, even though on a canvas duly framed, may only constitute to a service, since
the painter has engaged his entire intellectual effort in drawing the painting for a particular
customer and to his specifications and as he progresses with the painting, the same is for a specific
customer.

3.2 It is submitted that this can also happen in the case of “designs & drawings”. It is submitted that
a set of tailor made drawings and designs or readymade drawings and designs would constitute a
distinct clause when compared to preparation of drawings and designs under a contract of service
for a specific customer to suit his specifications. 3.3 Shri N. Venkataraman, learned ASG has heavily
relied upon the decision of this Court in the case of BSNL v. Union of India, reported in (2006) 3
SCC 1 (paras 44 & 45), in support of his submission on the distinction between sale of goods and a
contract of service. On the decision of this Court in the case of BSNL (supra) and the distinction
between sale of goods and a contract of service, Shri N. Venkataraman has made the following
submissions:

a) it held that sale in the conventional sense would mean the Gannon Dunkerly test
and, deemed sale involving both goods and services would be limited only to a work
contract and food contract;

b) It made it clear that Article 366(29A) does not give a license to assume that a
transaction is a sale and then to look around for what could be the goods. This would
be an incorrect approach since the expression goods had not been altered by the 46 th
amendment and the ingredients of sale continues to have the same definition;

c) However, this does not mean that the content of the concepts remain static, and
the Courts must move with times;

d) It proceeded to hold that Article 366(29A) does not seek to cover hospital services,
lawyer services and other professional services, where during the course of rendering
such services, there may be a transfer of goods;

e) Treatment of a patient in a hospital and administration of pills in the course of a
treatment would not tantamount to sale;

f) When a doctor writes out and hands over a prescription or a lawyer drafts a
document and delivers it to his/her client, strictly speaking, with a payment of fees,
consideration does not pass from the patient or client to the doctor or lawyer for the

3

Commissioner Of Customs, Central ... vs M/S Suzlon Energy Ltd. on 10 April, 2023

documents in both the cases;

g) However, these are mere services and do not involve a sale for the purposes of
Entry 54 List 2;

h) The reason is that ultimately one has to apply the Gannon Dunkerly test. If there is
an instrument of contract which may be composite in form, in any case other than the
exceptions in Article 366(29A), unless the transaction in truth represents two distinct
and separate contracts and is discernible as such, then the State would not have the
power to separate the agreement to sell from the agreement to render service and
impose tax on sale;

i) The test, therefore, for service contracts, other than the two contracts falling under
Article 366(29A), would be ‘did the parties have in mine or intend separate rights
arising out of the sale of goods? If there was no such intention, there is no sale even if
the contract could be disintegrated.’; and

j) The test for deciding whether a contract falls into one category or another is, as
what is the substance of the contract otherwise called, the dominant nature test.

3.4 It is submitted that therefore what is required to be considered is, did the contracting parties
intend transfer of both goods and services, either separately or in an indivisible manner or in a
composite manner. 3.5 Shri N. Venkataraman, learned ASG has also submitted the following
illustrations in support of his submission that the “Engineering Design & Drawings” of various
models imported by the respondent for the purpose of manufacture of WTG are leviable to service
tax and cannot be taxed as goods:

i) If a contracting parties A and B agree to the purchase of a huge boiler for erection,
installation and commission in a factory, the intention of the contracting parties
would envisage the sale of a boiler as goods and a rendition of erection, installation
and commissioning as services. This contract can be either divisible, indivisible or
composite. Whatever may be the nature of the contract, the intending parties have
contracted for both the sale of goods and the rendition of service.

ii) A patient is under medical treatment at a hospital and the doctor had advised for a
heart surgery and insertion of a stent. Here again, it involves two elements. The
transfer of the stent from the hospital into the body of the patient and the rendition
of medical services by the doctor through the hospital. Even though it involves both
goods (stends) and services (medical services/hospital services), the contracting
parties, namely, the patient and the hospital, do not intend to buy and sell a stent and
also a rendition of medical services as 2 items of sale and service. The contract is
essentially for the rendition of medical services and in the course of rendition, based
on the advice of the doctor, a stent is inserted into the body of the patient.

4

Commissioner Of Customs, Central ... vs M/S Suzlon Energy Ltd. on 10 April, 2023

3.6 Making above submissions, it is prayed to allow the present appeals.

4. Shri V. Sridharan, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent has submitted
that the precise question involved in the present appeal is, “whether service tax can be levied on
pure sale (not deemed sale) of customises drawings/designs contained in a medium prepared as per
the specifications given by the customer.” 4.1 It is submitted that as per the settled position of law,
supply of goods as per specifications given by the customer is also treated as sale of goods. 4.2 It is
submitted that the first question is, whether supply of goods as per specifications given by the
customer is a contract of sale of goods or merely a contract for work on labour. It is submitted that
in the case of Hindustan Shipyard Ltd. v. State of A.P., reported in (2000) 6 SCC 579, it is held that
if the thing to be delivered has any individual existence before the delivery as the sole property of the
party who is to deliver it, then it is a sale. Further, if the bulk of material used in construction
belongs to the manufacturer who sells the end product for a price, then it is a strong pointer to the
conclusion that the contract is in substance one for the sale of goods and not one for labour.

4.3 Learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent has heavily relied upon the
decision of this Court in the case of Associated Cement Companies Ltd. v. Commissioner of
Customs, reported in (2001) 4 SCC 593. It is submitted that in the said decision, this Court has held
that any media which contain drawings or designs would be regarded as goods under the provisions
of the Customs Act. It is observed that these items are movable goods and would be covered by
Section 2(22)(e) of the Customs Act. It is observed and held that the fact that the technology or ideas
is tailormade would not make any difference.

4.4 It is submitted by Shri V. Sridharan, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the
respondent that it may be true that the decision of this Court in the case of Associated Cement
Companies Ltd. (supra) may not be an authority for the proposition that service tax cannot be levied
on pure sale of goods, the said decision is certainly an authority for the proposition that designs on a
medium will be treated as goods under the natural definition of goods. It is submitted that the said
decision is also an authority for the proposition that the amount paid by the importer to the original
supplier is nothing but price for sale of such goods.

4.5 Shri V. Sridharan, learned senior counsel has also relied upon the Constitution Bench decision of
this Court in the case of Tata Consultancy Services v. State of A.P., reported in (2005) 1 SCC 308. It
is submitted that in the said decision, the question was, as to whether canned software soled by the
appellants can be termed to be “goods” and as such assessable to sales tax under the Andhra
Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, 1957. It is submitted that in the said decision, this Court affirmed the
decision in the case of Associated Cement Companies Ltd. (supra) and held that intellectual
property, once it is put on to a media, whether it be in the form of books or canvas (in case of
painting) or computer discs or cassettes and marketed would become “goods.” 4.6 It is further
submitted that the intent of service tax legislation is not to levy service tax on sale of goods. It is
submitted that sales tax is levied on sale of goods whereas the service tax is levied on provision of
service. It is submitted that therefore a transfer of goods for a price cannot be subject to service tax.

5

Commissioner Of Customs, Central ... vs M/S Suzlon Energy Ltd. on 10 April, 2023

4.7 It is submitted that it is true that different aspects of a transaction can be taxed through separate
provisions. The aspect theory permits taxation of two different aspects or features of a transaction.
For instance, in a catering contract, supply of food was subject to value added tax and the service
aspect was subject to service tax. However, in the case of BSNL (supra), this Court has observed that
the aspect theory does not allow the value of goods to be included in services and vice versa.

Reliance is placed on the observations made in para 88 of the said judgment.

4.8 It is further submitted by Shri V. Sridharan, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the
respondent that before the CESTAT, the respondent raised a specific ground that the services (if
any) rendered by a foreign entity will not fall within the purview of “design services”. The
respondent also raised a specific ground that the extended period of limitation cannot be invoked.
However, though the said submissions have been noted be the CESTAT, the CESTAT has not dealt
with those contentions and therefore it is prayed that the matter may be remanded to the CESTAT
to decide all these questions.

5. We have heard learned counsel for the respective parties at length.

The issue to be decided in the present appeals is “whether activity of import of “Engineering Design
& Drawings” from the sister companies by the notice during the period under dispute i.e., June,
2007 to September, 2010 is classifiable under taxable category “design services” under section
65(35b) read with Section 65(105) (zzzzd) of the Finance Act, 1994 .

5.1 While considering the aforesaid issue, the definition of “design services” under the Finance Act,
1994, as it stood during the impugned period, is required to be considered, which reads as under:

SECTION 65. Definitions. -In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,
……….

(36b) design services" includes services provided in relation to designing of furniture,
consumer products, industrial products, packages, logos, graphics, websites and
corporate identity designing and production of three dimensional models:

……….

(105) (zzzzd) "taxable service" means any service provided or to be provided, (zzzzd)
to any person, by any other person in relation to design services, but does not include
service provided by-

(i) an interior decorator referred to in sub- clause (q);

and

(ii) a fashion designer in relation to fashion designing referred to in sub-clause (zv):

6

Commissioner Of Customs, Central ... vs M/S Suzlon Energy Ltd. on 10 April, 2023

and the term "service provider" shall be construed accordingly.” Thus, it can be seen
that the definition of “design services” is a wide and conclusive one, specifically
excluding only fashion design and interior designing, which were already taxable
under separate taxable category.

6. In the present case, the respondent was engaged in manufacture of Wind Turbine Generator
(WTG). It entered into ‘product development and purchase agreement’ with three of its sister
companies. Relevant clauses of the agreement, more particularly which defined the ‘product’ read as
under:

1.10.1 'Design and Development' of all models of rated capacity geared WTG together
with all related and pertinent components and therein required;

1.10.2 'Design and Development' of 'Suzlon Flexislip System' together with all related
and pertinent components and therein required;

1.10.3 All and any products that is developed by M/s SEG conceived (whether or not
actually conceived during regular business hours), discovered, or made by M/s SEG
and its agents and employees during the course of performing its obligations under
the Agreement;

1.10.4 Documentation including material and documents containing studies planning
activities, manufacturing process details in respect of above.

1.10.5 All modifications made to the above, from time to time, and all other
improvements developed and incorporated within the above.

1.10.6 Intellectual property and intellectual property rights relating thereto in so far it
belongs to German Inventions Law.

7. At this stage, it is required to be noted that the said designs were to be exclusively used by the
respondent in the territory of India and it was a tailormade design. The respondent engaged the
sister concern M/s SEG for the activity of “Engineering Design & Drawings” used in manufacturing
of WTG, that was reduced as blue print on paper and delivered to the respondent on the same
medium. Such “designs” were subjected to the service tax even as per the clarification by the Board
dated 18.03.2011 on the issue of applicability of indirect taxes on packaged software. Therefore, as
such, the respondent was liable to pay service tax on the “design services” received from abroad
under reverse charge. It was also found that M/s SEG was a related unit, i.e., subsidiary of the
assessee and the amount received for service by M/s SEG from the assessee-respondent for the said
“Engineering design & drawings” services therefore was liable to service tax under reverse charge in
terms of the concept of ‘associated enterprise’.

8. Despite the above, M/s SEG raised the invoice/bill on the assessee treating it as ‘paper’. However,
when the said bill of entry was presented treating the same as ‘paper’ for which the duty payable was

7

Commissioner Of Customs, Central ... vs M/S Suzlon Energy Ltd. on 10 April, 2023

‘Nil’. Therefore, neither any custom duty was paid due to exemption from payment of duty treating
it as ‘paper’ nor the service tax was paid. By a detailed judgment and order, the Commissioner held
that the respondent was liable to pay the service tax under taxable category ‘”design services”.
However, by the impugned judgment and order, the CESTAT has held that the respondent is not
liable to pay the service tax under “design services” under the Finance Act, 1994 mainly on the
ground that the custom authority considered the same as ‘goods’ and therefore the same activity
cannot be taxed as ‘goods’ and ‘services’. The aforesaid view is absolutely erroneous. As observed
and held by this Court in the case of BSNL (supra), there can be two different taxes/levies under
different heads by applying the aspect theory. As per the settled position of law now, the same
activity can be taxed as ‘goods’ and ‘services’ provided the contract is indivisible and on the aspect of
services there may be levy of service tax. The aforesaid aspect has not at all been considered by the
CESTAT while passing the impugned judgment and order. As observed hereinabove, the definition
of “design services” is very clear and it is wide enough to cover all “design services.” Merely because
“Engineering Design & Drawings” prepared and supplied by sister company were shown as ‘goods’
under the Customs Act and in the bill of entry, by that itself cannot be a ground to take such services
out of the definition of “design services” under the Finance Act, 1994.

9. Even otherwise, as observed by this Court in the case of BSNL (supra), there is a distinction
between the sale of goods and a contract of service. What is relevant is the intention of the
contracting parties and whether the contracting parties intend transfer of both goods and services,
either separately or in an indivisible manner or in a composite manner. The issue is squarely
covered by the decision of this Court in the case of BSNL(supra) against the assessee and in favour
of the revenue. Therefore, the view taken by the CESTAT that the same activity cannot be taxed as
goods and services is absolutely erroneous. Nothing further has been discussed by the CESTAT,
more particularly on the findings recorded by the Commissioner recorded from para 20 onwards.
Under the circumstances, the impugned judgment and order passed by the CESTAT setting aside
the levy of service tax is unsustainable and the same deserves to be quashed and set aside.

However, at the same time, as other grounds raised before the CESTAT, namely, “whether the
services (if any) rendered by a foreign entity will or will not fall within the purview of “design
services” and invocation of extended period of limitation have not been considered by the CESTAT
and therefore learned counsel for the respondent is justified in praying to remand the matter to
CESTAT to decide the aforesaid two grounds.

10. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the impugned judgment and order passed
by the CESTAT holding that the respondent is not liable to pay service tax as “design services” on
importing various models of “Engineering Design & Drawings” for the purpose of manufacturing of
Wind Turbine Generator (WTG), as defined under Section 65(35b) r/w section 65(105)(zzzzd) of the
Finance Act, 1994 is hereby quashed and set aside. However, the matter is remitted back to the
CESTAT to consider the grounds raised on behalf of the respondent, namely, whether the services (if
any) rendered by a foreign entity will not fall within the purview of “design services” and that the
department was not justified in invoking the extended period of limitation. It is made clear that the
matter is remitted back to CESTAT to consider the aforesaid two grounds and none other. Insofar as
the issue of levy of service tax on the “Engineering Design & Drawings” is concerned, the same is

8

Commissioner Of Customs, Central ... vs M/S Suzlon Energy Ltd. on 10 April, 2023

decided in favour of the revenue and against the assessee.

11. The instant appeals stand disposed of in terms of the above. However, in the facts and
circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.

………………………………J.
[M.R. SHAH]

NEW DELHI;                    ………………………………J.
APRIL 10, 2023.               [KRISHNA MURARI]

9