Gulshan Kumar vs Institute Of Banking Personnel ... on 3 February, 2025

Gulshan Kumar vs Institute Of Banking Personnel ... on 3
February, 2025

                                                             1

2025 INSC 142
                                                                                     REPORTABLE

                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                    WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1018 OF 2022

             GULSHAN KUMAR                                                     ...   PETITIONER

                                                     VERSUS

             INSTITUTE OF BANKING PERSONNEL
             SELECTION & ORS.                                                  ... RESPONDENTS

                                                    JUDGMENT

R. MAHADEVAN, J.

1. This writ petition has been filed as a Public Interest Litigation invoking jurisdiction under Article
32 of the Constitution of India, seeking a writ of mandamus directing the Respondent Nos.1 to 4 to
provide the petitioner with the facility of a scribe, compensatory time and all other facilities, to
which he may be entitled, under the law, considering his disability status for the upcoming
examinations, the details of which are tabulated below:

Examinations                 Conducting Bodies      Date(s)

Common       Recruitment First Respondent           26/11/2022 or any
Process of Recruitment of                           other date
Probationary      officers/
Management trainees

State Bank of India (Junior Second Respondent       12/11/2022 or any
Associate & Sales)                                  other date

State Bank of India          Second Respondent      17/12/2022     to
Probationary officer (PO)                           20/12/2022 or any

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126361553/

1

Gulshan Kumar vs Institute Of Banking Personnel ... on 3 February, 2025

                                                    other date
Staff            Selection Third Respondent         1/12/2022      to
Commission’s Combined                               13/12/2022 or any
Graduate Level (CGL)                                other date

Bihar Staff Selection Fourth Respondent             26/11/2022 or any
Commission’s Combined                               other date
Graduate Level

The petitioner has also sought a direction to the Respondent No.5 to initiate suitable action against
the examining bodies that have failed to adhere to the guidelines issued by the Respondent No.5 /
Government of India, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, Department of Empowerment
of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) vide Office Memorandum in F.No.29-6/2019-DD-III dated
10.08.2022.

2. Vide order dated 15.12.20221, this court clarified that the Respondent No.2 shall not insist on the
requirement of a benchmark disability within the meaning of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
Act, 20162 for the facility of a scribe, having due regard to the judgment of this Court in Vikas
Kumar v. Union Public Service Commission and Others3.

2.1. Pursuant to the aforesaid order, the petitioner was provided with a scribe and compensatory
time during the examinations conducted by the Respondent No.2 / State Bank of India, on
12.11.2022 and 17.12.2022 respectively, for the posts of Clerk and Probationary Officer.

3. Though at the first blush, the reliefs sought in this writ petition may appear to have become
infructuous due to the efflux of time, considering the nature of the issue involved herein, we deem it
fit and appropriate to delve into the same and arrive at a possible solution, so as to streamline the
legal position which has been settled to an extent, and to ameliorate the plight of the persons with
disabilities4. The pleadings raised by the parties are restricted to this specific scope.

"1. Mr. Sanjay Kapur, counsel appearing on behalf of the State Bank of India (the
second respondent) states that a communication has been addressed by the second
respondent to the petitioner requiring the petitioner to produce necessary documents
so as to allow him the facility of a scribe for the selection test.

2. We clarify that the second respondent shall not insist on the requirement of a
bench mark disability within the meaning of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
Act 2016 for the facility of a scribe having due regard to the judgment of this Court in
Vikas Kumar vs Union Public Service Commission and Others [(2021) 5 SCC 370]. 3
Liberty to serve the Standing Counsel for the State of Bihar, who shall take
instructions insofar as the fourth respondent is concerned.

4 List the Petition on 30 January 2023.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126361553/

2

Gulshan Kumar vs Institute Of Banking Personnel ... on 3 February, 2025

For short, “the RPwD Act, 2016” [(2021) 5 SCC 370] For short, “the PwD” BRIEF
FACTS

4. It is stated by the petitioner herein that he belongs to 'Teli' Caste which falls under the category of
Other Backward Class in the State of Bihar. In 2017, soon after completing his degree, the petitioner
was diagnosed with Focal Hand Dystonia, a type of Writer's Cramp, classified as a chronic
neurological condition. Under the RPwD Act, 2016, he was assessed with 25% permanent disability
and was issued with a Unique Disability ID by the Primary Health Care Centre, Rajgir, Nalanda,
Bihar. On 12.07.2021, after evaluation, the National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro-Sciences
Centre (NIMHANS), Bangalore, issued a certificate in favour of the petitioner recognising his need
for a scribe in written examinations. Pursuant to the same, he appeared for his post-graduate final
year examination with the assistance of a scribe. Thereafter, he applied for various examinations
conducted by different recruitment bodies, however, he was not provided with any facilities
available to PwD candidates. According to him, such facilities were restricted only to the Persons
with Benchmark Disabilities5. Feeling aggrieved, the petitioner is before us.

CONTENTIONS

5. The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the petitioner is a PwD as defined under
Section 2(s) of the RPwD Act, 2016. In the application forms For short, the “PwBD” issued by the
respondents for recruitment, there was no clause for PwD candidates to seek the facilities of scribe,
compensatory time, etc. Such clause was made available only for PwBD candidates. As a result, the
petitioner was unable to apply for these facilities and consequently, could not write the examination
effectively.

5.1. The learned counsel further pointed out that the respondents have acted in derogation to the
principles enshrined by this Court in Vikash Kumar (supra), wherein, it was held that it would be
discriminatory to restrict the facilities of a scribe for only PwBD candidates. That apart, in Avni
Prakash v. National Testing Agency (NTA) & Others6, this Court has emphatically clarified that
Benchmark Disability is not a precondition to obtain a scribe or compensatory time in examinations.
Despite the same, the respondents continue to remain oblivious to the actual legal position and
ignorant towards their obligations. Therefore, the petitioner has come to this court with the present
writ petition for the above stated relief.

6. Denying the averments made by the petitioner, the Respondent Nos.1, 2 and 4 filed separate
replies in the form of counter affidavits, which were reiterated by their respective learned counsel,
during the course of arguments before us. The learned counsel appearing for the Respondent No.3
also made his submissions. 2021 SCC Online SC 1112 The sum and substance of the contentions
raised on the side of the respondents are as follows:

6.1.1. It is submitted that the Respondent No.1 / Institute of Banking Personnel
Selection, Mumbai, is not a ‘State’ as defined under Article 12 of the Constitution of
India and is, instead, a Public Trust registered under the Bombay Public Trust Act,
1950 and also a Society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126361553/

3

Gulshan Kumar vs Institute Of Banking Personnel ... on 3 February, 2025

According to the Respondent No.1, it is not a statutory body established under any
specific statute, but an autonomous body, that provides services to participating
banks and other organizations in conducting tests to fill up the actual reported
vacancies. The activity of the Respondent No.1 in conducting the examination /
selection is voluntary in nature and no public function is discharged by them.
Further, it does not receive any financial aid from the Government or its entity and is
not controlled in any manner either by the Government of India or its Departments.
Moreover, in the judgment dated 29.04.2019 passed by this Court in Civil Appeal
No.4455 of 2019 in Rajbir Surajbhan Singh vs. The Chairman, Institute of Banking
Personnel Selection, Mumbai, it was specifically held that the Respondent No.1 is not
amenable to the writ jurisdiction under Article 32 or Article 226 of the Constitution
of India. Thus, this writ petition is not maintainable against the Respondent No.1 and
the same is liable to be dismissed on this ground alone.

6.1.2. However, it is submitted that the Respondent No.1 has been acting in
accordance with the judgments of this Court in Vikas Kumar (supra) and Avni Praksh
(supra) as well as the Office Memorandum dated 10.08.2022 issued by the
Respondent No.5 and the option to seek a scribe and compensatory time for the
candidates mentioned in the said Office Memorandum will be duly incorporated into
the application forms for all future examinations conducted by them.

6.1.3. Additionally, it is submitted that the Respondent No.1 is merely a Service
Provider to Respondent No.2 (SBI) and conducts online examination as per its
mandate. It extends the facility of IBPS-Candidate Grievance Lodging and Redressal
Mechanism to the aggrieved candidates. Thus, according to the Respondent No.1, it
has neither violated the fundamental rights of the petitioner under Articles 14,19 (I)
(g) & 21 of the Constitution of India nor has it remained ignorant towards its
obligation.

6.2. It is submitted that the Respondent No.2 is a statutory body incorporated and
constituted under the State Bank of India Act, 1955. While submitting the application
forms, the petitioner did not opt/ apply for the facility of a scribe.

However, in accordance with the order of this court dated 15.12.2022, the Respondent No.2
permitted the petitioner to appear for the examination, and the petitioner subsequently, wrote the
examination with the assistance of a scribe and applicable compensatory time. Thus, according to
the Respondent No.2, they have complied with the directions issued by this Court as well as the
guidelines framed in the Official Memorandum dated 10.08.2022.

6.3. It is submitted that the Respondent No.4 / Bihar Staff Selection Commission is governed by
section 8 of the Bihar Staff Selection Commission Act, 2002, which requires it to formulate
procedure for selection for different services/posts with prior approval from the State Government.
The State Government of Bihar vide Letter No. 3433 dated 09.10.2007 approved the procedure for
selection for different services / posts, which included providing facilities of a scribe and extra time

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126361553/

4

Gulshan Kumar vs Institute Of Banking Personnel ... on 3 February, 2025

to blind or low vision candidates. Subsequently, vide Letter No. 9529 dated 01.07.2015 the State
Government extended the said facilities to candidates who are unable to write due to the permanent
absence of hand/hands or those suffering from cerebral palsy. Finally, in view of the Office
Memorandum dated 29.08.2018 issued by the Respondent No.5, the State Government issued
Letter No. 11 / AA.-Nyay-30 /2021 Sa/Pra. 10668 dated 29.06.2022 extending the benefits of
providing facilities of a scribe and extra time to all the candidates with 'Benchmark Disabilities'. It is
further submitted that as per clause 7(vi) of the advertisement published on 14.04.2022, the
Respondent No.4 provided the benefits of scribe to PwBD i.e., Blind or low vision candidates, whose
disability was 40% or more and who opted for such facilities. It is also submitted that the petitioner
did not approach the Respondent No. 4 with a request to provide a scribe, and hence, he is not
entitled to claim any relief in this writ petition.

7. We have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel appearing for the parties and
also perused the materials available on record. LEGAL POSITION

8. Before proceeding further, we may take note of the legal framework and judicial precedents
rendered by this Court as well as by other countries, connected to the issue involved herein. The
RPwD Act, 2016 emphasizes the rights of disabled persons to participate in examinations with
necessary accommodations. The relevant provisions read as under:

Section 2(m) “Inclusive education” means a system of education wherein students
with and without disability learn together and the system of teaching and learning is
suitably adapted to meet the learning needs of different types of students with
disabilities.

Section 2(y) “Reasonable accommodation” means necessary and appropriate
modification and adjustments, without imposing a disproportionate or undue burden
in a particular case, to ensure to persons with disabilities the enjoyment or exercise of
rights equally with others.

Section 2(h) “discrimination” in relation to disability, means any distinction,
exclusion, restriction on the basis of disability which is the purpose or effect of
impairing or nullifying the recognition, enjoyment or exercise on an equal basis with
others of all human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic,
social, cultural, civil or any other field and includes all forms of discrimination and
denial of reasonable accommodation.

Section 2(s) “Person with disability” means a person with long term physical, mental,
intellectual or sensory impairment which, in interaction with barriers, hinders his full
and effective participation in society equally with others. Section 2(r) "Person with
benchmark disability" means a person with not less than forty per cent of a specified
disability where specified disability has not been defined in measurable terms and
includes a person with disability where specified disability has been defined in
measurable terms, as certified by the certifying authority. Section 16 Duty of

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126361553/

5

Gulshan Kumar vs Institute Of Banking Personnel ... on 3 February, 2025

educational institutions. — The appropriate Government and the local authorities
shall endeavour that all educational institutions funded or recognised by them
provide inclusive education to the children with disabilities and towards that end
shall—

(i)…

(ii)…

(iii) provide reasonable accommodation according to the individual's requirements;

(iv) ….. (viii) Section 17 Specific measures to promote and facilitate inclusive
education. — The appropriate Government and the local authorities shall take the
following measures for the purpose of section 16, namely: —

(a) .... (h)

(i) to make suitable modifications in the curriculum and examination system to meet
the needs of students with disabilities such as extra time for completion of
examination paper, facility of scribe or amanuensis, exemption from second and
third language courses;

(j)….(k)… Section 18 Adult education. — The appropriate Government and the local
authorities shall take measures to promote, protect and ensure participation of
persons with disabilities in adult education and continuing education programmers
equally with others.

Indian decisions

9. This Court has reinforced the rights of PwD through several landmark judgments, a few of which
and the relevant observations therein are extracted below, for better appreciation:

(i)Vikash Kumar (supra):

“52. The principle of reasonable accommodation has found a more expansive
manifestation in the 2016 RPwD Act. Section 3 of the 2016 RPwD Act goes beyond a
formal guarantee of non-discrimination by casting affirmative duties and obligations
on the Government to protect the rights recognized in Section 3 by taking steps to
utilize the capacity of persons with disabilities “by providing appropriate
environment”. Among the obligations which are cast on the Government is the duty
to take necessary steps to ensure reasonable accommodation for persons with
disabilities. The concept of reasonable accommodation in Section 2(y) incorporates
making “necessary and appropriate modification and adjustments” so long as they do
not impose a disproportionate or undue burden in a particular case to ensure to

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126361553/

6

Gulshan Kumar vs Institute Of Banking Personnel ... on 3 February, 2025

persons with disability the enjoyment or exercise of rights equally with others.
Equality, non- discrimination and dignity are the essence of the protective ambit of
the 2016 RPwD Act.

56. Section 17(i) requires suitable modifications in the curriculum and examination
system to meet the needs of students with disabilities such as: (i) extra time for
completion of examination (ii) the facility of scribe or amanuensis (iii) exemption
from second and third language courses. The guarantee under Section 17(i) is not
confined to persons with benchmark disabilities but extends to students with
disabilities. It is thus evident that the legislature has made a clear distinction between
d i s a b i l i t y   a n d   b e n c h m a r k   d i s a b i l i t y .   S e c t i o n   2 0   p r o v i d e s   a   m a n d a t e   o f
non-discrimination in employment. Under Section 21, every establishment is under a
mandate to notify equal opportunity policies setting out the measures which will be
adopted in pursuance of the provisions of Chapter IV. Chapter V provides guarantees
for social security, health, rehabilitation and recreation to persons with disabilities.

57. When the Government in recognition of its affirmative duties and obligations
under the 2016 RPwD Act makes provisions for facilitating a scribe during the course
of the Civil Services Examination, it cannot be construed to confer a largesse. Nor
does it by allowing a scribe confer a privilege on a candidate. The provision for the
facility of a scribe is in pursuance of the statutory mandate to ensure that persons
with disabilities are able to live a life of equality and dignity based on respect in
society for their bodily and mental integrity. There is a fundamental fallacy on the
part of the UPSE/DoPT in proceeding on the basis that the facility of a scribe shall be
made available only to persons with benchmark disabilities. This is occasioned by the
failure of the MSJE to clarify their guidelines. The whole concept of a benchmark
disability within the meaning of Section 2(r) is primarily in the context of special
provisions including reservation that are embodied in Chapter VI of the 2016 RPwD
Act. Conceivably, Parliament while mandating the reservation of posts in government
establishments and of seats in institutions of higher learning was of the view that this
entitlement should be recognized for persons with benchmark disabilities.

63. In the specific context of disability, the principle of reasonable accommodation
postulates that the conditions which exclude the disabled from full and effective
participation as equal members of society have to give way to an accommodative
society which accepts difference, respects their needs and facilitates the creation of an
environment in which the societal barriers to disability are progressively answered.
Accommodation implies a positive obligation to create conditions conducive to the
growth and fulfilment of the disabled in every aspect of their existence — whether as
students, members of the workplace, participants in governance or, on a personal
plane, in realising the fulfilling privacies of family life. The accommodation which the
law mandates is “reasonable” because it has to be tailored to the requirements of each
condition of disability. The expectations which every disabled person has are unique
to the nature of the disability and the character of the impediments which are

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126361553/

7

Gulshan Kumar vs Institute Of Banking Personnel ... on 3 February, 2025

encountered as its consequence.

92. Before concluding, we also intend to issue a broader direction to the Union
Government in the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment to ensure the
framing of proper guidelines which would regulate and facilitate the grant of a facility
of a scribe to persons with disability within the meaning of Section 2(s) where the
nature of the disability operates to impose a barrier to the candidate writing an
examination. In formulating the procedures, the Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment may lay down appropriate norms to ensure that the condition of the
candidate is duly certified by such competent medical authority as may be prescribed
so as to ensure that only genuine candidates in need of the facility are able to avail of
it.

(ii) Avni Prakash (supra):

“Right to inclusive education

40. Education plays a key role in social and economic inclusion and effective
participation in society. Inclusive education is indispensable for ensuring universal
and non-discriminatory access to education. The Convention on Rights of Persons
with Disabilities recognises that inclusive education systems must be put in place for
a meaningful realisation of the right to education for PwD. Thus, a right to education
is essentially a right to inclusive education. In India, the RPwD Act, 2016 provides
statutory backing to the principle of inclusive education. Section 2(m) defines
“inclusive education” as:

“2. (m) “inclusive education” means a system of educationwherein students with and
without disability learn together and the system of teaching and learning is suitably
adapted to meet the learning needs of different types of students with disabilities;”

41. The RPwD Act, 2016 contains salutary provisions on the rights of PwD to
inclusive education in Chapter III. Section 17, which forms a part of Chapter III,
entails specific measures to promote and facilitate inclusive education for students
with disabilities. Among other inclusive measures in Section 17, is sub-

section (i) which prescribes a duty to make suitable modifications in the curriculum and
examination system to meet the needs of students with disabilities. This duty can be fulfilled by
providing extra time for the completion of examination papers and/or the facility of a scribe. The
provision of inclusive education is not limited to children with disabilities but extends to adults with
disabilities. Section 18 provides that the Government and local authorities are duty-bound to take
measures to promote, protect and ensure participation of PwD in adult education and continuing
education programmes on an equal footing with others. Chapter VI prescribes special provisions for
persons with benchmark disabilities, including reservations in higher educational institutions of not
less than 5% seats under Section 32.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126361553/

8

Gulshan Kumar vs Institute Of Banking Personnel ... on 3 February, 2025

42. The provisions for reservation in Chapter VI specifically for PwBD are distinct from the
provisions in Chapter III for PwD. PwD encompasses a wider group of which PwBD is a sub-set.
This distinction extends to efforts under Section 17 to promote inclusive education.

Above all, the RPwD Act, 2016 contains provisions mandating reasonable accommodation. The
expression “reasonable accommodation” is defined in Section 2(y), which reads as under:

“2. (y) “reasonable accommodation” means necessary and appropriate modification
and adjustments, without imposing a disproportionate or undue burden in a
particular case, to ensure to persons with disabilities the enjoyment or exercise of
rights equally with others;” The right to inclusive education is realised through the
provision of reasonable accommodation. In Vikash Kumar [Vikash Kumar v. UPSC,
(2021) 5 SCC 370 :

(2021) 2 SCC (L&S) 1] , this Court emphasised that reasonable accommodation is at
the heart of the principle of equality and non-discrimination espoused under the
RPwD Act, 2016. The denial of reasonable accommodation to a PwD amounts to
discrimination. It is the positive obligation of the State to create the necessary
conditions to facilitate the equal participation of disabled persons in society. This
Court observed thus : (SCC p. 399, para 44) “44. The principle of reasonable
accommodation captures the positive obligation of the State and private parties to
provide additional support to persons with disabilities to facilitate their full and
effective participation in society. The concept of reasonable accommodation is
developed in Section (H) below. For the present, suffice it to say that, for a person
with disability, the constitutionally guaranteed fundamental rights to equality, the six
freedoms and the right to life under Article 21 will ring hollow if they are not given
this additional support that helps make these rights real and meaningful for them.
Reasonable accommodation is the instrumentality—are an obligation as a society—to
enable the disabled to enjoy the constitutional guarantee of equality and non-

discrimination.”

(iii) Arnab Roy v. Consortium of National Law Universities and Another7 “24. In a situation such as
the present, the Court must have due regard, undoubtedly to the need for reasonable
accommodation consistent with the provisions of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, as
interpreted in the decision in Vikash Kumar. Equally, it would not be appropriate to ignore the
(2024) 5 SCC 793 genuine concerns which have been set up on behalf of the Consortium bearing on
the need to maintain the integrity of the entrance test.

25. It is from this perspective that the Consortium has, in its Guidelines required that the candidate
should not be above the 11th standard and in addition should not be affiliated with any
test-preparatory or examination coaching centre. At the highest, a candidate could have a grievance
if no such scribe meeting the said description is available. But as already noted above, the
Consortium has taken upon itself the obligation to provide a scribe who meets with the stipulations

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126361553/

9

which are contained in the Guidelines.

Gulshan Kumar vs Institute Of Banking Personnel ... on 3 February, 2025

26. In other words, candidates appearing for the CLAT can either bring their own scribe or if it not
possible to do so, request the Consortium to provide a scribe who is then made available to the
candidate. During the course of the hearing, it has been agreed that where the Consortium provides
a scribe, at least two days’ time should be provided so as to enable the candidate to interact with the
scribe. We are of the view that this is fair and proper. …”

10. Thus, it can be easily deduced from the above decisions that the principle of reasonable
accommodation is central to ensure equality for all the persons with disabilities; and denying the
facility of scribe or compensatory time, constitutes discrimination under the RPwD Act, 2016. This
Court also wishes to diminish the artificial distinction and bifurcation drawn between candidates
with disabilities and those with benchmark disabilities (40% disabled or more) by extending various
rights to candidates with disabilities that were earlier limited only to those with benchmark
disabilities. Further, the examination bodies are stressed upon to implement accessibility measures,
ensure that the examination centres are physically accessible and equipped to accommodate
disabled candidates and ensure strict compliance of the RPwD Act, 2016 to prevent discrimination
and provide equal opportunities for the persons with disabilities. Foreign decisions

11. The rights of the PwD have been recognized by the courts functioning in other countries. In this
regard, a few of the decisions rendered by the foreign courts and the relevant paragraphs can be
referred to as under:

(i) MOORE v. BRITISH COLUMBIA (EDUCATION)8 “28.....It is accepted that
students with disabilities require accommodation of their differences in order to
benefit from educational services.

39. Notably, however, the 1985 Manual said that “special education shares the basic purpose of all
education: the optimal development of individuals as skillful, free, and purposeful persons, able to
plan and manage life and to realize highest potential as individuals and as members of society” (s.
3.1 (emphasis added)). It added that “[a]ll children should be afforded opportunities to develop their
full potential”

62. Meiorin and Grismer also directed that practices that are neutral on their face but have an
unjustifiable adverse impact based on prohibited grounds will be subject to a requirement to
“accommodate the characteristics of affected groups within their standards, rather than maintaining
discriminatory standards supplemented by accommodation for those who cannot meet them”
(Grismer, at para. 19).

(ii) Mental Disability Advocacy Center (MDAC) v. Bulgaria9 [European Committee of Social Rights]
“37. The Committee considers that all education provided by states must fulfil the criteria of
availability, accessibility, acceptability and adaptability. It notes in this respect General Comment
No. 13 of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights of the United Nations
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights on the right to education. In the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126361553/

10

Gulshan Kumar vs Institute Of Banking Personnel ... on 3 February, 2025

present case, the criteria of accessibility and adaptability are at stake, i.e. educational institutions
[2012] 3 S.C.R Decision in Complaint No. 41/2007 dated 03.06.2008 and curricula have to be
accessible to everyone, without discrimination and teaching has to be designed to respond to
children with special speeds.”

(iii) International Association Autism Europe v. France10 [European Committee of Social Rights]
“48. As emphasised in the General Introduction to its Conclusions of 2003 (p.

10), the Committee views Article 15 of the Revised Charter as both reflecting and advancing a
profound shift of values in all European countries over the past decade away from treating them as
objects of pity and towards respecting them as equal citizens – an approach that the Council of
Europe contributed to promote, with the adoption by the Committee of Ministers of
Recommendation (92) 6 of 1992 on a coherent policy for people with disabilities. The underlying
vision of Article 15 is one of equal citizenship for persons with disabilities and, fittingly, the primary
rights are those of “independence, social integration and participation in the life of the community”.
Securing a right to education for children and others with disabilities plays an obviously important
role in advancing these citizenship rights. This explains why education is now specifically mentioned
in the revised Article 15 and why such an emphasis is placed on achieving that education “in the
framework of general schemes, wherever possible”. It should be noted that Article 15 applies to all
persons with disabilities regardless of the nature and origin of their disability and irrespective of
their age.

49. Article 17 is predicated on the need to ensure that children and young persons grow up in an
environment which encourages the “full development of their personality and of their physical and
mental capacities”. This approach is just as important for children with disabilities as it is for others
and arguably more in circumstances where the effects of ineffective or untimely intervention are
ever likely to be undone. The Committee views Article 17, which deals more generally, inter alia,
with the right to education for all, as also embodying the modern approach of mainstreaming.
Article 17(1), in particular, requires the establishment and maintenance of sufficient and adequate
institutions and services for the purpose of education. Since Article 17(1) deals only with children
and young persons it is important to read it in conjunction with Article 15(1) as far as adults are
concerned.”

(iv) G.L. v. ITALY11 [European Court of Human Rights] “52. As regards the prohibition set forth in
Article 14 of the Convention, the Court reiterates that discrimination means treating differently,
without an objective and reasonable justification, persons in similar situations, and that “no
objective and reasonable justification” means that the distinction in issue does not pursue a
“legitimate aim” or that there is not a “reasonable relationship of proportionality between the means
employed and the aim sought to be realised”.

53. When examining a case under Article 14 of the Convention, the Court must have regard to
developments in international and European law and respond, for example, to any emerging
consensus as to the standards to be achieved. To that effect, the Court notes the importance of the
fundamental principles of universality and non-discrimination in the exercise of the right to

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126361553/

11

Gulshan Kumar vs Institute Of Banking Personnel ... on 3 February, 2025

education, which are enshrined in many international. It further emphasises that those instruments
have recognised inclusive education, aimed at promoting equal opportunities for all, particularly for
persons with disabilities. Inclusive education therefore forms part of the States’ international
responsibility in this sphere.”

(v) T.H. v. BULGARIA12 [European Court of Human Rights] “109. In that context the Court
considers it sufficient to emphasise that:

(a) Article 14 of the Convention prohibits discrimination on grounds of disability,
which falls under the rubric “other status”;

(b) Such discrimination can consist not only in less favourable treatment on grounds
of a disability without a reasonable and objective justification but also in a failure to
provide “reasonable accommodation” for someone with a disability;

(c) The notion of “reasonable accommodation” in this context must be understood in
the sense ascribed to it by Article 2 of the 2006 United Nations Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities (2515 UNTS 3) 1, in whose light Article 14 of the
Convention must be read when being applied in this domain: “necessary and
appropriate modification and adjustments not imposing a disproportionate or undue
burden, where needed in a particular case, to ensure to persons with Judgment in
Application no. 59751/15 dated 10.12.2020 Judgment in Application no. 46519/20
dated 11.07.2023 disabilities the enjoyment or exercise on an equal basis with others
of all human rights and fundamental freedoms;

(d) “Reasonable accommodation” in the field of education can take different material
or non-material forms – for instance, teacher training, curricular adaptation or
appropriate facilities, depending in particular on the disability in question – and it is
not for the Court to define its modalities in a given case, the national authorities
being much better placed to do so, it being emphasised however that those
authorities must take great care with the choices that they make in this respect.”

(vi) XXXX v HR Rail SA13 “38. In that regard, it should be recalled that Directive
2000/78 must, as far as possible, be interpreted in a manner that is consistent with
the UN Convention.

Article 2, third indent of the UN Convention provides that discrimination on the grounds of
disability includes all forms of discrimination, including denial of reasonable accommodation.”

12. Thus, it is clear from the above that the rights of disabled persons are less instructive and more
general and that, right to education, right to equality, and right against discrimination accorded to
them will only be truly realized, when State structures form policies, laws, and rules to provide equal
access and reasonable accommodation to such persons.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126361553/

12

DISCUSSION

Gulshan Kumar vs Institute Of Banking Personnel ... on 3 February, 2025

13. The law is settled that all the benefits given to PwBD candidates must also be extended to PwD
candidates, and there can be no discrimination between the candidates in granting facilities such as
scribes, compensatory time, etc., except Judgment of the Court (Third Chamber) dated 10.02.2022
in Case C(cid:135)485/20 for reservation, in writing the examinations. Earlier, the office memorandum
dated 29.08.201814 came to be issued, dealing with the entitlements and benefits for PwBD
candidates for all examinations irrespective of its nature and irrespective of the authority
conducting the examination.

14. Notably, the Respondent No.5 issued Office Memorandum dated 10.08.2022, in compliance with
the directions issued by this Court in Vikash Kumar (Supra). In the said Office Memorandum, based
on the recommendation of the Expert Committee, certain guidelines were issued for conducting
written examination for persons with specified disabilities covered under the definition of Section
2(s) of the RPwD Act, 2016, but not covered under the definition of Section 2(r) of the said Act, i.e.
persons having less than 40% disability and having difficulty in writing. For better appreciation, the
relevant paragraphs of the said Office Memorandum read as under:

“2. Keeping in view the above order of the Hon'ble Supreme Court, an Expert
Committee was constituted to consider the issue and suggest guidelines accordingly.
The Committee noted that there are various types of clinical problems that can affect
the writing capacity. After careful consideration of the matter, the Committee
recommended that sole criteria for grant of scribe and compensatory time should be
based on assessment of the capability of a person to write.

3. The Committee accordingly recommended the following guidelines for conducting
written examination for persons with specified disabilities covered under the
definition of Section 2(s) of the RPwD Act, 2016 but not covered under the definition
of Section 2(r) of the said Act, i.e. persons having less than 40% For short, “the 2018
OM” disability and having difficulty in writing.

(a)………

(b) The facility of scribe and/or compensatory time shall be granted solely to those
having difficulty in writing subject to production of a certificate to the effect that
person concerned has limitation to write and that scribe is essential to write
examination on his/her behalf from the competent medical authority of a
Government healthcare institution as per proforma at Appendix-1.

(c) The medical authority for the purpose of certification as mentioned in point

(b) above should be a multi-member authority comprising the following:-

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126361553/

13

Gulshan Kumar vs Institute Of Banking Personnel ... on 3 February, 2025

i. Chief Medical officer/Civil Surgeon/Chief District Medical Officer..... Chairperson
ii. Orthopaedic/PMR specialist iii. Neurologist, if available* iv. Clinical
Psychologist/Rehabilitation Psychologist/ Psychiatrist/Special Educator v.
Occupational therapist, if available* vi. Any other expert based on the condition of
the candidate as may be nominated by the Chairperson.

(* the Chief Medical Officer/Civil Surgeon/Chief District Medical Officer may make
full efforts for inclusion of neurologists, occupational therapist from the nearest
District or the Medical College/Institute, if the same is not available in the District)"

(d) The candidate should have the discretion of opting for his own scribe or request
the Examination Body for the same. The examination body may also identify the
scribe to make panels at the District/Division/State level as per the requirements of
the examination. In later instances the candidates should be allowed to meet the
scribe two days before the examination so that the candidates get a chance to check
and verify whether the scribe is suitable or not.

(e) In case the examination body provides the scribe, it shall be ensured that
qualification of the scribe should not be more than the minimum qualification
criteria of the examination. However, the qualification of the scribe should always be
matriculate or above.

In case the candidate is allowed to bring his own scribe, the qualification of the scribe should be one
step below the qualification of the candidate taking examination. The person opting for own scribe
should submit details of the own scribe as per proforma at Appendix-II.

(f) There should also be flexibility in accommodating any change in scribe in case of emergency. The
candidates should also be allowed to take different scribe for writing different papers especially for
languages. However, there can be only one scribe per subject.'

(g) The candidate should be allowed to use aids and assistive devices such as prosthetics & orthotics,
hearing aid as mentioned in para 2 of the certificate issued by medical authority as per Appendix I.

(h) Compensatory time not less than 20 minutes per hour of the examination should be allowed for
persons who are eligible for getting scribe. In case the duration of the examination is less than an
hour, then the duration of the compensatory time should be allowed on pro-rata basis.
Compensatory time should not be less than 5 minutes and should be in the multiple of 5.

(i) The examination bodies shall modify their application forms to incorporate specific needs of this
category of persons. In case, any incident has been reported after filling up the form, the
examination bodies shall inform the candidates to obtain medical certificate as per these guidelines
for facilitating grant of scribe and/or compensatory time.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126361553/

14

Gulshan Kumar vs Institute Of Banking Personnel ... on 3 February, 2025

(j) As far as possible the examination for such persons may be held at ground floor. The examination
centres should be accessible for persons with disabilities.

(k) These guidelines are applicable to written examinations conducted by central recruitment
agencies as well as academic institutions. The States/UTs may adopt these guidelines or issue
similar guidelines to maintain uniformity.

(l) These guidelines are independent of the Guidelines for conducting written examination for
persons with benchmark disabilities issued by the Department of Empowerment of Persons with
Disabilities on 29.08.2018.

(m) The examining bodies shall ensure strict vigilance to check misuse of facility of scribe.

4. All the recruitment agencies, Academics/Examination Bodies etc. under the administrative
control of each Ministry/Department may be advised appropriately to ensure compliance of
implementing these guidelines.

5. The above guidelines are issued with the approval of Hon'ble Minister (Social Justice &
Empowerment).

14.1. The aforesaid Office Memorandum dated 10.08.2022 was forwarded by the Government of
I n d i a ,   M i n i s t r y   o f   F i n a n c e ,   D e p a r t m e n t   o f   F i n a n c i a l   S e r v i c e s ,   v i d e   c o m m u n i c a t i o n
No.FZ-3/3/2022-SCT dated 10.11.2022 to all recruitment agencies / examination bodies, for strict
compliance.

15. It is the grievance of the petitioner herein that though the aforesaid Office Memorandum dated
10.08.2022 came to be issued by the Respondent No.5 in accordance with the directions of this
Court, it fails to incorporate the essence of reasonable accommodation and underscores the true
meaning and purpose of the RPwD Act, 2016. According to the petitioner, the said Office
Memorandum contains the following defects:

(i) As per the directions of this Court in Vikash Kumar (supra) and Avni Prakash
(supra), all conditions/benefits found in Paras I to XVII of the 2018 OM relating to
PwBD candidates, were required to be extended to PwD candidates.

However, the Respondent No.5 came up with a separate Office Memorandum granting selective
facilities, without any justification for restricting the facilities for PwD candidates.

(ii)The Judgment in Vikash Kumar (supra) mandates that any disability imposing a barrier to a
candidate writing an examination should be remedied by extending the necessary facilities. In the
case of blind or low vision candidates, the disability does not prevent them from “writing” per se, but
it certainly imposes a barrier to writing the examination. However, clause (3) of the Office
Memorandum only extends facilities to candidates who have “difficulty in writing”. Furthermore,
Clause 3(b) of the Office Memorandum creates confusion and a problematic situation, where the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126361553/

15

Gulshan Kumar vs Institute Of Banking Personnel ... on 3 February, 2025

rights of PwD candidates to receive facilities in examinations can be denied simply because their
disability is not related to “writing”. This contradicts the entire purpose of the Act. Therefore, this
court may direct the Respondent No.5 to strike down the restrictions in clause (3) and 3(b) and
extend examination relaxations to all PwD candidates, regardless of the nature, type, or form of
disability.

(iii) The Office Memorandum does not provide for any facilities other than a scribe and
compensatory time. For instance, the 2018 OM includes provisions that as far as possible, PwBD
candidates should have the option to choose the mode of taking the examination, such as in Braille,
on a computer, in large print, or even by recording their answers. These are also feasible as
examining bodies can easily use technology to convert question papers into large prints, e-text or
Braille, and can also convert Braille text into English or regional languages. However, the same does
not find any mention in the said Office Memorandum. The Office Memorandum also sets specific
criteria (both educational and otherwise) for a scribe. Quite often, candidates face significant
challenges in finding a suitable scribe and ensuring their presence on the day of the examination. At
the same time, while the 2018 OM allowed candidates to use a computer or other technological
means for taking the exam, this option was not extended to PwD candidates in the present OM.
Therefore, the petitioner states that if candidates are permitted to type their answers on computers,
it would eliminate the need for a scribe and also address the concerns of the examining body
regarding malpratice by reducing human interaction.

(iv) The Office Memorandum fails to prescribe a grievance redressal mechanism to address
instances where any relaxations are denied to PwD candidates. As a result, the only remedy
available to such candidates who are denied the benefit of such relaxations, is to approach a writ
court and seek redress for the grievance.

15.1. The petitioner further highlighted the problems and inconveniences faced by him during the
examination process, which are as follows: (i) The application forms for recruitment did not include
provisions for PwD candidates, and the requisite facilities were only provided upon specific requests
from applicants;

(ii) Compensatory time was not displayed on the screen, leading to a failure by the invigilators to
provide the facility to PwD candidates; (iii) Some recruitment agencies refused to provide the
facilities of a scribe and extra time to PwD candidates, citing that such provisions were contrary to
the policy decisions of their respective departments; (iv) In certain cases, the facilities of a scribe
and extra time were denied because the invigilators were not informed about the court orders
mandating strict compliance with such provisions; (v) In various examinations, the benefits were
provided only to PwBD candidates, due to a lack of coordination and proper implementation. Thus,
according to the petitioner, these issues have a serious detrimental effect on the candidates, and as a
result, the guidelines framed by Respondent No. 5 should be reconsidered and amended.

16. On the other hand, the respondents categorically stated in their replies and submissions that
they have been following the directions of this Court as well as the guidelines issued by Respondent
No. 5 in the Office Memorandum dated 10.08.2022.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126361553/

16

Gulshan Kumar vs Institute Of Banking Personnel ... on 3 February, 2025

17. However, there have been instances where examination bodies refused to extend the benefits
available to PwD candidates due to the absence of a clear-cut grievance redressal mechanism, which
continues to cause inconvenience and injustice to several candidates, including the petitioner
herein. Further, the petitioner demonstrated that there are certain defects and lacunas in the
guidelines issued by Respondent No. 5, as well as in the implementation of this Court’s directions,
resulting in different authorities following disparate procedures. This lack of uniformity causes
confusion, discrimination, and undermines the efficiency and effectiveness of the examination
process. Therefore, in our opinion, there is an urgent need for a uniform memorandum for
examinations applicable to all PwD candidates, and it is the responsibility of Respondent No. 5 to
ensure its proper and just compliance.

18. It is also to be pointed out that the constitution bench of this Court in Kaushal Kishor v. State of
Uttar Pradesh and others15 considered the question as to whether fundamental rights under Articles
19 and 21 of the Constitution can be claimed against anyone who is not a state instrumentality, and
answered the same in the affirmative with a majority of 4:1. It was clarified that rights under Articles
19 and 21 can be enforced even against private entities and it overrides the principle laid down in
Rajbir (supra). Hence, the contention of the Respondent No.1 that they are not amenable to writ
jurisdiction cannot be countenanced by us. It is noteworthy mentioning that the Office
Memorandum clearly stated that the guidelines are applicable to all the authorities. As such, the
benefits conferred by the statute should be provided for all the PwD candidates and they cannot be
denied on the ground of absence of accountability and/or lack of duty on enforceability.

19. In the ultimate analysis, we are of the considered view that the guidelines issued by the
Respondent No.5 pursuant to the directions of this Court, have to be enforced, by extending the
benefits for PwBD candidates to all PwD candidates in writing their examinations, without any
hindrance. Accordingly, we direct the Respondent No.5 to revisit the Office Memorandum dated
10.08.2022, remove the restrictions and grant relaxations in a reasonable manner and Writ Petition
(Criminal) No. 113 of 2016 incorporate the following aspects and thereby, re-notify the same afresh,
within a period of two months:

(i)direct all the authorities / recruitment agencies / examining bodies to uniformly
follow the guidelines issued by the Respondent No.5, which is the nodal agency and
ensure strict adherence through periodic surveys / verification;

(ii)carry out periodic sensitization drive at educational institutions to raise awareness
among the examination conducting bodies so as to ensure that the OMs are
effectively implemented;

(iii)set up a grievance redressal portal to register complaints, which would permit the
candidates to approach it first before approaching the court of law;

(iv)inspect the guidelines framed by different authorities and re-notify the existing
guidelines with an aim to ensure compliance;

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126361553/

17

Gulshan Kumar vs Institute Of Banking Personnel ... on 3 February, 2025

(v)extend the validity of the scribe certificate (currently being valid only for 6
months) to prevent the long wait time after applying, especially, in rural areas;

(vi)set up Incentive programs for scribes to ensure their availability and provide
necessary training;

(vii)provide some time prior to the examination to allow the candidates to familiarize
themselves with the scribe to ensure that there is a sense of comfort while
communicating with the scribe during the examination;

(viii)offer PwD candidates a choice of examination modes, such as scribe, braille,
large print, audio recording of answers, etc.;

(ix) take penal action against authorities / officials in charge of decision-

making process, who fail to follow the guidelines set out by the Respondent No.5 and formulate
guidelines which exclude PwD;

(x) sensitise the persons working for the respondent authorities, and train them on a regular basis,
to address the reasonable accommodation needs of PwDs; and

(xi) ensure strict compliance of the letter and spirit of the judgments in Vikash Kumar and Avni
Prakash as well as the provisions of the RPwD Act, 2016, with a special focus on ‘reasonable
accommodation’.

20. With the aforesaid directions, this writ petition stands disposed of. No costs. Connected
Miscellaneous application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.

Post the matter after two months “for reporting compliance”.

…………………………J. [J.B. Pardiwala] …………………………J. [R. Mahadevan] NEW DELHI ;

FEBRUARY 03, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126361553/

18

