Common Cause (A Regd. Society) Director ... vs Union Of India (A) Ministry Of Health And ... on 24 January, 2023

Common Cause (A Regd. Society) Director ... vs Union Of India
(A) Ministry Of Health And ... on 24 January, 2023

Author: K.M. Joseph

Bench: C.T. Ravikumar, Hrishikesh Roy, Aniruddha Bose, Ajay Rastogi, K.M.
Joseph

‘REPORTABLE’

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

MISCELLANEOUS APPLICATION NO. 1699 OF 2019
IN
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 215 OF 2005

COMMON CAUSE (A REGD. SOCIETY)         Petitioner(s)

VERSUS

UNION OF INDIA                         Respondent(s)

INDIAN SOCIETY OF
CRITICAL CARE MEDICINE                 Applicant

O R D E R

K. M. JOSEPH, J.

(1) This is an application filed by Indian Society of Critical Care Medicine seeking clarification of the
judgment reported in Common Cause (A Registered Society) v. Union of India and Another (2018) 5
SCC (2) A Constitution Bench came to be constituted on the basis of a Reference made to it by a
Bench of MA No. 1699/ 2019 in WP (C) No. 215/ 2005 three learned Judges. In the backdrop of
certain earlier decisions of this Court, in particular, this Court was engaged with the question as to
whether the Court should issue suitable directions or set in place norms to provide for what is
described as Advance Directives. This Court also was concerned with the question as to whether
even in the absence of Advance Directives, when a person is faced with a medical condition with no
hope of recovery and is continued on life support system/medicines, life support system should be
withdrawn. The Court went on to dwell on the right of a person to die with dignity. Thereafter, this
Court has proceeded to lay down the directives as follows:

1

Common Cause (A Regd. Society) Director ... vs Union Of India (A) Ministry Of Health And ... on 24 January, 2023

"198. In our considered opinion, Advance Medical Directive would serve as a fruitful
means to facilitate the fructification of the sacrosanct right to life with dignity. The
said directive, we think, will dispel many a doubt at the relevant time of need during
the course of treatment of the patient. That apart, it will strengthen the mind of the
treating doctors as they will be in a position to ensure, after being satisfied, that they
are acting in a lawful manner. We may hasten to add that Advance Medical Directive
cannot operate in abstraction. There has to be safeguards. They need to be spelt out.
We enumerate them as follows:

MA No. 1699/ 2019 in WP (C) No. 215/ 2005 198.1. Who can execute the Advance
Directive and how?

198.1.1. The Advance Directive can be executed only by an adult who is of a sound
and healthy state of mind and in a position to communicate, relate and comprehend
the purpose and consequences of executing the document. 198.1.2. It must be
voluntarily executed and without any coercion or inducement or compulsion and
after having full knowledge or information.

198.1.3. It should have characteristics of an informed consent given without any
undue influence or constraint.

198.1.4. It shall be in writing clearly stating as to when medical treatment may be
withdrawn or no specific medical treatment shall be given which will only have the
effect of delaying the process of death that may otherwise cause him/her pain,
anguish and suffering and further put him/her in a state of indignity.

198.2. What should it contain?

198.2.1. It should clearly indicate the decision relating to the circumstances in which
withholding or withdrawal of medical treatment can be resorted to.

198.2.2. It should be in specific terms and the instructions must be absolutely clear
and unambiguous.

198.2.3. It should mention that the executor may revoke the instructions/authority at
any time.

198.2.4. It should disclose that the executor has understood the consequences of
executing such a document.

198.2.5. It should specify the name of a guardian or close relative who, in the event of
MA No. 1699/ 2019 in WP (C) No. 215/ 2005 the executor becoming incapable of
taking decision at the relevant time, will be authorised to give consent to refuse or
withdraw medical treatment in a manner consistent with the Advance Directive.

2

Common Cause (A Regd. Society) Director ... vs Union Of India (A) Ministry Of Health And ... on 24 January, 2023

198.2.6. In the event that there is more than one valid Advance Directive, none of
which have been revoked, the most recently signed Advance Directive will be
considered as the last expression of the patient's wishes and will be given effect to.

198.3. How should it be recorded and preserved?

198.3.1. The document should be signed by the executor in the presence of two
attesting witnesses, preferably independent, and countersigned by the jurisdictional
Judicial Magistrate of First Class (JMFC) so designated by the District Judge
concerned.

198.3.2. The witnesses and the jurisdictional JMFC shall record their satisfaction that
the document has been executed voluntarily and without any coercion or inducement
or compulsion and with full understanding of all the relevant information and
consequences.

198.3.3. The JMFC shall preserve one copy of the document in his office, in addition
to keeping it in digital format.

198.3.4. The JMFC shall forward one copy of the document to the Registry of the
jurisdictional District Court for being preserved.

Additionally, the Registry of the District Judge shall retain the document in digital format.

198.3.5. The JMFC shall cause to inform the immediate family members of the executor, if MA No.
1699/ 2019 in WP (C) No. 215/ 2005 not present at the time of execution, and make them aware
about the execution of the document.

198.3.6. A copy shall be handed over to the competent officer of the local Government or the
Municipal Corporation or Municipality or Panchayat, as the case may be. The aforesaid authorities
shall nominate a competent official in that regard who shall be the custodian of the said document.

198.3.7. The JMFC shall cause to hand over copy of the Advance Directive to the family physician, if
any.

198.4. When and by whom can it be given effect to?

198.4.1. In the event the executor becomes terminally ill and is undergoing prolonged medical
treatment with no hope of recovery and cure of the ailment, the treating physician, when made
aware about the Advance Directive, shall ascertain the genuineness and authenticity thereof from
the jurisdictional JMFC before acting upon the same.

198.4.2. The instructions in the document must be given due weight by the doctors. However, it
should be given effect to only after being fully satisfied that the executor is terminally ill and is

3

Common Cause (A Regd. Society) Director ... vs Union Of India (A) Ministry Of Health And ... on 24 January, 2023

undergoing prolonged treatment or is surviving on life support and that the illness of the executor is
incurable or there is no hope of him/her being cured.

198.4.3. If the physician treating the patient (executor of the document) is satisfied that the
instructions given in the document need to be acted upon, he shall inform the executor or his
guardian/close relative, as the case may be, about the nature of illness, the availability of medical
care and consequences MA No. 1699/ 2019 in WP (C) No. 215/ 2005 of alternative forms of
treatment and the consequences of remaining untreated. He must also ensure that he beliefs on
reasonable grounds that the person in question understands the information provided, has cogitated
over the options and has come to a firm view that the option of withdrawal or refusal of medical
treatment is the best choice.

198.4.4. The physician/hospital where the executor has been admitted for medical treatment shall
then constitute a Medical Board consisting of the Head of the treating department and at least three
experts from the fields of general medicine, cardiology, neurology, nephrology, psychiatry or
oncology with experience in critical care and with overall standing in the medical profession of at
least twenty years who, in turn, shall visit the patient in the presence of his guardian/close relative
and form an opinion whether to certify or not to certify carrying out the instructions of withdrawal
or refusal of further medical treatment. This decision shall be regarded as a preliminary opinion.

198.4.5. In the event the Hospital Medical Board certifies that the instructions contained in the
Advance Directive ought to be carried out, the physician/hospital shall forthwith inform the
jurisdictional Collector about the proposal. The jurisdictional Collector shall then immediately
constitute a Medical Board comprising the Chief District Medical Officer of the district concerned as
the Chairman and three expert doctors from the fields of general medicine, cardiology, neurology,
nephrology, psychiatry or oncology with experience in critical care and with overall standing in the
medical profession of at least twenty years (who were not members of the previous Medical Board of
the hospital). They shall jointly visit the hospital where the patient is MA No. 1699/ 2019 in WP (C)
No. 215/ 2005 admitted and if they concur with the initial decision of the Medical Board of the
hospital, they may endorse the certificate to carry out the instructions given in the Advance
Directive.

198.4.6. The Board constituted by the Collector must beforehand ascertain the wishes of the
executor if he is in a position to communicate and is capable of understanding the consequences of
withdrawal of medical treatment. In the event the executor is incapable of taking decision or
develops impaired decision-making capacity, then the consent of the guardian nominated by the
executor in the Advance Directive should be obtained regarding refusal or withdrawal of medical
treatment to the executor to the extent of and consistent with the clear instructions given in the
Advance Directive.

198.4.7. The Chairman of the Medical Board nominated by the Collector, that is, the Chief District
Medical Officer, shall convey the decision of the Board to the jurisdictional JMFC before giving
effect to the decision to withdraw the medical treatment administered to the executor. The JMFC
shall visit the patient at the earliest and, after examining all aspects, authorise the implementation

4

Common Cause (A Regd. Society) Director ... vs Union Of India (A) Ministry Of Health And ... on 24 January, 2023

of the decision of the Board.

198.4.8. It will be open to the executor to revoke the document at any stage before it is acted upon
and implemented.

198.5. What if permission is refused by the Medical Board?

198.5.1. If permission to withdraw medical treatment is refused by the Medical Board, it would be
open to the executor of the Advance Directive or his family members or even the MA No. 1699/ 2019
in WP (C) No. 215/ 2005 treating doctor or the hospital staff to approach the High Court by way of
writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution. If such application is filed before the High Court,
the Chief Justice of the said High Court shall constitute a Division Bench to decide upon grant of
approval or to refuse the same. The High Court will be free to constitute an independent committee
consisting of three doctors from the fields of general medicine, cardiology, neurology, nephrology,
psychiatry or oncology with experience in critical care and with overall standing in the medical
profession of at least twenty years.

198.5.2. The High Court shall hear the application expeditiously after affording opportunity to the
State counsel. It would be open to the High Court to constitute Medical Board in terms of its order
to examine the patient and submit report about the feasibility of acting upon the instructions
contained in the Advance Directive.

198.5.3. Needless to say that the High Court shall render its decision at the earliest as such matters
cannot brook any delay and it shall ascribe reasons specifically keeping in mind the principles of
“best interests of the patient”.

198.6. Revocation or inapplicability of Advance Directive 198.6.1. An individual may withdraw or
alter the Advance Directive at any time when he/she has the capacity to do so and by following the
same procedure as provided for recording of Advance Directive. Withdrawal or revocation of an
Advance Directive must be in writing.

198.6.2. An Advance Directive shall not be applicable to the treatment in question if MA No. 1699/
2019 in WP (C) No. 215/ 2005 there are reasonable grounds for believing that circumstances exist
which the person making the directive did not anticipate at the time of the Advance Directive and
which would have affected his decision had he anticipated them.

198.6.3. If the Advance Directive is not clear and ambiguous, the Medical Boards concerned shall
not give effect to the same and, in that event, the guidelines meant for patients without Advance
Directive shall be made applicable.

198.6.4. Where the Hospital Medical Board takes a decision not to follow an Advance Directive while
treating a person, then it shall make an application to the Medical Board constituted by the Collector
for consideration and appropriate direction on the Advance Directive.

5

Common Cause (A Regd. Society) Director ... vs Union Of India (A) Ministry Of Health And ... on 24 January, 2023

199. It is necessary to make it clear that there will be cases where there is no Advance Directive. The
said class of persons cannot be alienated. In cases where there is no Advance Directive, the
procedure and safeguards are to be same as applied to cases where Advance Directives are in
existence and in addition there to, the following procedure shall be followed:

199.1. In cases where the patient is terminally ill and undergoing prolonged
treatment in respect of ailment which is incurable or where there is no hope of being
cured, the physician may inform the hospital which, in turn, shall constitute a
Hospital Medical Board in the manner indicated earlier. The Hospital Medical Board
shall discuss with the family physician and the family members and record the
minutes of the discussion in writing. During the discussion, the family members shall
be apprised of the pros and cons of withdrawal or refusal of further medical
treatment to the MA No. 1699/ 2019 in WP (C) No. 215/ 2005 patient and if they give
consent in writing, then the Hospital Medical Board may certify the course of action
to be taken. Their decision will be regarded as a preliminary opinion.

199.2. In the event the Hospital Medical Board certifies the option of withdrawal or
refusal of further medical treatment, the hospital shall immediately inform the
jurisdictional Collector. The jurisdictional Collector shall then constitute a Medical
Board comprising the Chief District Medical Officer as the Chairman and three
experts from the fields of general medicine, cardiology, neurology, nephrology,
psychiatry or oncology with experience in critical care and with overall standing in
the medical profession of at least twenty years.

The Medical Board constituted by the Collector shall visit the hospital for physical examination of
the patient and, after studying the medical papers, may concur with the opinion of the Hospital
Medical Board. In that event, intimation shall be given by the Chairman of the Collector nominated
Medical Board to the JMFC and the family members of the patient.

199.3. The JMFC shall visit the patient at the earliest and verify the medical reports, examine the
condition of the patient, discuss with the family members of the patient and, if satisfied in all
respects, may endorse the decision of the Collector nominated Medical Board to withdraw or refuse
further medical treatment to the terminally-ill patient.

199.4. There may be cases where the Board may not take a decision to the effect of withdrawing
medical treatment of the patient or the Collector nominated Medical Board may not concur with the
opinion of the hospital Medical Board. In such a situation, the nominee of the patient or the family
member or the treating doctor or the hospital staff can seek MA No. 1699/ 2019 in WP (C) No. 215/
2005 permission from the High Court to withdraw life support by way of writ petition under Article
226 of the Constitution in which case the Chief Justice of the said High Court shall constitute a
Division Bench which shall decide to grant approval or not. The High Court may constitute an
independent committee to depute three doctors from the fields of general medicine, cardiology,
neurology, nephrology, psychiatry or oncology with experience in critical care and with overall
standing in the medical profession of at least twenty years after consulting the competent medical

6

Common Cause (A Regd. Society) Director ... vs Union Of India (A) Ministry Of Health And ... on 24 January, 2023

practitioners. It shall also afford an opportunity to the State counsel. The High Court in such cases
shall render its decision at the earliest since such matters cannot brook any delay. Needless to say,
the High Court shall ascribe reasons specifically keeping in mind the principle of “best interests of
the patient”.

200. Having said this, we think it appropriate to cover a vital aspect to the effect the life support is
withdrawn, the same shall also be intimated by the Magistrate to the High Court. It shall be kept in a
digital format by the Registry of the High Court apart from keeping the hard copy which shall be
destroyed after the expiry of three years from the death of the patient.

201. Our directions with regard to the Advance Directives and the safeguards as mentioned
hereinabove shall remain in force till Parliament makes legislation on this subject.” (3) The
applicant has approached this Court within a short period.

The reason for approaching this Court all over MA No. 1699/ 2019 in WP (C) No. 215/ 2005 again
appears to be that in the actual working of the directions, insurmountable obstacles are being posed.
For instance, it is pointed out that this Court has provided in paragraph 198.3 that in the case of an
Advance Directive which is devised by a person, it should not only be in the presence of two attesting
witnesses who are preferably independent witnesses, but also it should have countersigned by a
Judicial First Class Magistrate. It is pointed out that this clause has led the very object of this Court
issuing directions being impaired, if not completely defeated.

There are other aspects which have been highlighted in the application.

(4) The respondent, viz., the Union of India, has filed a counter affidavit. We find from the contents
of the counter affidavit that the stand of the Union of India was that it opposed the application.

(5) As we have noticed, this is an application seeking clarification. Ordinarily, be it an MA No. 1699/
2019 in WP (C) No. 215/ 2005 application lodged in this Court blessed as it is with powers under
Article 142 of the Constitution of India, we would have thought that the application should not
receive further consideration. However, we notice that there has been a subsequent development.
The development is in the form of orders evidencing an attempt being made by the respondent also
to evolve/agree to certain changes.

Several rounds of discussions, it would appear, have taken place between officers of the
respondent-Union who not unnaturally includes medical experts.

According to the applicant, the difficulties which are being encountered have been voiced by a large
number of Doctors and it becomes absolutely necessary for this Court to revisit the directions so that
this Court puts in place a mechanism which effectively carries out the object of this Court laying
down the principles in the paragraphs which have already been adverted to.

(6) Having heard Shri Arvind Datar, learned senior counsel, appearing for the applicant, assisted by
Dr. Dhvani Mehta and Ms. Rashmi Nandakumar, learned MA No. 1699/ 2019 in WP (C) No. 215/

7

Common Cause (A Regd. Society) Director ... vs Union Of India (A) Ministry Of Health And ... on 24 January, 2023

2005 counsel, Dr. R. R. Kishore, learned counsel, as also Mr. K. M. Nataraj, learned Additional
Solicitor General appearing on behalf of respondent-Union of India, we are of the view that the
directions contained in paragraphs 198 to 199 require to be modified/ deleted as hereinafter
indicated:

Para Existing Modifications Guidelines Para It should specify It should specify the
198.2.5 the name of a guardian or close name of a guardian(s) or relative who, in the
event of the close relative(s) who, in executor becoming incapable of the event of the
executor taking decision at the relevant time, becoming incapable of will be
authorised to give consent to taking decision at the refuse or withdraw medical
treatment relevant time, will be in a manner consistent with authorised to give the
Advance Directive. consent to refuse or withdraw medical treatment in a manner
consistent with the Advance Directive.

Para The document The document should be 198.3.1 should be signed MA No. 1699/
2019 in WP (C) No. 215/ 2005 by the executor in signed by the executor in the
presence of two attesting the presence of two witnesses, preferably attesting
witnesses, independent, and countersigned by preferably independent, the
jurisdictional Judicial and attested before a Magistrate of First Class (JMFC) notary
or Gazetted so designated by the District Judge Officer.

concerned.

Para The witnesses and The witnesses and the 198.3.2 the jurisdictional JMFC shall record notary or
Gazetted their satisfaction that the document Officer shall record has been executed voluntarily and
their satisfaction that without any coercion or the document has been inducement or compulsion
and executed voluntarily and with full understanding of without any coercion or all the relevant
information and inducement or compulsion consequences.

and with full understanding of all the relevant information and consequences.

Para The JMFC shall Deleted. 198.3.3 preserve one copy MA No. 1699/ 2019 in WP (C) No. 215/
2005 of the document in his office, in addition to keeping it in digital format.

Para The JMFC shall Deleted.

198.3.4    forward one copy
of the document to
the   Registry    of
the jurisdictional
District Court for
being    preserved.
Additionally, the
Registry    of   the
District       Judge
shall retain the

8

Common Cause (A Regd. Society) Director ... vs Union Of India (A) Ministry Of Health And ... on 24 January, 2023

document          in
digital format.

Para     The   JMFC    shall         The           executor               shall
198.3.5    cause   to   inform
the       immediate         inform, and hand over a
family members of
the executor, if            copy          of        the        Advance
not present at the
time of execution,          Directive          to     the       person
and    make    them
aware   about   the         or       persons           named        in
execution of the
document.                   Paragraph               198.2.5,        as

well      as       to     the      family

physician, if any.
Para     A copy shall be             A      copy    shall          be    handed
198.3.6    handed over to the
competent officer           over      to        the       competent
of    the    local
Government or the           officer            of     the        local
Municipal
Corporation     or          Government                 or          the

MA No. 1699/ 2019 in WP (C) No. 215/ 2005 Municipality or Municipal Corporation or Panchayat,
as the case may be. The Municipality or aforesaid authorities shall Panchayat, as the case nominate
a competent official may be. The aforesaid in that regard who shall be the authorities shall custodian
of the said document. nominate a competent official in that regard who shall be the custodian of the
said document.

The     executor          may    also

choose        to        incorporate

their     Advance         Directive

as a part of the digital

health records, if any.
Para     The    JMFC   shall         Deleted.
198.3.7    cause to hand over
copy      of    the
Advance Directive
to    the    family
physician, if any.

Para     In the event the            In the event the executor
198.4.1    executor    becomes

9

Common Cause (A Regd. Society) Director ... vs Union Of India (A) Ministry Of Health And ... on 24 January, 2023

terminally ill and          becomes       terminally          ill
is       undergoing

MA No. 1699/ 2019 in WP (C) No. 215/ 2005 prolonged medical and is undergoing treatment with
no hope of recovery prolonged medical and cure of the ailment, the treatment with no hope of
treating physician, when recovery and cure of the made aware about the Advance ailment, and does
not Directive, shall ascertain the have decision-making genuineness and authenticity capacity, the
treating thereof from the jurisdictional physician, when made JMFC before acting upon the same.
aware about the Advance Directive, shall ascertain the genuineness and authenticity thereof with
reference to the existing digital health records of the patient, if any or from the custodian of the
document referred to in Paragraph 198.3.6 of this judgement.

Para The instructions No change.

198.4.2    in   the   document
must be given due
weight    by    the

MA No. 1699/ 2019 in WP (C) No. 215/ 2005 doctors. However, it should be given effect to only
after being fully satisfied that the executor is terminally ill and is undergoing prolonged treatment or
is surviving on life support and that the illness of the executor is incurable or there is no hope of
him/her being cured.

Para If the physician If the physician treating 198.4.3 treating the patient (executor the patient
(executor of of the document) is satisfied that the document) is the instructions given in the satisfied
that the document need to be acted upon, he instructions given in the shall inform the executor or
his document need to be acted guardian/close relative, as the upon, he shall inform the case may be,
about the nature of person or persons named illness, the availability of in the Advance Directive,
medical care and consequences of as the case may be, about alternative forms of treatment and the
nature of illness, the consequences of remaining the availability of untreated. He must MA No.
1699/ 2019 in WP (C) No. 215/ 2005 also ensure that medical care and he beliefs on reasonable
grounds consequences of that the person in question alternative forms of understands the
information treatment and the provided, has cogitated over the consequences of remaining options
and has come to a firm untreated. He must also view that the option of ensure that he believes
withdrawal or refusal of medical on reasonable grounds treatment is the best choice. that the person
in question understands the information provided, has cogitated over the options and has come to a
firm view that the option of withdrawal or refusal of medical treatment is the best choice.

Para The The hospital where the 198.4.4 physician/hospital where the executor executor has been
has been admitted for medical admitted for medical treatment shall then constitute a treatment
shall then Medical Board MA No. 1699/ 2019 in WP (C) No. 215/ 2005 consisting of the constitute a
Primary Head of the treating Medical Board consisting department and at least three of the treating

10

Common Cause (A Regd. Society) Director ... vs Union Of India (A) Ministry Of Health And ... on 24 January, 2023

physician experts from the fields of general and at least two subject medicine, cardiology, experts of
the concerned neurology, nephrology, specialty with at least psychiatry or oncology with five years’
experience, experience in critical care and who, in turn, shall visit with overall standing in the the
patient in the medical profession of at least twenty presence of his years who, in turn, shall visit
guardian/close relative the patient in the presence of his and form an opinion guardian/close an
opinion whether to certify or not hours of the case being to certify carrying out the referred to it
whether to instructions of withdrawal or certify or not to certify refusal of further medical treatment.
carrying out the This decision shall be regarded instructions of as a preliminary opinion. withdrawal
or refusal of further medical treatment. This decision shall be regarded as a MA No. 1699/ 2019 in
WP (C) No. 215/ 2005 preliminary opinion.

Para     In the event the            In the event the Primary
198.4.5    Hospital    Medical
Board     certifies         Medical        Board       certifies
that            the
instructions                that         the     instructions
contained in the
Advance Directive           contained in the Advance
ought     to     be
carried out, the            Directive          ought     to     be
physician/hospital
shall     forthwith         carried out, the hospital
inform          the
jurisdictional              shall        then       immediately
Collector     about
the proposal. The           constitute          a      Secondary
jurisdictional
Collector     shall         Medical       Board     comprising
then    immediately
constitute        a         one     registered           medical
Medical       Board
comprising      the         practitioner nominated by
Chief      District
Medical Officer of          the Chief Medical Officer
the        district
concerned as the            of     the    District       and    at
Chairman and three
expert      doctors         least two subject experts
from the fields of
general medicine,           with at least five years’
cardiology,
neurology,                  experience              of         the
nephrology,
psychiatry       or         concerned specialty                who
oncology       with
experience       in         were     not       part      of    the
critical care and

11

Common Cause (A Regd. Society) Director ... vs Union Of India (A) Ministry Of Health And ... on 24 January, 2023

with        overall         Primary        Medical        Board.
standing   in   the

MA No. 1699/ 2019 in WP (C) No. 215/ 2005 medical profession They shall visit the of at least
twenty years (who were hospital where the not members of the previous Medical patient is admitted
and Board of the hospital). They if they concur with the shall jointly visit the hospital initial decision
of the where the patient is admitted and if Primary Medical Board of they concur with the initial the
hospital, they may decision of the Medical Board of endorse the certificate the hospital, they may
endorse the to carry out the certificate to carry out the instructions given in the instructions given in
the Advance Advance Directive. The Directive.

Secondary Medical Board shall provide its opinion preferably within 48 hours of the case being
referred to it.

Para The Board The secondary Board must 198.4.6 constituted by the Collector must beforehand
ascertain the beforehand ascertain the wishes of the executor if wishes of the executor if he is he is in
a position to in a position to communicate and is communicate and is capable of MA No. 1699/ 2019
in WP (C) No. 215/ 2005 understanding the capable of understanding consequences of withdrawal
of the consequences of medical treatment.

In the event the            withdrawal              of      medical
executor          is
incapable         of        treatment.          In       the     event
taking decision or
develops impaired           the executor is incapable
decision-making
capacity, then the          of     taking           decision         or
consent    of    the
guardian nominated          develops                       impaired
by the executor in
the         Advance         decision-making               capacity,
Directive     should
be         obtained         then    the    consent             of   the
regarding refusal
or withdrawal of            person             or           persons
medical treatment
to the executor to          nominated by the executor
the extent of and
consistent      with        in the Advance Directive
the            clear
instructions given          should             be          obtained
in   the    Advance
Directive.                  regarding            refusal             or

withdrawal              of      medical

12

Common Cause (A Regd. Society) Director ... vs Union Of India (A) Ministry Of Health And ... on 24 January, 2023

treatment to the executor to the extent of and consistent with the clear instructions given in the
Advance Directive.

Para The Chairman of The hospital where the 198.4.7 the Medical Board MA No. 1699/ 2019 in WP
(C) No. 215/ 2005 nominated by the patient is admitted, Collector, that is, the Chief shall convey the
decision District Medical Officer, shall of the Primary and convey the decision of the Secondary
Medical Boards Board to the jurisdictional and the consent of the JMFC before giving effect to the
person or persons named decision to withdraw the in the Advance Directive medical treatment
administered to to the jurisdictional the executor. The JMFC shall visit JMFC before giving effect
the patient at the earliest and, to the decision to after examining all aspects, withdraw the medical
authorise the implementation of treatment administered to the decision of the Board. the executor.

Para It will be open to No change.

198.4.8    the   executor  to
revoke         the
document   at  any
stage before it is
acted    upon  and
implemented.

Para     If permission to            If permission to withdraw
198.5.1    withdraw    medical
treatment        is         medical        treatment        is
refused    by   the
Medical Board, it           refused by the Secondary
would be open to
the   executor   of         Medical      Board,    it     would

MA No. 1699/ 2019 in WP (C) No. 215/ 2005 the Advance be open to the person Directive or his
family members or or persons named in the even the treating doctor or the Advance Directive or
even hospital staff to approach the High the treating doctor or Court by way of writ petition the
hospital staff to under Article 226 of the approach the High Court Constitution. If such application
by way of writ petition is filed before the High Court, under Article 226 of the the Chief Justice of the
said High Constitution. If such Court shall constitute a application is filed Division Bench to decide
upon grant before the High Court, of approval or to refuse the same. the Chief Justice of the The
High Court will be free to said High Court shall constitute an independent constitute a Division
committee consisting of Bench to decide upon three doctors from the fields of grant of approval or
to general medicine, cardiology, refuse the same. The High neurology, nephrology, Court will be free
to psychiatry or oncology with constitute an independent experience in critical care and committee
consisting of with overall standing in the three doctors from the medical profession of at least
twenty fields of general MA No. 1699/ 2019 in WP (C) No. 215/ 2005 years. medicine, cardiology,
neurology, nephrology, psychiatry or oncology with experience in critical care and with overall
standing in the medical profession of at least twenty years.

13

Common Cause (A Regd. Society) Director ... vs Union Of India (A) Ministry Of Health And ... on 24 January, 2023

Para The High Court No change.

198.5.2 shall hear the application expeditiously after affording opportunity to the State counsel. It
would be open to the High Court to constitute Medical Board in terms of its order to examine the
patient and submit report about the feasibility of acting upon the instructions contained in the
Advance Directive.

Para Needless to say No change. 198.5.3 that the High Court shall render its decision at MA No.
1699/ 2019 in WP (C) No. 215/ 2005 the earliest as such matters cannot brook any delay and it shall
ascribe reasons specifically keeping in mind the principles of “best interests of the patient”.

Paras An individual may No change.

198.6.1 withdraw or alter the Advance Directive at any time when he/she has the capacity to do so
and by following the same procedure as provided for recording of Advance Directive.

Withdrawal or revocation of an Advance Directive must be in writing.

Para An Advance No change. 198.6.2 Directive shall not be applicable to the treatment in question if
there are reasonable grounds for believing that circumstances exist which the person making the
directive did not anticipate at the MA No. 1699/ 2019 in WP (C) No. 215/ 2005 time of the Advance
Directive and which would have affected his decision had he anticipated them.

Para If the Advance No change.

198.6.3    Directive is not
clear           and
ambiguous,      the
Medical      Boards
concerned     shall
not give effect to
the same and, in
that   event,   the
guidelines    meant
for        patients
without     Advance
Directive shall be
made applicable.

Para     Where the Hospital          Where the Primary Medical
198.6.4    Medical       Board
takes a decision            Board     takes     a    decision
not to follow an
Advance Directive           not to follow an Advance
while treating a
person,   then   it         Directive       while    treating
shall    make    an
application to the          a person,        the person or

14

Common Cause (A Regd. Society) Director ... vs Union Of India (A) Ministry Of Health And ... on 24 January, 2023

Medical       Board
constituted by the          persons     named        in      the
Collector       for
consideration and           Advance         Directive        may
appropriate
direction on the            request    the     hospital       to
Advance Directive
refer     the     case     to    the

Secondary        Medical        Board

MA No. 1699/ 2019 in WP (C) No. 215/ 2005 for consideration and appropriate direction on the
Advance Directive.

Para It is necessary to No change.

199      make it clear that
there      will    be
cases where there
is     no     Advance
Directive.        The
said      class    of
persons cannot be
alienated.         In
cases where there
is     no     Advance
Directive,        the
procedure         and
safeguards are to
be same as applied
to    cases     where
Advance Directives
are in existence
and    in    addition
there      to,    the
following
procedure shall be
followed:

Cases where there is No Advance Directive Para In cases where the In cases where the 199.1 patient
is terminally ill and patient is terminally ill undergoing prolonged and undergoing prolonged
treatment in respect of ailment treatment in respect of which is incurable or where there is ailment
which is no hope of being MA No. 1699/ 2019 in WP (C) No. 215/ 2005 cured, the incurable or
where there physician may inform the is no hope of being hospital which, in turn, shall cured, the
physician may constitute a Hospital Medical inform the hospital, Board in the manner indicated

15

Common Cause (A Regd. Society) Director ... vs Union Of India (A) Ministry Of Health And ... on 24 January, 2023

which, in turn, shall earlier. The Hospital Medical constitute a Primary Board shall discuss with the
Medical Board in the family physician and the family manner indicated earlier.

members and record
the minutes of the          The Primary Medical Board
discussion         in
writing.       During       shall       discuss      with     the
the     discussion,
the family members          family physician, if any,
shall be apprised
of the pros and             and the patient’s next of
cons of withdrawal
or    refusal      of       kin/next          friend/guardian
further      medical
treatment to the            and record the minutes of
patient     and    if
they give consent           the          discussion            in
in writing, then
the         Hospital        writing.           During         the
Medical Board may
certify the course          discussion, the patient’s
of action to be
taken.          Their       next          of          kin/next
decision will be
regarded      as    a       friend/guardian          shall     be
preliminary
opinion.                    apprised of the pros and

cons     of       withdrawal       or

refusal            of         further

MA No. 1699/ 2019 in WP (C) No. 215/ 2005 medical treatment to the patient and if they give
consent in writing, then the Primary Medical Board may certify the course of action to be taken
hours of the case being referred to it.

Their decision will be regarded as a preliminary opinion.

Para      In the event the            In the event the Primary
199.2      Hospital    Medical
Board     certifies         Medical        Board         certifies
the    option    of
withdrawal       or         the option of withdrawal
refusal of further
medical treatment,          or     refusal          of     further
the hospital shall

16

Common Cause (A Regd. Society) Director ... vs Union Of India (A) Ministry Of Health And ... on 24 January, 2023

immediately inform          medical        treatment,            the
the jurisdictional
Collector.      The         hospital            shall            then
jurisdictional
Collector     shall         constitute          a        Secondary
then constitute a
Medical       Board         Medical       Board      comprising
comprising      the
Chief      District         in     the    manner         indicated
Medical Officer as

MA No. 1699/ 2019 in WP (C) No. 215/ 2005 the Chairman and hereinbefore. The three experts
from the fields of Secondary Medical Board general medicine, cardiology, shall visit the hospital
neurology, nephrology, for physical examination psychiatry or oncology with of the patient and,
after experience in critical care and studying the medical with overall standing in the papers, may
concur with medical profession of at least twenty the opinion of the years. The Medical Board
constituted Primary Medical Board. In by the Collector shall visit the that event, intimation hospital
for physical shall be given by the examination of the patient and, after hospital to the JMFC and
studying the medical papers, the next of kin/next may concur with the opinion of the
friend/guardian of the Hospital Medical Board. In that patient preferably within event, intimation
shall be given by 48 hours of the case the Chairman of the Collector being referred to it.

nominated Medical
Board to the JMFC
and    the     family
members     of    the
patient.

Para     The    JMFC    shall        Deleted
199.3     visit the patient
at   the    earliest
and    verify    the

MA No. 1699/ 2019 in WP (C) No. 215/ 2005 medical reports, examine the condition of the patient,
discuss with the family members of the patient and, if satisfied in all respects, may endorse the
decision of the Collector nominated Medical Board to withdraw or refuse further medical treatment
to the terminally-

ill patient.

Para     There may be cases          There may be cases where
199.4     where   the    Board
may not take a              the Primary Medical Board
decision    to   the

17

Common Cause (A Regd. Society) Director ... vs Union Of India (A) Ministry Of Health And ... on 24 January, 2023

effect            of        may    not    take    a   decision
withdrawing
medical treatment           to      the          effect     of
of the patient or
the       Collector         withdrawing                medical
nominated Medical
Board    may     not        treatment of the patient
concur   with    the
opinion    of    the        or the Secondary Medical
hospital     Medical
Board. In such a            Board may not concur with
situation,       the
nominee    of    the        the     opinion           of   the
patient    or    the
family member or            Primary Medical Board. In
the        treating
doctor    or     the        such    a     situation,       the
hospital staff can
seek     permission         nominee of the patient or
from    the     High

MA No. 1699/ 2019 in WP (C) No. 215/ 2005 Court to withdraw the family member or the life
support by way of writ treating doctor or the petition under Article 226 of the hospital staff can seek
Constitution in which case the permission from the High Chief Justice of the said High Court to
withdraw life Court shall constitute a support by way of writ Division Bench which shall decide
petition under Article to grant approval or not. The High 226 of the Constitution Court may
constitute an in which case the Chief independent committee to Justice of the said High depute
three doctors from the Court shall constitute a fields of general medicine, Division Bench which
cardiology, neurology, shall decide to grant nephrology, psychiatry or approval or not. The High
oncology with experience in Court may constitute an critical care and with overall independent
committee to standing in the medical profession depute three doctors from of at least twenty years
after the fields of general consulting the competent medical medicine, cardiology, practitioners. It
shall also afford neurology, nephrology, an opportunity to the State counsel. psychiatry or oncology
The High Court in such cases shall with experience in MA No. 1699/ 2019 in WP (C) No. 215/ 2005
render its critical care and with decision at the earliest since overall standing in the such matters
cannot brook any medical profession of at delay. Needless to say, the High least twenty years after
Court shall ascribe reasons consulting the competent specifically keeping in mind medical
practitioners. It the principle of “best interests of shall also afford an the patient”.

opportunity to the State counsel. The High Court in such cases shall render its decision at the
earliest since such matters cannot brook any delay. Needless to say, the High Court shall ascribe
reasons specifically keeping in mind the principle of “best interests of the patient”.

Para Having said this, No change. 200 we think it MA No. 1699/ 2019 in WP (C) No. 215/ 2005
appropriate to cover a vital aspect to the effect the life support is withdrawn, the same shall also be
intimated by the Magistrate to the High Court. It shall be kept in a digital format by the Registry of

18

Common Cause (A Regd. Society) Director ... vs Union Of India (A) Ministry Of Health And ... on 24 January, 2023

the High Court apart from keeping the hard copy which shall be destroyed after the expiry of three
years from the death of the patient.

(7) Registry will communicate a copy of this Order to Registrar Generals of all the High Courts.

The Registrar Generals of the High Courts will dispatch a copy of this Order to the Health
Secretaries in the respective States/Union Territories for onward communication to all the Chief
Medical Officers in the States/Union Territories.

The miscellaneous application will stand MA No. 1699/ 2019 in WP (C) No. 215/ 2005 disposed of
as above.

No orders as to costs.

……………………………………………………., J. [ K.M. JOSEPH ] ……………………………………………………., J. [
A J A Y   R A S T O G I   ]   … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … . ,   J .   [   A N I R U D D H A   B O S E   ]
… … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … . ,   J .   [   H R I S H I K E S H   R O Y   ]
……………………………………………………., J. [ C.T. RAVIKUMAR ] New Delhi;

January 24, 2023.

19