Debashis Sinha vs M/S R.N.R Enterprise on 9 February, 2023

Debashis Sinha vs M/S R.N.R Enterprise on 9 February, 2023

Author: S. Ravindra Bhat

Bench: Dipankar Datta, S. Ravindra Bhat

1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NO.3343 OF 2020

DEBASHIS SINHA & ORS.                                     …..APPELLANTS

VS.

M/S R.N.R. ENTERPRISE REP. BY ITS
PROPRIETOR/CHAIRMAN,KOLKATA & ORS.                        RESPONDENTS

ORDER

1. This appeal under section 23 of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 (hereafter ‘the C.P. Act’, for
short) calls in question the order dated 21st August, 2020 passed by the National Consumer
Disputes Redressal Commission, New Delhi, (hereafter ‘NCDRC’, for short). By the impugned order,
the NCDRC has dismissed the consumer complaint lodged by the appellants.

2. The multiple appellants are owners of flats in different blocks of a housing complex at 1, Kailash
Ghosh Road, Kolkata – 700008 (hereafter ‘housing complex’, for short).

3. Aggrieved by the failure of the respondents - the developers of the housing complex - to provide
services as promised, the jurisdiction of the NCRDC was invoked by the appellants in 2008. They
alleged that despite paying full consideration amount as per market rate and despite execution and
registration of deeds of conveyance in their favour, the respondents had failed, inter alia, to provide
the ‘Completion Certificate’, which is their statutory obligation as per the rules of the Kolkata
Municipal Corporation (hereafter ‘KMC’, for short); and, in the absence of such a certificate, their
occupation of the respective flats has been rendered precarious. According to the appellants, the
respondents also failed to provide them common amenities and facilities viz., playground,
community hall-cum-office room, 33-feet wide concrete road, and supply of water from the KMC. It

1

Debashis Sinha vs M/S R.N.R Enterprise on 9 February, 2023

was their further complaint that the respondents had adopted unfair trade practices by promising a
playground on a land which actually belonged to a local club as well as attracted buyers by showing
in the brochure/ advertisement a ‘beautified lake’, which never came into existence. Also, finding
that there were constructional defects, a valuer from the list of approved valuers maintained by the
Calcutta High Court had been engaged by the appellants. The report of such valuer revealed
constructional defects of the nature delineated therein. Based on the complaint that was lodged
before the NCDRC, the appellants sought direction to the respondents to provide the completion
certificate of the project and to set right the constructional defects as pointed out by the valuer.
Further, they claimed that direction be issued for providing other facilities such as community hall,
landscape gardening, generator, multi-gymnasium, water filtration plant, and gas pipeline.
Additionally, compensation of Rs.1,80,00,000/- (Rupees one crore eighty lakh only) together with
litigation cost of Rs.50,000/- (Rupees fifty thousand only) was claimed.

4. The complaint lodged by the appellants was contested by the respondents by filing a written
statement. Apart from objecting to the maintainability of the complaint on the grounds that the
same was time barred and that a joint complaint could not have been lodged by 36 (thirty-six) flat
owners, it was contended that the appellants have not paid the full consideration amounts, that
certain common facilities/amenities could be provided only if all the members of the housing
complex contribute for the same and that the compensation claimed was vague and imaginary. It
was also contended in the written statement that most of the appellants had taken possession of the
flats in 2006 without raising any objection at the material time; hence, lodging of a complaint after 2
(two) years of possession being delivered is motivated. Insofar as the issue of obtaining the
completion certificate is concerned, it was contended that the flats having already stood transferred
to the appellants by way of conveyance/sale deed(s), it was for the appellants to apply before the
KMC for obtaining such certificate. The respondents also contended that since KMC had completed
assessment of the flats of the appellants, it was not possible for the respondents to now apply and
obtain completion certificate for the flats.

5. Considering the pleadings before it as well as upon hearing the parties, the NCDRC returned
findings that the respondents had shown a very casual approach and were guilty of unfair trade
practice as well; yet, it was observed that the appellants had not been able to establish their claim. It
also appears from the impugned order that the NCDRC suspected that the purpose of the complaint
was to pressurize the respondents into paying some compensation and/or not insisting upon extra
payment for the extra facilities and amenities. Also, it was held that the respondents had been able
to successfully urge that the fault for not obtaining the completion certificate of the project could not
be attributed to them. In this regard, the NCDRC returned a finding that reading of section 403 of
the Kolkata Municipal Corporation Act, 1980 (hereafter ‘KMC Act’, for short) makes it clear that it
was incumbent on both the respondents as well as the appellants to not occupy the premises in the
absence of the completion certificate. As a result thereof, a finding was further returned that both
the parties had violated the law; as such, no deficiency could be attributed to the respondents on this
account. Based on broadly these findings, the complaint of the appellants failed before the NCDRC.

6. We have heard Mr. Sharma, learned counsel for the appellants. None appeared before us on
behalf of the respondents on the previous 2 (two) occasions the appeal was heard and even today.

2

7. We have also perused the impugned order of the NCDRC and considered the materials on record.

Debashis Sinha vs M/S R.N.R Enterprise on 9 February, 2023

8. What has struck us first is the time taken by the NCDRC to decide the complaint after it reserved
the same for passing orders. It took the NCDRC in excess of 10 (ten) months to dismiss the
complaint. As our discussion hereafter would unfold, we are of the clear view that the long delay in
passing the order on the complaint did have its own effect on the ultimate decision of the NCDRC.

9. The complaint of the appellants was that the respondents have not provided playground,
community hall, beautified lake, landscape gardening, generator backup, multi-gymnasium, etc. as
mentioned in the brochure/advertisement pursuant to which they expressed interest to purchase
flats in the project and, thus, defaulted in providing services in relation to housing construction.

10. One entire paragraph in the order has been devoted by the NCDRC to highlight that the project
was not that huge and talk of common areas and facilities on a grand scale was quite misplaced. An
admission made by the appellants themselves in the complaint has been referred to but we have not
been able to trace any admission of the complainants that the respondents promised not to deliver
substantial common areas and common facilities. Be that as it may, what the NCDRC omitted to
bear in mind was that the appellants were allured to purchase flats of the nature and kind together
with facilities and amenities as attractively published in the brochure/advertisement; hence,
whether the project was huge or otherwise was absolutely beside the point. It was the duty of the
NCDRC to ascertain, based on the materials on record, whether if at all and to what extent facilities
and amenities as promised were offered and/or whether there was any deficiency of service. We
have not found any categorical findings in this regard, although there are unambiguous findings that
the NCDRC disapproved the conduct of the respondents.

11. The conduct of the respondents, the NCDRC recorded in the impugned order, was far too casual
and on the face of it, the respondents are guilty of “unfair trade practice” within the meaning of
section 2(1)(r) of the C.P. Act. After so recording, the NCDRC held that this does little to rescue the
complainants. The reason assigned therefor defies logic. We have failed to comprehend as to what
the NCDRC meant when it observed that the appellants “ought to have known what they were
purchasing”. More often than not, the jurisdiction of the consumer fora under the C.P. Act is
invoked post- purchase. If complaints were to be spurned on the specious ground that the
consumers knew what they were purchasing, the object and purpose of the enactment would be
defeated. Any deficiency detected post-purchase opens up an avenue for the aggrieved consumer to
seek relief before the consumer fora. The reasoning of the NCDRC is, thus, indefensible. Indeed, the
appellants had purchased their respective flats on payment of consideration amounts as per market
rate and there was due execution and registration of the deeds of conveyance preceded by
agreements for sale and these instruments did indicate, inter alia, what formed part of the common
facilities/amenities; however, the matter obviously could not have ended there. Whether the
appellants had been provided what the respondents had promised did survive for consideration,
which does not get reflected in the impugned order.

12. NCDRC, in our opinion, might have missed to appreciate the present day realities of life.
Now-a-days, flat owners seldom purchase flats with liquid cash. Flats are purchased on the basis of

3

Debashis Sinha vs M/S R.N.R Enterprise on 9 February, 2023

finances being advanced by banks and other financial institutions. Once a flat is booked and the
prospective flat owner enters into an agreement for loan, instalments fall due to be paid to clear the
debt irrespective of whether the flat is ready for being delivered possession. The usual delays that
are associated with construction activities result in undue anxiety, stress, and harassment for which
many a prospective flat owner, it is common knowledge, even without the project/flat being wholly
complete is left with no other option but to take possession. Whether, upon taking possession, a flat
owner forfeits his/her right to claim such services which had been promised but are not provided
resulting in deficiency in services is a question that the NCDRC ought to have adverted to. Once the
NCDRC arrived at a finding that the respondents were casual in their approach and had even
resorted to unfair trade practice, it was its obligation to consider the appellants’ grievance
objectively and upon application of mind and thereafter give its reasoned decision. If at all, the
appellants had not forfeited any right by registration of the sale deeds and if indeed the respondents
were remiss in providing any of the facilities/amenities as promised in the brochure/advertisement,
it was the duty of the NCDRC to set things right.

13. That the appellants had genuine reasons to feel aggrieved was clearly documented in the report
of the valuer dated 11 th July, 2008 which was even acknowledged by the NCDRC, yet, a peculiar
approach was adopted and the respondents absolved of their obligations by an order which appears
to us to be unjustified on facts and in the circumstances.

14. We have found from the impugned order that it speaks of certain facilities to be made available
by the respondents on payment of extra money. However, there is no such clear-cut description of
facilities/amenities which the respondents asserted would be provided on payment of extra money
by the appellants. NCDRC would have done well to indicate the same with clarity.

15. Finally, we cannot resist but comment on the perfunctory approach of the NCDRC while dealing
with the appellants’ contention that it was the duty of the respondents to apply for and obtain the
completion certificate from the KMC and that the respondents ought to have been directed to act in
accordance with law. The observation made by the NCDRC of the respondents having successfully
argued that it was not their fault, that no completion certificate of the project could be obtained, is
clearly contrary to the statutory provisions.

16. Sub-section (2) of section 403 of the KMC Act was referred to by the NCDRC in the impugned
order. Sub-section (1) thereof, which finds no reference therein, requires every person giving notice
under section 393 or section 394 or every owner of a building or a work to which the notice relates
to send or cause to be delivered or sent to the Municipal Commissioner a notice in writing of
c o m p l e t i o n   o f   e r e c t i o n   o f   b u i l d i n g   o r   e x e c u t i o n   o f   w o r k   w i t h i n   o n e   m o n t h   o f   s u c h
completion/erection, accompanied by a certificate in the form specified in the rules made in this
behalf as well as to give to the Municipal Commissioner all necessary facilities for inspection of such
building or work.

17. Section 393 mandates every person, who intends to erect a building, to apply for sanction by
giving notice in writing of his intention to the Municipal Commissioner in such form and containing
such information as may be prescribed together with such documents and plans. Similarly, section

4

394 also mandates every person who intends to execute any of the works specified in clause

Debashis Sinha vs M/S R.N.R Enterprise on 9 February, 2023

(b) to clause (m) of sub-section (1) of section 390 to apply for sanction by giving notice in writing of
his intention to the Municipal Commissioner in such form and containing such information as may
be prescribed.

18. It is, therefore, evident on a conjoint reading of sections 403, 390, and 394 of the KMC Act that
it is the obligation of the person intending to erect a building or to execute works to apply for
completion certificate in terms of the rules framed thereunder. It is no part of the flat owner’s duty
to apply for a completion certificate. When the respondents had applied for permission/sanction to
erect, the Calcutta Municipal Corporation Buildings Rules, 1990 (hereafter ‘1990 Rules’, for short)
were in force. Rule 26 of the 1990 Rules happens to be the relevant rule. In terms of sub-rules (1) to
(3) of rule 26 thereof, the obligation as cast was required to be discharged by the respondents.
Evidently, the respondents observed the statutory provisions in the breach.

19. Curiously enough, the NCDRC referred to sub-section (2) of section 403 of the KMC Act only to
permit the respondents to wriggle out of such obligation and arrived at a completely erroneous
finding that no deficiency in service could be attributed to the respondents since both the
respondents and the appellants had acted in violation of law. True it is, the appellants ought not to
have taken possession without the completion certificate; however, that was not a valid ground not
to direct the respondents to apply for and obtain the completion certificate as required by law. The
mere fact that the flat owners were being assessed by the KMC affords no reason to the respondents
for breaching section 403(1) read with rule 26 of the 1990 Rules. Of course, once a completion
certificate is issued by the KMC upon conducting appropriate inspection and tests of the building
that has since been erected, it would stand to reason that the same amounts to a certification that
the building does not suffer from any violation of the building plan sanctioned for the purpose under
section 390 of the KMC Act or that its constructional quality is not of the desired level for which it is
unsafe for human habitation. We are constrained to observe that the respondents have been let off
by the NCDRC in a manner contrary to law.

20. For such infirmities, as noticed above, this is an appropriate case where the complaint of the
appellants ought to be remitted to the NCDRC for taking a relook into the complaint in accordance
with law. It is ordered accordingly.

21. Since it is found that the appellants while praying for monetary compensation of
Rs.1,80,00,000.00 have failed to give detailed particulars and/or provide the basis therefor, and
undoubtedly, they have also been on the wrong side of law by taking possession of their respective
flats without the completion certificate, whatever might be the compulsion, we are not inclined to
direct the NCDRC to decide on the compensation component. That chapter stands closed. The
remand is directed only with a view to secure adherence to the promises that the respondents had
made in the brochure and/or advertisement, as the case may be, and thereby cover up deficiency in
service, if any, as well as the mandatory statutory provisions.

22. The appeal stands disposed of on terms as aforesaid, with no orders as to costs.

5

Debashis Sinha vs M/S R.N.R Enterprise on 9 February, 2023

23. Since the complaint is more than 15 (fifteen) years old, it would be desirable if the NCDRC
decides the same as early as possible and preferably within a year of service of an authenticated copy
of this order.

………………………………J (S. RAVINDRA BHAT) ………………………………J (DIPANKAR DATTA) NEW
DELHI;

FEBRUARY 9, 2023.

6