Delhi Development Authority vs Mgs (India) Private Limited on 17 February, 2023

Delhi Development Authority vs Mgs (India) Private Limited on
17 February, 2023

Author: M.R. Shah

Bench: Sanjay Karol, C.T. Ravikumar, M.R. Shah

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 944 OF 2023
(@ SLP (C) No. 18982 of 2022)

Delhi Development Authority                               …Appellant(s)

Versus

MGS (India) Private Limited & Ors.                        …Respondent(s)

WITH

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 947 OF 2023
(@ SLP (C) No. 3167 of 2023)
(@ Diary No. 1203 of 2023)

Govt. of NCT of Delhi Through Secretary
Land & Building Department & Anr.                         …Appellant(s)

Versus

MGS (India) Private Limited & Ors.                        …Respondent(s)

JUDGMENT

M.R. SHAH, J.

1. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment Natarajanand order passed by the
High Court of Delhi at New Delhi dated 20.07.2015 in Writ Petition (C) No. 910 of 2015 by which
the High Court has allowed the said writ petition and has declared that the acquisition with respect
to the land in question is deemed to have lapsed by virtue of Section 24(2) of the Right to Fair
Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013

1

Delhi Development Authority vs Mgs (India) Private Limited on 17 February, 2023

(hereinafter referred to as “Act, 2013”), the Delhi Development Authority (DDA) as well as
Government of NCT of Delhi have preferred the present appeals.

2. Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants has vehemently submitted that the original
writ petitioner before the High Court was the subsequent purchaser, who admittedly purchased the
property – land in question after the acquisition proceedings commenced and the award was
declared. It is submitted that therefore, the original writ petitioner being a subsequent purchaser
had no locus to challenge the acquisition proceedings and/or lapsing of the acquisition proceedings.
It is submitted that the aforesaid objection was taken before the High Court and even it was
specifically mentioned in the counter before the High Court, however, the Hon’ble High Court has
not decided the locus of the original writ petitioner to pray for lapsing of the acquisition being a
subsequent purchaser. Reliance is placed on the decisions of this Court in the case of Shiv Kumar &
Anr. Vs. Union of India & Ors., (2019) 10 SCC 229; Delhi Development Authority Vs. Godfrey
Phillips (I) Ltd. & Ors., Civil Appeal No. 3073 of 2022 and the subsequent decision in which the
aforesaid two decisions have been relied upon.

3. Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent – original writ petitioner though is not
disputing that the original writ petitioner was the subsequent purchaser and purchased the land
subsequent to the acquisition proceedings. However, he has submitted that the decision of this
Court in the case of Shiv Kumar & Anr. (supra) shall not be applicable inasmuch as in that case, the
original writ petitioner had no title and he claimed the title on the basis of the general power of
attorney. It is submitted that at the relevant time, the decision of this Court in the case of
Government (NCT of Delhi) Vs. Manav Dharam Trust and Anr., (2017) 6 SCC 751 was on the point,
which came to be relied upon by the High Court.

4. We have heard the learned counsel appearing for the respective parties.

5. It is not in dispute that the original writ petitioner is the subsequent purchaser, who purchased
the land in question subsequent to the acquisition proceedings and even after the award was
declared. Therefore, being a subsequent purchaser, as observed and held by this Court in catena of
decisions, more particularly, in the case of Shiv Kumar & Anr. (supra) and Godfrey Phillips (I) Ltd.
& Ors. (supra) and other subsequent decisions, subsequent purchaser has no locus to challenge the
lapsing of the acquisition.

5.1 The submission on behalf of the respondent that the decision of this Court in the case of Shiv
Kumar & Anr. (supra) shall not be applicable as in that case, the original writ petitioner claimed the
title on the basis of a general power of attorney and in the present case, the subsequent purchaser
purchased the property by registered sale deed is concerned, it is required to be noted that the law
laid down by this Court in the aforesaid decision is that a subsequent purchaser has no locus to
challenge the acquisition. In the case of Godfrey Phillips (I) Ltd. & Ors. (supra), it is specifically
observed and held that the subsequent purchaser has no locus to pray for lapsing of the acquisition.
5.2 Now, so far as the reliance placed upon the decision of this Court in the case of Manav Dharam
Trust and Anr. (supra) is concerned, it is required to be noted that the said decision is held to be per
incuriam by this Court in the aforesaid decisions.

2

Delhi Development Authority vs Mgs (India) Private Limited on 17 February, 2023

5.3 From the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court, it appears that though before
the High Court and so stated in the counter, an objection was raised on maintainability of the writ
petition, at the instance of the original writ petitioner – subsequent purchaser, the same has not
been dealt with by the High Court. The High Court ought to have dealt with the said aspect. Be that
it may, the fact remains that the respondent being a subsequent purchaser had no locus to pray for
lapsing of the acquisition as observed and held by this Court in the aforesaid decisions. Therefore,
the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court is unsustainable.

6. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, both these appeals succeed. The impugned
judgment and order passed by the High Court is hereby quashed and set aside. There shall not be
any deemed lapse of the acquisition proceedings with respect to the land in question as observed
and held by the High Court.

Present appeals are accordingly allowed. However, in the facts and circumstances of the case, there
shall be no order as to costs.

Pending applications, if any, also stand disposed of.

………………………………….J.
[M.R. SHAH]

………………………………….J.
[C.T. RAVIKUMAR]

NEW DELHI;                              ………………………………….J.
FEBRUARY 17, 2023.                         [SANJAY KAROL]

3