Devesh Sharma vs Union Of India on 11 August, 2023

Devesh Sharma vs Union Of India on 11 August, 2023

Author: Sudhanshu Dhulia

Bench: Sudhanshu Dhulia, Aniruddha Bose

1

2023 INSC 704

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE/ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5068 OF 2023
(ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) No.20743 OF 2021)

DEVESH SHARMA                                 … Appellant

Versus

UNION OF INDIA AND ORS.                       …Respondent(s)

WITH

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S).5122 OF 2023
(ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO(S). 17633 OF 2023)
@ D.NO.21388 OF 2022

WITH

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5070 OF 2023
(ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO.2069 OF 2022)

WITH

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 5086 OF 2023
(ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO(S).17630 OF 2023)
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
NEETA SAPRA
@ D.NO.5464 OF 2022

1

Devesh Sharma vs Union Of India on 11 August, 2023

Date: 2023.08.14
12:07:17 IST
Reason:

WITH

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S).5121 OF 2023
(cid:12)                                                             2

(ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO(S).17632 OF 2023)
@ D.NO.12813 OF 2022

WITH

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5069 OF 2023
(ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO.2061 OF 2022)

WITH

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S).5071-5084 OF 2023
(ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NOS.2578-2591 OF 2022)

WITH

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5085 OF 2023
(ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO.3222 OF 2022)

WITH

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 5087 OF 2023
(ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO(S). 17631 OF 2023)
@ D.NO.7368 OF 2022

WITH

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 5088-5120 OF 2023
(ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NOS.15118-15150 OF
2022)

WITH

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5125 OF 2023
(ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO.22923 OF 2022)

WITH

CIVIL APPEAL NOS.5123-5124/2023 OF 2023
(ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NOS.21308-21309 OF 2022)
(cid:12)                                                                 3

2

WITH

Devesh Sharma vs Union Of India on 11 August, 2023

WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.137 OF 2022

WITH

WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.881 OF 2022

WITH

WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.355 OF 2022

JUDGMENT

SUDHANSHU DHULIA, J.

Leave granted.

2. A Division Bench judgment of Rajasthan High Court, dated 25.11.2021, is under challenge before
this Court. Apart from the appeals, there are three Writ Petitions as well before this Court, on the
same issue. All the same, while dealing with these cases, for facts, we would be referring to Civil
Appeal @ SLP (C) No.20743 of 2021 Devesh Sharma versus Union of India, which arises out of the
order dated 25.11.2021 passed by the High Court in D.B. Civil Writ Petition No. 2109 of 2021.

3. What lies at the core of the dispute before this Court is the notification dated 28.06.2018, issued
by the National Council for Teacher Education (hereafter ‘NCTE’), made in exercise of its powers
under Section 23(1) of the Right to Education Act, 2009 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Act’). This
notification made B.Ed. degree holders eligible for appointment to the post of primary school
teachers (classes I to V). All the same, in spite of the above notification, when the Board of
Secondary Education, State of Rajasthan, issued an advertisement on 11.01.2021, for Rajasthan
Teacher Eligibility Test (RTET Level-1), it excluded B.Ed. degree holders from the list of eligible
candidates. This action of the Rajasthan Government was challenged before the High Court. The
petitioner Shri Devesh Sharma has a B.Ed. degree, and as per the Notification dated 28.06.2018, he
was eligible, like many other similar candidates. Consequently, he filed his petition before the
Rajasthan High Court, inter alia, praying that the advertisement dated 11.01.2021 be quashed, as it
was in violation of the notification dated 28.06.2018 issued by the NCTE.

4. Apart from the above batch of petitioners, there was another set of petitioners, with their own
grievance. These are the candidates who are diploma holders in Elementary Education (D.El.Ed.)1,
which was the only teaching qualification required for teachers at primary level, and who are
aggrieved by the inclusion 1 It is possible that this diploma is called by different names in different
States. It is for this reason that at some place it may just be referred as a diploma in elementary
education. of B.Ed. qualified candidates. They too filed Writ Petitions before the Rajasthan High
Court challenging the legality of the notification dated 28.06.2018. The State of Rajasthan
understandably supported these second batch of candidates before the High Court, as they would do
before this Court.

3

Devesh Sharma vs Union Of India on 11 August, 2023

5. Out of the three writ petitions before us two (W.P. No. 137 of 2022 and 881 of 2022) are
challenging the notification dated 28.06.2018 and the subsequent notifications issued by the
Government of Bihar and U.P. respectively calling for application from eligible candidates including
B.Ed. W.P. No. 355 of 2022 again challenges the notification dated 28.06.2018. SLP (C) No. 22923
of 2022 is against an interim order of the Calcutta High Court which denied relief to the petitioners
who were seeking a stay of the notification dated 28.06.2018.

6. Hence the question of law to be answered in these cases is whether NCTE was right in including
B.Ed. qualification as an equivalent and essential qualification for appointment to the post of
primary school teacher (Level-1)? The Rajasthan High Court in the impugned judgment has quashed
the notification dated 28.06.2018, holding B.Ed. candidates to be unqualified for the posts of
primary school teachers (Level-1).

7. On behalf of the Petitioners, we have heard learned Senior Counsel, Mr. Paramjit Singh Patwalia
who has assailed the Judgement of the Rajasthan High Court. Mr. Patwalia appeared for the B.Ed.
qualified candidates and would support the notification dated 28.06.2018, and the petitioners who
had challenged their exclusion before the Rajasthan High Court. Ms. Meenakshi Arora, learned
senior counsel was also heard for the appellants. The learned counsel would argue that the High
Court failed to consider that the notification dated 28.06.2018 was a policy decision taken by the
NCTE after the Central Government had issued directions in this regard, under Section 29 of the
NCTE Act, and the High Court was wrong in interfering with the policy decision of the Central
Government. The NCTE broadly agrees with the submissions which have been made by Shri
Patwalia, and Ms. Arora, while assailing the impugned judgement.

8. We have also heard the submissions by the learned Senior Counsel Mr. Kapil Sibal and Dr.
Manish Singhvi who appeared for the Diploma holders and the State of Rajasthan respectively who
would argue, inter alia, that the NCTE being an expert body had to take an independent decision in
this case, based on the objective realties. Even if the NCTE had to follow the directions of the Central
Government, the NCTE must demonstrate that these directions had been independently considered
by them and not implemented in a mechanical manner.

9. On behalf of the Union of India we have heard learned Additional Solicitor General(s) Ms.
Aishwarya Bhati and Mr. Vikramjeet Banerjee. They would argue that the Impugned Judgement has
been passed ignoring the powers of the Central Government given both under the Act as well as
NCTE Act. Moreover, an objection has also been raised that the Union of India was not even made a
party in the proceedings before the Rajasthan High Court!

10. During the course of hearing, this Court had passed an order dated 24.08.2022, granting liberty
to the Board of Secondary Education for different States, and other stake holders to be impleaded as
intervenors. Pursuant to this order, several Interlocutory Applications were filed which are being
heard along with these appeals.

11. “The Indian Constitution is first and foremost a social document”, writes Granville Austin2. The
Rights contained in 2 Austin, Granville. “The Conscience of the Constitution”. The Indian

4

Devesh Sharma vs Union Of India on 11 August, 2023

Constitution, Cornerstone of a Nation, Oxford University Press, 2000, pp. 50 Part III and the
Directive Principles of State Policy contained in Part IV together establish conditions which further
the goal of this social revolution3. Austin goes on to call Part III and Part IV of the Constitution as
“The Conscience of the Constitution” 4. Free and compulsory education for children was a part of
the social vision, of the framers of our Constitution.

12. Elementary education for children is today a Fundamental Right enshrined under Article 21A of
Part III of the Constitution of India. Every child (upto 14 years of age), has a fundamental Right to
have ‘free’ and ‘compulsory’ elementary education. But then ‘free’ and ‘compulsory’ elementary
education is of no use unless it is also a ‘meaningful’ education. In other words, elementary
education has to be of good ‘quality’, and not just a ritual or formality!

13. Our progress, in achieving this constitutional goal, has been slow. In some ways, it is still a work
in progress. Prior to the Constitutional 86th Amendment, the Right to Education was in Part-IV of
the Constitution (Article 45), as a Directive Principle of State Policy. Directive Principles, as we
know, are a set of goals which the state must strive to achieve. The goal set out in Article 3 Ibid – pp
50.

4 Ibid – pp 50.

455 of the Constitution (as it stood at that time), was to make elementary education free and
compulsory for all children up to age of 14 years, within 10 years of the promulgation of the
Constitution. All the same, it would take much more than ten years to achieve this goal.

14. The 1986 National Policy on Education, modified in the year 1992, declared that free and
compulsory elementary education of ‘satisfactory quality’ be given to all children up to the age of
fourteen years, before the nation enters the next century i.e., 21 st Century.

15. Later in the seminal judgment of this court in Unni Krishnan J.P. versus State of Andhra Pradesh
and Ors. (AIR 1993 SC 2178), it was held that children have a fundamental right to free education,
till they complete the age of fourteen years.

16. In the year 1997, in order to make free and compulsory education a fundamental right the 83 rd
Constitutional Amendment Bill was introduced in Parliament, to insert a new Article in Part III of
the Constitution of India, which was to be 5 Article 45 of the Constitution as it existed prior to the
86th Amendment:

“Provision for free and compulsory education for children.— The State shall
endeavour to provide, within a period of ten years from the commencement of this
Constitution, for free and compulsory education for all children until they complete
the age of fourteen years.” Article 21A. The Bill was sent for the scrutiny of the
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resources Development. The
Standing Committee not only welcomed the amendment but in addition emphasizes
on the ‘quality of elementary education’. This is what it said.

5

Devesh Sharma vs Union Of India on 11 August, 2023

“The eminent educationists felt that the Bill is silent on the ‘Quality’ of Education.
They suggested that there should be a reference to ‘quality’ of education in the Bill.
The Secretary, Education agreed that the ‘quality’ aspect also has to be seen.

Education definitely must mean ‘quality’ education and anything less than that
should not be called education. Therefore, the emphasis would be through
strengthening the teacher education content, the Secretary stated.”6 Finally, by way
of the Constitution (86 th Amendment) Act of 2002, Article 21A, was inserted as a
Fundamental Right in Part III of the Constitution, and made effective from
01.04.2010. Article 21A of the Constitution reads as under:

“Article 21A: The State shall provide free and compulsory education to all children of
the age of six to fourteen years in such manner as the State may, by law, determine.”

6 Para 13 of the Report of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development.

17. In order to fulfil the above mandate Right to Education Act, 2009, was passed by the Parliament
on August 20, 2009, which became effective from 01.04.2010. The object and reasons of the Act
declared loud and clear that what the Act seeks to achieve is not merely ‘free’ and ‘compulsory’
elementary education, but equally important would be the ‘Quality’ of this education! The Preamble
to the Act states “that every child has a right to be provided full time elementary education of
satisfactory and equitable ‘quality’ in a formal school which satisfies certain essential norms and
standards”.

18. When the validity of the Act was challenged before this Court7, this Court, while upholding its
validity emphasized that the Act, was intended not only to impart “free” and “compulsory” education
to children, but the purpose was also to impart ‘quality’ education! “The provisions of this Act are
intended not only to guarantee right to free and compulsory education to children, but it also
envisages imparting of ‘quality’ education by providing required infrastructure and compliance of
specified norms and standards in the schools.” [See Para 8, (2012) 6 SCC 1] 77 In Society for
Unaided Private Schools of Rajasthan v. Union of India & Anr. [(2012) 6 SCC 1]

19. As we can see, the purpose behind bringing this pathbreaking legislation was not to complete the
formality of ‘free and compulsory’ elementary education for children, but to make a qualitative
difference in elementary education and to impart it in a meaningful manner. Provisions like ‘Right
to be admitted in a neighbourhood school’8, ‘No denial of admission’9 and ‘Prohibition of physical
punishment and mental harassment’ 10, are some of the heartwarming provisions of the Act.

20. The Act sets down certain norms and standards which have to be followed in elementary
schools, and this is with the purpose of providing a meaningful and ‘quality’ education. To name
some of these requirements such as:-

6

Devesh Sharma vs Union Of India on 11 August, 2023

A. The necessary infrastructure requirement. B. Pupil teacher ratio which is 30:1 and
C. The absolute necessity of trained as well as qualified teachers.

21. Free and compulsory education for children becomes meaningless if we make compromise on its
‘quality’. We must recruit the best qualified teachers. A good teacher is the first assurance of ‘quality’
education in a school. Any compromise on 8 Section 3 of the Right to Education Act, 2009. 9
Section 15 of the Right to Education Act, 2009. 10 Section 17 of the Right to Education Act, 2009.
the qualification of teachers would necessarily mean a compromise on the ‘quality’ of education.
Jacques Barzun, the American educationalist and historian, in his seminal work ‘Teacher in
America’, says “teaching is not a lost art, but the regard for it is a lost tradition” 11. Though this
comment was for the state of higher education in America, it is equally relevant here on the
treatment of Primary education in our country, as it emerges from the facts before us.

22. Elementary education in India is at two levels. A is the ‘Primary’ level i.e. class I to V, and B is
the Senior primary level i.e., classes VI to VIII. Presently we are only concerned with the “primary
level” of education.

23. Section 23 of the Act is extremely important as it not only provides as to who shall determine the
qualifications of teachers in a Primary school, but as to who can relax these qualifications, and for
how long.

It reads as under :-

“Section 23. Qualifications for appointment and terms and conditions of service of teachers .—(1)
Any person possessing such minimum 11 Barzun, Jacques. “Profession: Teacher”. Teacher in
America, published by Little Brown 7 Co. in association with Atlantic Monthly Press, 1945, pp. 3-13
qualifications, as laid down by an academic authority, authorised by the Central Government, by
notification, shall be eligible for appointment as a teacher.

(2) Where a State does not have adequate institutions offering courses or training in teacher
education, or teachers possessing minimum qualifications as laid down under sub-section (1) are
not available in sufficient numbers, the Central Government may, if its deems necessary, by
notification, relax the minimum qualifications required for appointment as a teacher, for such
period, not exceeding five years, as may be specified in that notification:

Provided that a teacher who, at the commencement of this Act, does not possess
minimum qualifications as laid down under sub-section (1), shall acquire such
minimum qualifications within a period of five years:

[Provided further that every teacher appointed or in position as on the 31st March,
2015, who does not possess minimum qualifications as laid down under sub-section
(1), shall acquire such minimum qualifications within a period of four years from the
date of commencement of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education
(Amendment) Act, 2017.] (3) The salary and allowances payable to, and the terms

7

and conditions of service of, teachers shall be such as may be prescribed.”

Devesh Sharma vs Union Of India on 11 August, 2023

24. Whereas sub-Section (1) of Section 23 is the provision where the ‘academic
authority’ has been empowered to prescribe qualifications for teachers in elementary
schools, sub-section (2) of Section 23 empowers the Central Government to relax the
minimum ‘qualifications’ prescribed by the ‘academic authority’, under certain
circumstances and for a limited period.

The ‘Academic Authority’ under Section 23(1) of the Act is the National Council for Teachers
Education (NCTE), which brought a notification on 23.08.2010, laying down the necessary
qualifications for teachers, both at primary, as well as upper primary level. Inter alia, this
notification prescribes as under:-

1. Minimum Qualifications: -

(i) Classes I-V

(a) Senior Secondary (or its equivalent) with atleast 50% marks and 2- year Diploma
in Elementary Education (by whatever name known) OR Senior Secondary (or its
equivalent) with atleast 45% marks and 2-year Diploma in Elementary Education (by
whatever name known), in accordance with NCTE (Recognition Norms and
Procedure), Regulations 2002 OR Senior Secondary (or its equivalent) with atleast
50% marks and 4-year Bachelor of Elementary Education (B.El.Ed.) OR Senior
Secondary (or its equivalent) with at least 50% marks and 2-year Diploma in
Education (Special Education) AND

(b) Pass in the Teacher Eligibility Test (TET), to be conducted by the appropriate
Government in accordance with the Guidelines framed by the NCTE for its purpose.

The above notification dated 23.08.2010, does not provide B.Ed. as a qualification for appointment
to the post of primary school teachers. Later this notification was amended, but B.Ed. was never
included (till the impugned notification dated 28.06.2018), as an essential qualification for teachers
of primary school i.e. for classes I to V. A candidate for the post of a teacher in a primary school was
to have these three qualifications.

A. He must have passed higher secondary level. B. He must have a Diploma in elementary education
(D.El.Ed.), by whatever name it was called in that State. C. He should then pass an examination to
be conducted by the State known as Teachers Eligibility Test or TET.

25. The academic authority, which is NCTE considered the appointment of trained and qualified
teachers as an absolute necessity in primary schools. It is for this reason that the qualification which
was prescribed for a teacher in primary school was a diploma in elementary education (D.El.Ed.),
and not any other educational qualification, including B.Ed. Apart from this the teachers eligibility
test or TET would further test the skills of a candidate to handle students at primary level.

8

Devesh Sharma vs Union Of India on 11 August, 2023

It must be emphasised that the pedagogical approach required from a teacher at primary level is in
some manners unique. These are the initial formative years where a student has just stepped inside
a classroom, and therefore needs to be handled with care and sensitivity. A candidate who has a
diploma in elementary education (D.El.Ed.) is trained to handle students at this level, as he has
undergone a pedagogical course specifically designed for this purpose.

The ‘Academic Authority’ which is NCTE is mandated by the Act to set up a curriculum and
evaluation procedure for the all round development of a ‘child’, mindful of all the fears and anxieties
which a child may have. Section 29 of the Act reads as under :-

29. Curriculum and evaluation procedure.— (1) The curriculum and the evaluation
procedure for elementary education shall be laid down by an academic authority to
be specified by the appropriate Government, by notification.

(2) The academic authority, while laying down the curriculum and the evaluation procedure under
sub-section (1), shall take into consideration the following, namely:—

(a) conformity with the values enshrined in the Constitution;

(b) all round development of the child;

(c) building up child's knowledge, potentiality and talent;

(d) development of physical and mental abilities to the fullest extent;

(e) learning through activities, discovery and exploration in a child friendly and child-

centered manner;

(f) medium of instructions shall, as far as practicable, be in child's mother tongue;

(g) making the child free of fear, trauma and anxiety and helping the child to express views freely;

(h) comprehensive and continuous evaluation of child's understanding of knowledge and his or her
ability to apply the same.” As we can see the curriculum and evaluation procedure which the
‘Academic Authority’ is mandated to set up requires a pedagogical approach which can be best given
by teachers who are trained to deal with child students.

A person who has a B.Ed. qualification has been trained to impart teaching to secondary and higher
secondary level of students. He is not expected to impart training to primary level students.

In order to appreciate the difference between Diploma in Elementary Education (it is called by
different names in each State), and Bachelor of Education (B.Ed.), we look no further than the
Notifications issued by National Council for Teacher Education (NCTE) itself from time to time.

9

Devesh Sharma vs Union Of India on 11 August, 2023

The Appendix 2 to the NCTE Regulations, 2009 spells out as to what is the aim of Elementary
Education. It is stated to be as follows:

“1. Preamble 1.1 The Diploma in Elementary Education (D.El.Ed) is a two year
professional programme of teacher education. It aims to prepare teachers for the
elementary stage of education, i.e. classes I to VIII. The aim of elementary education
is to fulfill the basic learning needs of all children in an inclusive school environment
bridging social and gender gaps with the active participation of the community.

1.2 The elementary teacher education programme carries different nomenclatures
such as BTC, J.B.T, D.Ed. and (Diploma in Education). Henceforth, the nomenclature
of the programme shall be the same across all states and it shall be referred to as the
‘Diploma in Elementary Education’(D.El.Ed).” The same Regulation in its appendix 4
describes B.Ed as follows:

"1. Preamble The Bachelor of Education programme, generally known as B.Ed., is a
professional course that prepares teachers for upper primary or middle level (classes
VI-VIII), secondary level (classes IX-X) and senior secondary level (classes XI-XII).
The programme shall be offered in composite institutions as defined in clause (b) of
Regulations 2.” It is therefore clear that a B.Ed. course is not designed for teaching at
primary level.

Moreover, the inclusion of B.Ed. candidates for primary classes is in the teeth of
several decisions of this Court, as this Court has consistently held that Diploma in
elementary education (D.El.Ed.) and not B.Ed., is the proper qualification in Primary
Schools.

26. In Dilip Kumar Ghosh and Others versus Chairman and Others12, this Court had to decide on
the question whether B.Ed degree candidate can be equated with a candidate who holds training in
Primary School teaching or in other words who is trained specifically for Primary Schools. The
Contention of the 12 (2005) 7 SCC 567 appellants (in the aforesaid case) who were B.Ed. candidates
was that, their course (B.Ed.), equips them to teach Primary Classes. Their contention was rejected
by this Court. In Para 9, it stated as under:

“In B.Ed. curriculum such subjects like child psychology are not found. On the other
hand, the curriculum is of a generic nature and deals with subjects like the principle
of educational-curriculum studies, educational psychology, development of education
in modern India, social organization and instructional methods, etc.” Then again in
Para 10 it was stated as under:

“…………For teaching in the primary school, therefore, one must know the child
psychology and development of a child at a tender age. As already noticed, the
candidates like the appellants who are trained in B.Ed. degree are not necessarily to
be equipped to teach the students of primary class. They are not trained and

10

Devesh Sharma vs Union Of India on 11 August, 2023

equipped to understand the psychology of a child of tender age.” In P.M. Latha and
Another versus State of Kerala and Others13 the argument that B.Ed. qualification is
a higher qualification than Diploma in Elementary Education (D.El.Ed.) was rejected.
Again, it was a case before the Apex Court where B.Ed candidates, were claiming
appointment as Primary School teachers on the basis of the claim that their
educational qualification (i.e. B.Ed.) was even higher than the Diploma in

13 (2003) 3 SCC 541 Elementary Education (D.El.Ed.) which was held by the other candidates. In
para 10 of the said case, it was stated as under:

“We find absolutely no force in the argument advanced by the respondents that B.Ed.
qualification is a higher qualification than TTC and therefore, the B.Ed. candidates
should be held to be eligible to compete for the post…………….” These findings were
reiterated by Supreme Court in Yogesh Kumar v. Government of NCT, Delhi 14,
holding that though B.Ed. is a well-recognized qualification in the field of teaching,
yet it is a training which equips a candidate to teach higher classes, not classes at
primary level.

27. B.Ed. is not a qualification for teachers at Primary level of schooling. The
pedagogical skills and training required from a teacher at Primary level is not
expected from a B.Ed. trained teacher. They are trained to teach classes at higher
level, post primary, secondary and above. For Primary level i.e. class I to class V the
training is D.El.Ed or what is known as diploma in elementary education. It is a
D.El.Ed. training course which is designed and structured to impart skills in a teacher
who is to teach Primary level of students.

14 (2003) 3 SC 548 Therefore, by implication the inclusion of B.Ed. as a qualification amounts to
lowering down of the ‘quality’ of education at Primary level. ‘Quality’ of education which was such
an important component of the entire elementary education movement in this country, which we
have discussed in the preceding paragraphs of this order.

28. We are also conscious of the fact that, till the notification dated 28.06.2018, the consistent policy
of NCTE had been to exclude B.Ed. candidates from the eligibility criteria of Primary School
Teachers. In the 23.08.2010 notification – the first given by NCTE in its capacity as the “academic
authority” under Section 23 of the RTE Act, which has been referred in the preceding paragraphs,
B.Ed. qualified teachers were not considered for primary classes. All the same, purely in order to
equip the various State governments to establish enough training colleges/centres for imparting
specialised training centres for elementary teachers, the B.Ed. candidates were to continue for a very
limited period.

29. This was during the initial period starting from the year 2010 onwards, when the Act and the
subsequent order of NCTE laid down the qualifications for Primary School Teachers throughout the
country. But essentially B.Ed. qualified teachers were kept out from the purview of the eligibility of
the teachers in primary schools as B.Ed. was not considered a “qualification” for teachers at primary

11

level.

Devesh Sharma vs Union Of India on 11 August, 2023

The inherent pedagogical weakness in B.Ed. courses (for primary classes), is well recognised, and it
is for this reason that in the impugned notification itself it is provided that B.Ed. trained teachers
will have to undergo a six months training in elementary classes, within the first two years of their
appointment.

In this background, the inclusion of B.Ed. candidates for primary level classes is beyond our
comprehension.

We have seen so far that the need for ‘quality’ and meaningful primary education was emphasized
by the legislature as well as by the academic authority all throughout. In primary education, any
compromise on ‘quality’ of education would mean going against the very mandate of Article 21A and
the Act. The value of Primary education can never be overstated.

Myron Weiner in his important book on Child Labour in India15, links child labour problems in
India to the lack of 15 Weiner Myron (1991) : The Child and the State In India in Comparative
Perspective -- effective measures in the past in the field of elementary education. Great care must be
taken to nurture these institutions as our future takes shape in these classes. Victor Hugo had
famously said ‘one who opens a school door, closes a prison.’ Children still working in hazardous
environment and juveniles in conflict with law, in some measure, do point towards the weakness in
our elementary education system, both on its accessibility and its ‘quality’.

The pedagogical skills of a teacher must be given a very high priority. But our priority seems to be
different. It is not to impart ‘quality’ education, but to provide more job avenues to B.Ed. trained
candidates, as this seems to be the only reason for their inclusion, in presence of overwhelming
evidence that B.Ed. course is not a suitable course for primary classes.

The material which has been placed before this Court in the form of official communications and
meetings at the highest level makes it clear that in the present case the decision taken by NCTE is
not an independent decision of an expert body which is created by the statute and mandated to take
independent decisions. The aim of NCTE is to improve the standard of Princeton University Press
education and not to provide further avenues for employment to B.Ed. trained teachers. We may
also mention that this is being done when teachers trained in elementary education can be employed
only as teachers in elementary schools and nowhere else, when compared to B.Ed. qualified teacher,
who can be employed in senior elementary classes (VI to VIII), as well as secondary and higher
secondary classes. It is therefore in any case not fair on the Diploma holders, who will now be seeing
the only space available for them shrinking further.

The inclusion of B.Ed. as a ‘qualification’ was done by the notification dated 28.06.2018, which was
impugned before the Rajasthan High Court. This notification is reproduced below: -

“National Council for Teacher Education Notification New Delhi, the 28th of June,
2018 F. No. NCTE-Regl 012/16/2018-In exercise of the powers conferred by

12

Devesh Sharma vs Union Of India on 11 August, 2023

sub-section (1) of Section 23 of Right to Children to Free and Compulsory Education
Act, 2009 (35 of 2009) and in pursuance of notification number S.P. 750(E), dated
the 31st March, 2010 issued by the Department of School Education and Literacy,
Ministry of Human Resource Development, Government of India, the National
Council for Teacher Education (NCTE) hereby makes the following further
amendments to the notification number F.N. 61-03/20/2010/NCTE/(N&S), dated
the 23rd August, 2010 published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part III,
Section 4, dated the 25th August, 2010 hereinafter referred to as the said notification
namely:-

(1) In the said notification, in para 1 in sub-para (i), in clause (a) after the words and
brackets “Graduation and two year Diploma in Elementary Education (by whatever
name known), the following shall be inserted, namely:-

OR “Graduation with at least 50% marks and Bachelor of Education (B.Ed.)”

2. In the said notification in para 3, for sub-para (a), the following sub-para shall be
substituted namely:-

“(a) who has acquired the qualification of Bachelore of Education from any NCTE
Recognized institution shall be considered for appointment as a teacher in classes I to
V provided the person so appointed as a teacher shall mandatorily undergo a six
month Bridge course in Elementary Education recognized by the NCTE, within two
years of such appointment as primary teacher” (Emphasis supplied)

30. The sequence of events, which are now well established by the documents which
were placed before the Rajasthan High Court and before this Court, make it clear,
that the decision to include B.Ed. as a qualification was apparently triggered by a
letter of the Commissioner of KVS 16, who made a request requested that since in the
Primary classes of Central Schools sufficient number of trained Diploma holders are
not available, they may be permitted to appoint B.Ed. qualified teachers, who are
readily available. The Ministry takes cognizance of this letter, meetings are held and
ultimately it directs NCTE to appoint B.Ed.

16 Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan – An autonomous body under Ministry of Education, Government
of India, which looks after the management of Central Schools throughout the country.

trained teachers not just in central schools but in primary schools throughout the country, which
would include State run schools. The sequence of how it happened is as under.

A meeting was held on 28.05.2018 in the Ministry of Human Resource Development, headed by the
Minister concerned. In the meeting it was decided to recognize B.Ed. as an additional eligibility
criterion for the appointment to the post of primary teachers in KVS Schools. This was followed by a
note on the very next day, i.e., 29.05.2018, which says that since B.Ed. qualified candidates were

13

Devesh Sharma vs Union Of India on 11 August, 2023

eligible to be appointed as primary teachers in KVS Schools, there should be no objection to
implement this direction in other schools as well. These communications culminate in a letter dated
30.05.2018 issued by the Ministry of Human Resource Development, which was in the form of a
direction issued under Section 29 of the NCTE Act which required NCTE to amend the eligibility
criteria to include B.Ed. qualified candidates as Primary Teachers. Complying with the above
directions, NCTE issued the impugned notification on 28.06.2018.

The minutes of the meeting dated 28.05.2018, disclose the reason as to why B.Ed. should be
included as a qualification. These minutes state as under :-

“…...

2. The matter was considered in this Ministry and HRM has approved the proposal of
KVS to recruit primary teacher with higher qualification (i.e. B.A./B.Sc., B.Ed.+
TET). Further, HRM has also directed that NCTE may amend the qualification and
make B.A./B.Sc., B.Ed. also eligible for teaching at Primary level with provision of
completing Pedagogical module in 2 years of joining the service, these directions
were conveyed to NCTE on 12.04.2018, however, the action is still pending at their
part.

3. The matter was again discussed and deliberated in detail in the meeting held today
(28th May, 2018) chaired by HRM and attended by Special Secretary, Chairperson,
N C T E ,   M S ,   N C T E ,   J o i n t   S e c r e t a r y   ( S E . I )   a n d   K V S   C o m m i s s i o n e r .   K V S
Commissioner raised the issues of insufficient number of candidates applying for the
post of Primary teachers and candidates applying from few states rather than across
the country. It was informed by MS, NCTE that approximately 7.5 lakh seat are
available for D.El.Ed across the country out of which 50% seats are filled. However,
the TET pass D.El.Ed.

candidate would be much less as the result of TET varies from 6% to 16%. This makes the
availability of eligible D.El.Ed. candidates much less than the desired. HRM also pointed out the
need for better equipped teachers to ensure quality education in schools. Recruitment of Teachers
with higher qualifications will ultimately be beneficial and in the interest of the students.

4. In addition to above, NCTE will roll out four year B.Ed. integrated course from next academic
year, therefore, the prevalent D.El.Ed./B.Ed. etc will phase out in time bound manner. Further
similar kind of request has also been from the state of Uttrakhand.

5. In view of the above discussions, HRM directed NCTE to change its regulations, Directions are
required to be given under section 29 of the NCTE Act, 1993. Section 29 of the NCTE Act is as
follows:

(1) The Council shall in the discharge of its functions and duties under this Act be
bound by such directions on questions of policy as the Central Government may give

14

in writing to it from time to time.

Devesh Sharma vs Union Of India on 11 August, 2023

(2) The decision of the Central Government as to whether a question is one of policy
or not shall be final. (6) We may request NCTE to submit draft notification to amend
NCTE regulations at the earliest. The draft letter is attached for approval please. Once
the draft notification is received, the same will be sent to Legislative Department for
vetting with the approval of HRM.

Submitted.” The minutes of the meeting dated 29.05.2018 state as under :-

“Note dated 29.05.2018 Please place on file the letter from NCTE which was handed
over to the HRM by the MS, NCTE during the meeting, the details of which have been
referred to in the draft reply. The meeting clearly took the decision that in view of the
facts presented by the Commissioner, KV and since the NCTE did not have any
objection to permit KV schools to recruit primary teachers with higher qualifications,
then there should be no objection to extending this to other schools, and therefore,
this Ministry could issue directions to the NCTE under Section 29."

Letter dated 30.05.2018 from the Government to NCTE.

“Letter Dated 30.05.2018 Priority F.No.11-15/2017-EE.10-Part (1) Government of
India Ministry of Human Resource Development Department of School Education &
Literacy Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi, Dated the 30th May, 2018 To, The Chairperson
NCTE, Hans Bhawan, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi – 110002.

Dear Madam, Kindly refer to the letter of even no. dated 12.04.2018 regarding
request of Kendriya Vidaylaya Sangathan for recruiting primary teachers with higher
q u a l i f i c a t i o n s   i . e .   B . A . / B . S c . ,   B . E d .   p l u s   T E T   p a s s   a n d   l e t t e r   n o .
NCTE-REG1012/16/2018-

US(Regulation)-HQ dated 23.05.2018 received from NCTE regarding the same.

2. The above request has been considered in this Ministry. In order to safeguard the interest of the
students and ensure the quality of education, the competent authority has decided to agree to the
request of KVS to recruit Primary Teachers with Higher Qualifications. The insufficient number of
eligible D.EI.Ed. candidates due to low pass percentage of TET examination has also become an
issue for recruitment of primary teachers. Further, with the roll out of four year B.Ed. integrated
course from next academic year, the existing D.EI.Ed./B.Ed. courses will be phased out in due
course of time.

3. NCTE vide their letter No. NCTE-

REG1012/16/2018-US(Regulation)-HQ dated 23.05.2018 stated that “the MHRD may consider
implementing the direction in the detailed noting of Hon’ble Minister of Human Resource

15

Devesh Sharma vs Union Of India on 11 August, 2023

Development, Government of India”. Further, in view of the facts presented by the Commissioner,
KV and since the NCTE did not have any objection to permit KV schools to recruit primary teachers
with higher qualifications, then there should be no objection to extending this to other schools.
Therefore, considering the powers vested in MHRD under Section 29 of the NCTE Act, 1993, the
NCTE Regulation 25.08.2010 (Determining qualification of teacher to be appointed at primary level
Classes 1st to 5th) shall be amended to include that any person who has acquired the qualification of
B.Ed. from any NCTE recognized course will also be considered for appointment as a teacher in
classes 1st to 5th provided the person so appointed as a teacher shall mandatorily undergo a 6
month bridge course, which is recognized by NCTE, within two years of such appointment as
primary teacher.

4. It is therefore, requested that the draft notification to amend the NCTE regulations may please be
submitted to this Ministry. This may please be treated as most urgent.

With regards, Yours Sincerely, Sd/-

(Rashi Sharma) Director(TE)” This is followed by the notification dated 28.06.2018, issued by
NCTE, which has already been referred above.

31. The sequence of events show that what started as an exercise for consideration of B.Ed. qualified
candidates as teachers for Primary classes in Central schools, was expanded to include all primary
schools throughout the country. The apparent reasoning given is that B.Ed. qualified candidates are
better suited for appointment as teachers in Primary schools, as they have ‘higher qualifications’,
and as such they should be appointed as teachers in all Primary schools. Another reason for doing
this is the dearth of qualified TET candidates. The figures given in the meeting suggests that only 6%
to 16% of the candidates who appear in the TET examination qualify the test. The suggestion
appears to be that with the inclusion of B.Ed. candidates the number of TET qualified candidates
would increase. But this logic does not hold good when B.Ed. as a qualification has not passed the
basic pedagogical threshold for teaching primary classes.

We have already examined this aspect in great detail. B.Ed. is not a qualification for teaching at
Primary level of classes, much less a better or higher qualification, in context of Primary classes.
This finding is self-evident in the very admission of NCTE which mandates that all B.Ed. qualified
teachers who are appointed to teach Primary level classes must mandatorily undergo a pedagogical
course for elementary classes within two years of their appointment.

32. In Society for Unaided Private Schools of Rajasthan v. Union of India & Anr. (supra) this Court
while upholding the validity of the RTE Act, held that primary education, which is now a part of
fundamental right under Part III of the Constitution, has to be a meaningful education, and not just
a formality. When Diploma in elementary education (D.El.Ed.), was placed as an essential
qualification for teachers in Primary school, it was with a purpose, and the purpose was to declare
only such teachers as qualified who are trained to impart education to children at ‘primary level’.
The pedagogy for a child who has just entered the school, is an important consideration. A child has
come to face a “teacher”, so to speak, for the first time in a class room. It is the beginning of a

16

Devesh Sharma vs Union Of India on 11 August, 2023

journey for the child student and therefore world over great care is taken in laying down proper
foundations in these formative years. Well qualified and trained teacher in elementary school is an
extremely vital aspect. A teacher must be trained to teach students at “primary level”, and this is
precisely what the training of Diploma in elementary education (D.El.Ed.) does; it trains a person to
teach children at primary level. B.Ed. is not a ‘higher qualification’, or a better qualification, as is
being canvassed in its favour, while comparing it with ‘Diploma in elementary education’. B.Ed. is a
different qualification; a different training. Even assuming it is a higher qualification, it would still
not be a suitable qualification for primary level of classes. Unlike Diploma in elementary education
(D.El.Ed.), B.Ed. does not equip a teacher to teach at primary level. This fact is implicitly recognised
in the Notification as well (notification dated 28.06.2018), which still requires a person, who is
appointed as a teacher with B.Ed. qualification to ‘mandatorily undergo a six-month Bridge Course
in Elementary Education’. This defeats the very logic of including B.Ed. as a qualification, as the
very notification which pushes for the inclusion of B.Ed., also recognises its inherent pedagogical
weakness in its relation to primary classes. It is to cover this defect, that all such candidates, must
undergo a mandatory six months Bridge Course in elementary education! The irony here is that all
this is being done when the State of Rajasthan already has more than the required number of
Diploma qualified candidates available. This is besides the fact that there is presently no such
“bridge course” available; at least there was none till the disposal of the petition by the Rajasthan
High Court.

33. Under these circumstances, we are unable to comprehend as to what was the pressing need to
include B.Ed. candidates, who are admittedly not fully trained to take up Primary Classes!
Consequently, the decision of the NCTE to include B.Ed. as a qualification for teachers in a primary
school seems arbitrary, unreasonable and in fact has no nexus with the object sought to be achieved
by the Act i.e. Right to Education Act, which is to give to children not only free and compulsory but
also ‘quality’ education.

34. In our considered opinion therefore NCTE was not justified in including B.Ed. as a qualification
for appointment to the post of primary school teacher (Level-1), a qualification it had so far
consciously kept out of the eligibility requirement. The Rajasthan High Court by way of the
Impugned Judgement had rightly struck down the notification dated 28.06.2018, on the following
grounds:-

“(i) The impugned notification dated 28.06.2018 is unlawful because: -

(a) it is under the direction of the Central Government, which power the Central
Government under Subsection (1) of Section 23 of the RTE Act did not have; and

(b) it is not in exercise of power of the Central Government under Sub-section (2) of
Section 23 of RTE Act relaxing the eligibility criteria prescribed by the NCTE, nor
there has been any exercise for ascertaining existence of the conditions precedent for
exercising such power.

17

Devesh Sharma vs Union Of India on 11 August, 2023

(ii) The petitioners have locus standi to challenge the notification dated 28.06.2018.
Merely because an additional qualification is recognized as one of the eligibility
criteria, the petitioners cannot be prevented from challenging it.

(iii) Accepting a candidate with B.Ed. degree as eligible for appointment and
thereafter subjecting him to complete the bridge course within two years of
appointment is in the nature of relaxing the existing eligibility criteria, which the
Central Government could have done only within Sub-section (2) of Section 23 and
subject to existence of circumstances necessary for exercise of such power.

(iv) The State Government could not have ignored the notification of NCTE dated
28.06.2018 while issuing advertisement for REET. However, when we have declared
that this notification is illegal and are in the process of setting aside, the issue
becomes one of academic value.

35. One important aspect of the present case must now be dealt with, on which much emphasis was
laid by the counsel for the appellant. The submission is that the Central Government in any case is
the final authority in deciding as to what qualification has to be there for teachers and the NCTE is
bound to follow the directions of the Central Government in this regard. Reliance was placed on two
provisions of National Council for Teacher Education Act, (NCTE Act), Section 12A and Section 29.
We must examine these provisions in the light of the submissions made before us.

Section 12A of the Act, reads as under:

“12A. Power of Council to determine minimum standards of education of school
teachers. -- For the purpose of maintaining standards of education in schools, the
Council may, by regulations, determine the qualifications of persons for being
recruited as teachers in any pre-primary, primary, upper primary, secondary, senior
secondary or intermediate school or college, by whatever name called, established,
run, aided or recognised by the Central Government or a State Government or a local
or other authority:

Provided that nothing in this section shall adversely affect the continuance of any
person recruited in any pre- primary, primary, upper primary, secondary, senior
secondary or intermediate schools or colleges, under any rule, regulation or order
made by the Central Government, a State Government, a local or other authority,
immediately before the commencement of the National Council for Teacher
Education (Amendment) Act, 2011 (18 of 2011) solely on the ground of non-fulfilment
of such qualifications as may be specified by the Council:

Provided further that the minimum qualifications of a teacher referred to in the first
proviso shall be acquired within the period specified in this Act or under the Right of
Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 (35 of 2009).]” Section 12A
was inserted in the NCTE Act that is after the enactment of Right to Education Act,

18

Devesh Sharma vs Union Of India on 11 August, 2023

2009. Section 12A only compliments Section 23 of the Right to Education Act, which
we have already discussed in the preceding paragraphs.

Next, we come to the Section 29 of the NCTE Act which is as under:

“29. Directions by the Central Government : (1) The Council shall, in the discharge of
its functions and duties under this Act be bound by such directions on questions of
policy as the Central Government may give in writing to it from time to time.

(2) The decision of the Central Government as to whether a question is one of policy
or not shall be final.” It was submitted that by a notification dated 28.06.2018, NCTE
has only followed the directions of the Central Government which are in the nature of
a policy. Further it is also evident from the minutes of the meeting dated 28.05.2018
where it was clarified that the direction of the Central Government to include B.Ed.
as a qualification is a direction under Section 29 of the Act.

The NCTE is bound to follow the directions of the Central Government in this regard and the
direction in the present case was to include B.Ed. as a qualification for teachers in primary school,
which has been done by NCTE through notification dated 28.06.2018, are the submission of the
learned counsel for the appellants as well as that of the learned ASG Ms. Aishwarya Bhati on behalf
of the Union of India. Moreover, as per sub- Section (2) of Section 29, the decision of the Central
Government as to what constitutes a policy decision will ultimately matter, is also the argument.

36. The introduction of B.Ed. as a qualification by NCTE on the directions of the Central
Government is a policy decision of the Government, as has been submitted before this Court, and is
also evident from the sequence of events, the minutes of the various meeting and the order passed in
this regard. Section 29 of NCTE Act which mandates that NCTE must follow the directions of the
Central Government in discharging of its functions. It is a policy decision which binds NCTE.

We have absolutely no doubt in our mind that policy decisions of the Government should normally
not be interfered with, by a constitutional Court in exercise of its powers of judicial review. At the
same time if the policy decision itself is contrary to the law and is arbitrary and irrational, powers of
judicial review must be exercised.

A policy decision which is totally arbitrary; contrary to the law, or a decision which has been taken
without proper application of mind, or in total disregard of relevant factors is liable to be interfered
with, as that also is the mandate of law and the Constitution. This aspect has been reiterated by this
Court time and again.

Judicial review becomes necessary where there is an illegality, irrationality or procedural
impropriety. These principles were highlighted by Lord Diplock in Council of Civil Service Unions v.
Minister for the Civil Service17 (commonly known as CCSU case). The above decision has been
referred by this Court in State of NCT of Delhi v. Sanjeev18. This view was reiterated again by this
Court in State of M.P. & Ors. v. Mala Banerjee19 :-

19

Devesh Sharma vs Union Of India on 11 August, 2023

“6. We also find ourselves unable to agree with the appellants' submission that this is
a policy matter and, therefore, should not be interfered with by the courts. In
Federation of Railway Officers Assn. v. Union of India [(2003) 4 SCC 289] , this
Court has already considered the scope of judicial review and has enumerated that
where a policy is contrary to law or is in violation of the provisions of the Constitution
or is arbitrary or irrational, the courts must perform their constitutional duties by
striking it down...” 17 (1984) 3 All ER 935 : 1985 AC 374 : (1984) 3 WLR 1174 (HL) 18
(2005) 5 SCC 181 19 (2015) 7 SCC 698 In Brij Mohan Lal v. Union of India20 this
Court reiterated on this aspect and made out a distinction as to where an interference
to a decision is required, and whereas it is not :-

“100. Certain tests, whether this Court should or not interfere in the policy decisions
of the State, as stated in other judgments, can be summed up as:

(I)     If the policy fails to satisfy the test of
reasonableness,       it     would     be
unconstitutional.

(II)    The change in policy must be made
fairly and should not give the
impression that it was so done
arbitrarily on any ulterior intention.

(III) The policy can be faulted on grounds of mala fides, unreasonableness,
arbitrariness or unfairness, etc. (IV) If the policy is found to be against any statute or
the Constitution or runs counter to the philosophy behind these provisions.

(V) It is dehors the provisions of the Act or legislations.

(VI) If the delegate has acted beyond its power of delegation.

101. Cases of this nature can be classified into two main classes: one class being the 20 (2012) 6 SCC
502 matters relating to general policy decisions of the State and the second relating to fiscal policies
of the State. In the former class of cases, the courts have expanded the scope of judicial review when
the actions are arbitrary, mala fide or contrary to the law of the land;

while in the latter class of cases, the scope of such judicial review is far narrower.

Nevertheless, unreasonableness, arbitrariness, unfair actions or policies contrary to the letter, intent
and philosophy of law and policies expanding beyond the permissible limits of delegated power will
be instances where the courts will step in to interfere with government policy.” The decision whether
to include or exclude B.Ed. as a qualification for teachers in primary school is an academic decision,
which has to be taken after proper study by the academic body i.e. NCTE and should be better left to

20

this expert body.

Devesh Sharma vs Union Of India on 11 August, 2023

But as we have seen the decision to include B.Ed. as a qualification is not an independent decision of
NCTE, but it was the decision of the Central Government and NCTE was simply directed to carry it
out for that being a direction under Section 29 of NCTE Act, a direction NCTE followed.

In the present case and in the larger context of the matter, we cannot even see this as a policy
decision. But without getting into this argument, even presuming for the sake of argument that the
decision taken at the Government level to include B.Ed. as a qualification for teachers at primary
level is a policy decision, we must say that this decision is not correct as it is contrary to the purpose
of the Act. In fact, it goes against the letter and spirit of the Fundamental Right enshrined in the
Constitution under Article 21A. It is against the specific mandate of the Act, which calls for a free,
compulsory and meaningful primary education to children. By including B.Ed. as a qualification for
teachers for primary school, the Central Government has acted against the provisions of the
Constitution and the laws. The only logic given by the Central Government to include B.Ed. as a
qualification is that it is a ‘higher qualification’. This we have already seen is not correct. Under
these circumstances, we have no hesitation to say that the notification has rightly been quashed and
the decision of the Division Bench of the Rajasthan High Court has to be upheld.

In our considered opinion therefore the direction of the Central Government dated 30.05.2018
culminating in the notification dated 28.06.2018 of NCTE are violative of the principles as laid down
in RTE Act. Not only this, the notification goes against the purpose and the mandate of law, which is
to provide a meaningful and ‘quality’ primary education to children.

The entire exercise is also procedurally flawed. The notification dated 28.06.2018 is not an
independent decision of NCTE taken after due deliberation, but it simply follows the direction of the
Central Government, a direction which fails to take into consideration the objective realities of the
day.

Having made the above determination we, all the same, are also of the considered opinion that the
State of Rajasthan was clearly in error in not calling for applications from B.Ed. qualified
candidates, for the reasons that till that time when such an advertisement was issued by the
Rajasthan Government, B.Ed. candidates were included as eligible candidates as per the statutory
notification of NCTE, which was binding on the Rajasthan Government, till it was declared illegal or
unconstitutional by the Court. The Rajasthan High Court had rightly observed as under :-

“..we are of the opinion that the State Government could not have ignored the
notification while inviting applications for REET. Even if the State Government was
of the opinion that such notification was unconstitutional or for any reason illegal,
the same had to be stayed or set aside by a competent court before it could be
ignored.” [Para 45 of the Impugned Judgement] What the Rajasthan High Court had
stated above is the settled legal position. In a recent three Judge judgment of this
Court in State of Manipur & Ors. v. Surjakumar Okram & Ors.21 this position that a
statute which is made by a competent legislature is valid till it is declared

21

unconstitutional by a court of law; has been reiterated.

Devesh Sharma vs Union Of India on 11 August, 2023

37. Consequently, the Appeals are dismissed and the judgement dated 25.11.2021 of
the Rajasthan High Court is upheld. The notification dated 28.06.2018 is hereby
quashed and set aside.

The Writ Petitions and all pending applications stand disposed of in light of the above order.

…………………………..J. [ANIRUDDHA BOSE] …………………………..J. [SUDHANSHU DHULIA] NEW
DELHI 11th AUGUST, 2023.

21 2022 SCC Online SC 130

22