H. Anjanappa vs A. Prabhakar on 29 January, 2025

H. Anjanappa vs A. Prabhakar on 29 January, 2025

2025 INSC 121                                                                     REPORTABLE

                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                        CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 1180-1181 OF 2025
                                   (arising out of S.L.P. (Civil) Nos. 5785-5786 of 2023)

                            H. ANJANAPPA & ORS.                               …APPELLANT(S)

                                                         VERSUS

                            A. PRABHAKAR & ORS.                             …RESPONDENT(S)

                                                          WITH

                                        CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 1182-1183 OF 2025
                                   (arising out of S.L.P. (Civil) Nos. 6724-6725 of 2023)

                            H. ANJANAPPA & ORS.                               …APPELLANT(S)

                                                         VERSUS

                            BEENA ANTHONY & ORS.                            …RESPONDENT(S)

   Signature Not Verified

   Digitally signed by
   VISHAL ANAND
                                                    JUDGMENT

Date: 2025.01.29 15:24:27 IST Reason:

J.B. PARDIWALA, J. :

1. Leave granted.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63497145/

1

H. Anjanappa vs A. Prabhakar on 29 January, 2025

2. Since the issues raised in the above captioned appeals are the same, the parties are
also same and the challenge is also to the self-same judgment and order passed by the
High Court, those were taken up for hearing analogously and are being disposed of by
this common judgment and order.

3. The appeals arise from the order passed by the High Court of Karnataka at
Bengaluru dated 16.11.2022 in I.A. Nos. 1 & 3 of 2018 respectively in Regular First
Appeal No. 1303 of 2018 by which the High Court allowed the said I.A. Nos. 1 & 3 of
2018 respectively filed by the respondents herein and thereby condoned the delay of
586 days in filing the said appeal against the judgment and decree dated 16.09.2016
passed by the Senior Civil Judge and JMFC, Devanahalli in Original Suit No. 458 of
2006 instituted for specific performance of contract. By the order passed in I.A. Nos 1
& 3 of 2018 respectively, the High Court granted leave to appeal to the Respondent
Nos. 1 and 2 herein (subsequent purchasers) against the original judgment and
decree of specific performance as they were not parties in the suit proceedings.

4. The facts giving rise to these appeals may be summarised as under.

The description of the parties before this Court and before the Trial Court is tabulated as follows:

      BEFORE THIS                BEFORE THE                   REMARKS
        COURT                TRIAL COURT
 Appellants          Plaintiffs                         Agreement     of   Sale
                                                        Holders/Purchasers
 Respondent Nos. Not         a     party   as     their Lis           Pendens
 1-2                 impleadment application was Purchasers (Alleged to
                     rejected.     Order       remained have purchased from
                     unchallenged        and     hence, Subsequent Purchaser)
                     attained finality

Respondent Nos. LRs. Of Original Defendant Original Owner Respondent No. Defendant No. 2 GPA
Holder Respondent No. Defendant No. 3 Subsequent Purchaser For the sake of convenience, the
parties shall be referred to in terms of their status before the Trial Court.

(I) One Late Smt. Daisy Shanthappa – Original Defendant No.1 (since deceased represented through
her LRs-Respondents Nos. 3-5 herein) was the absolute owner of lands bearing Sy. No. 176/42
measuring 32 acres and Sy. No. 176/43 measuring 10 acres, situated adjacent to each other in
Bagalur Village, Jala Hobli, Bangalore North Taluk. The Suit Schedule Property was agreed to be
sold to the plaintiffs, the appellants herein, vide an Agreement of Sale dated 05.09.1995 for a total
sale consideration of Rs.20,00,000/- by the Defendant No.1 through her Power of Attorney holder
one Shri V. Chandramohan (Original Defendant No. 2/ Respondent No.6 herein). Earnest money of
Rs.5,00,000/- was paid and the Defendant Nos. 1 & 2 undertook to get the unauthorized occupants
in the Suit Schedule Property evicted.

(II) Since the unauthorized occupants on the Suit Schedule Property were not evicted by the
Defendant Nos.1 & 2, a Supplementary Agreement dated 10.03.1997 was executed extending the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63497145/

2

H. Anjanappa vs A. Prabhakar on 29 January, 2025

time for execution of Sale Deed. Out of the entire sale consideration of Rs.20,00,000/- a substantial
amount of Rs.15,00,000/- was paid by the appellants herein to the Defendant No. 1.

(III) While such being the case, and during the subsistence of Sale Agreement in favour of the
Plaintiffs, the Defendant No.1 having lost her right over the suit schedule property in pursuance of
the general power of attorney executed in favour of Defendant No.2, which has been acted upon,
allegedly executed a Sale Deed in favour of Respondent No. 7/Defendant No. 3 selling land to an
extent of 40 acres out of 42 acres for a sum of Rs.40,00,000/-. The plaintiffs became aware of the
aforementioned sale transfer, when the Defendant No.3 attempted to change the revenue records in
his name.

(IV) Aggrieved by the same, the plaintiffs filed O.S. No.1093/2003 (later renumbered as O.S.
No.458/2006) before the Court of Principal Civil Judge (Sr. Dn.) Bengaluru Rural District
(hereinafter referred to as the Trial Court) inter alia seeking Specific Performance of the Agreement
of Sale. The Trial Court upon appreciating the case of the plaintiffs admitted the suit and on
17.12.2003 passed a specific Order of Temporary Injunction restraining the Defendant Nos. 1-3 from
alienating and creating third party rights in the Suit Schedule Property.

(V) The Defendant No.3 however, in contravention of specific order of injunction and during the
subsistence of the order of injunction, sold a portion of Suit Schedule Property to the extent of 4
Acres (and 6 Acres) in Sy. No. 176/43 in favour of Respondents Nos. 1-2 herein. (VI) It is relevant to
note that the Defendant No.1 executed a Deed of Confirmation in favour of the plaintiffs admitting
the Agreement of Sale in favour of the plaintiffs and further acknowledged the receipt of a
substantial sum of Rs. 15,00,000/- out of Rs.20,00,000/- in furtherance of the Agreement of Sale
dated 05.09.1995 and further stating that the sale made by her in favour of Defendant No.3 was due
to the fact that she was being misled by some persons of oblique mindsets.

(VII) At this stage, on 10.07.2007, the Respondent Nos. 1-2 respectively herein filed an Interlocutory
Application - I.A. No.4 in O.S. No.458/2006 seeking to implead themselves as Defendants in the
said suit. The said I.A. No.4 was however rejected by the Trial Court vide Order dated 06.08.2014 on
the ground that the Respondent Nos. 1-2 herein had purchased the portion of Suit Schedule
Property without the permission of the court, during the pendency of suit and in contravention of a
Specific Order of Injunction against alienation and creation of third party rights. The same being
contrary to Section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (for short, “Transfer of Property Act”).
The said order of rejection of impleadment never came to be challenged in appeal and thereby, the
said issue has attained finality. (VIII) Thereafter, the Trial Court upon appreciation of evidence on
record passed its final Judgment and Decree in O.S. No. 458/2006 decreeing the suit of the
plaintiffs and granting relief of specific performance with a specific direction to execute a sale deed
within a period of 2 months. Assailing the legality of the said Order, the Defendant No. 3 (who is the
Vendor of Respondent Nos. 1 & 2 herein) filed R.F.A. No.396/2017 before the High Court which
came to be dismissed on 04.07.2017. (IX) It is in the aforestated backdrop that the Respondent
Nos.1 & 2 respectively, in spite of a Specific Order of Injunction against the Defendant No. 3 (Vendor
of the Respondent Nos.1 & 2) of not creating third party rights, purchased the suit property in
contravention of Section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act. More importantly the application for

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63497145/

3

H. Anjanappa vs A. Prabhakar on 29 January, 2025

impleadment in the Suit also came to be rejected and having not been challenged by the contesting
Respondent Nos. 1 & 2, the issue had attained finality. After dismissal of the appeal filed by their
Vendor i.e., Defendant No. 3, Respondent Nos 1 & 2 proceeded to challenge the order of Trial Court
decreeing the Suit of the plaintiffs. After almost 2 years of passing of the Judgment and Decree
dated 16.09.2016 in O.S. No.458/2006 and 11 years from the filing of the Impleadment Application,
the Respondent Nos. 1 & 2 herein preferred RFA No.1303/2018 before the High Court challenging
the said Decree.

(X) The Respondent Nos. 1 & 2 filed I.A. No.1 & 3 of 2018 seeking condonation of delay of 586 days
in preferring RFA No.1303/2018, and also prayed for leave to appeal. The said I. A.s were opposed
by the plaintiffs. The High Court, however, vide the impugned order allowed both the I.A. Nos. 1 & 3
of 2018 respectively by condoning the inordinate and unexplained delay of 586 days and further
permitting the Respondents Nos. 1 and 2 herein to prefer the appeal by granting leave.

5. Being aggrieved by the same, the plaintiffs are here before this Court with the present appeals.

SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE PLAINTIFFS/APPELLANTS

6. Mr. Anand Sanjay M. Nuli, the learned senior counsel appearing for the appellants (original
plaintiffs) vehemently submitted that the High Court committed a serious error in condoning the
unexplained and inordinate delay of 586 days in preferring the regular first appeal and also by
granting leave to file appeal to the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 i.e., subsequent purchasers of the suit
property. According to the learned counsel, it is not just enough for the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2
respectively to say that they were not aware of the suit proceedings before the Trial Court. The
Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 had, in fact, preferred an application for being impleaded in the suit as
defendants and such application which was filed on 10.07.2007 came to be rejected vide order dated
06.08.2014. The said order was never challenged by the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 herein and it has
attained finality.

7. Mr. Nuli submitted that having purchased the suit property pendente lite on 05.04.2004 and that
too in contravention of the order of temporary injunction dated 17.12.2003 passed by the Trial
Court, the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 respectively do not deserve any indulgence. It was argued that
the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 cannot be said to be bona fide purchasers of the suit property for value
without notice.

8. In such circumstances referred to above, the learned senior counsel prayed that there being merit
in his appeals, those may be allowed. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENT NOS. 1 AND
2 RESPECTIVELY

9. Mr. Gautam Narayan, the learned senior counsel appearing for the subsequent purchasers i.e.
Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 submitted that no error, not to speak of any error of law, may be said to
have been committed by the High Court in passing the impugned order. According to the learned
counsel, there is no question of law involved in the present appeals warranting any interference with
the impugned order passed by the High Court. He would submit that his clients are bona fide

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63497145/

4

H. Anjanappa vs A. Prabhakar on 29 January, 2025

subsequent purchasers of the suit property and as subsequent purchasers, they have a substantial
interest in the suit property and also in the final outcome of the suit.

10. The learned counsel submitted that the order passed by the Trial Court, in itself, would not
render the transfer made to the subsequent purchasers ineffective and the validity of such transfer is
always subject to the outcome of the litigation.

11. The learned counsel submitted that in the present case, collusion between the vendor of the
answering respondents who are subsequent purchasers pendente lite i.e., Defendant No. 3 and the
plaintiffs, is writ large on the face of the record. He submitted that the bar on transfer of immovable
property which is subject matter of a litigation under Section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act is
not applicable to the present case as Section 52 expressly excludes from its ambit collusive
proceedings and, therefore, the High Court correctly granted an opportunity to his clients to
establish this fact by allowing them to prefer an Appeal.

12. He submitted that unfortunately the Defendant No. 3 colluded with the plaintiffs in order to get
the suit decreed vide judgment dated 16.09.2016 as is borne out from the following facts:

(i) Defendant No. 3 did not cross-examine the witnesses of the Plaintiffs;

(ii) Defendant No. 3 did not lead any rebuttal evidence in the suit;

(iii) Despite filing an appeal against the decree dated 16.09.2016, he withdrew the
Appeal without stating any reason on 04.07.2017, and

(iv) In fact, even after having succeeded in the suit and obtaining a decree dated
16.09.2016, the plaintiffs did not get the same executed and have allowed the
Defendant No.3 to enter into a registered agreement of sale dated 12.09.2019 for the
suit property for a consideration of Rs.20 crores with third parties.

In light of the aforesaid facts, he submitted that the High Court was justified in granting permission
to the answering respondents to prefer an appeal against the decree dated 16.09.2016 in order to
defend their rights.

13. He further submitted that the impugned order is also justified in the context of settled law that a
subsequent purchaser should ordinarily be allowed to implead himself in pending proceedings in
order to protect his interests when the transferor fails to do so.

14. He submitted that the approach of the High Court in the impugned order is only a logical
extension of the aforesaid principle in so far as it only extends to subsequent purchasers, i.e., the
answering respondents, the opportunity to defend their interests in the face of ex facie collusion by
their vendors with plaintiffs in the suit.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63497145/

5

H. Anjanappa vs A. Prabhakar on 29 January, 2025

15. No prejudice would be caused to the plaintiffs if the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 are merely allowed
to agitate their appeal on merits keeping in view the fact that they are subsequent purchasers for
value who were duped by their vendor.

16. He submitted that the condonation of delay in preferring the appeals is justified in view of
Section 17 of the Limitation Act, 1963 read with Section 5 thereof.

17. He submitted that his clients, both of whom are senior citizens, were residing with their children
in Scotland when their application for impleadment was rejected by the Trial Court and were
assured by Defendant No. 3 that he would defend their interest in the suit and therefore due to the
trust and faith reposed in him, they did not make any efforts to prosecute the suit or the Appeal.

18. In the last, the learned counsel submitted that the lis pendens purchasers although not arrayed
as parties in the suit, yet they are the persons who could be said to be claiming as defendants under
Section 146 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (for short “CPC”).

19. In such circumstances referred to above, the learned senior counsel prayed that there being no
merit in the present appeals, those may be dismissed.

ANALYSIS

20. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having gone through the
materials on record, the only question that falls for our consideration is whether the High Court
committed any error in passing the impugned order.

21. The High Court in the impugned order observed as under:-

“13. In these two applications, we are concerned with the prayer for leave to
prosecute the appeal and condonation of delay. It is not disputed that appellants have
purchased 4 acres of land out of the suit schedule property. They did file an
application to implead themselves in the suit, but unsuccessfully. One of the main
ground urged in support of the application for condonation of delay is that they were
assured by their vendor-third defendant that he would protect their interest.

14. Shri Holla, pointed out in para 18 of the judgment that the learned trial Judge has
adverted to the evidence of P.W. 2 and his evidence has remained unchallenged as he
was not subjected to cross-examination and none of the defendants stepped into the
witness box. Further the third defendant has filed R.F.A.No.396/2017 and withdrew
the same. It is pleaded in the affidavit in support of the application for condonation
of delay that the appellants are aged 75 and 66 years respectively and living with their
children in Scotland. This averment has remained unrebutted.

15. Keeping in view the fact that appellants have purchased the immovable property
measuring 4 acres, that they are senior citizens and their vendor has not defended the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63497145/

6

H. Anjanappa vs A. Prabhakar on 29 January, 2025

suit nor prosecuted the first appeal filed before this Court, we are of the opinion that
rights of the parties cannot be scuttled by dismissal of the application seeking
condonation of delay.

Curiously appellants' vendor namely the third defendant/ respondent No.8, though served and
represented by advocate has remained absent. Thus, the allegations made against him in appellants'
affidavit have remained uncontroverted. Therefore, in our considered view, the instant applications
merit consideration.

16. In view of the above, I.As.No.1 & 3 of 2018 are allowed subject to appellants paying cost of Rs.
25,000/- for each of the applications and cumulatively Rs.50,000/- to the plaintiffs/ respondent
Nos.1 to 3.”

22. Thus, a plain reading of the impugned order passed by the High Court would indicate that what
weighed with the High Court was the fact that the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 respectively are aged 75
and 66 years and are living with their children in Scotland. The High Court proceeded further to
observe that the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 have purchased 4 acres of land out of a large chunk of
subject property and their vendor i.e. the original owner failed to protect their interest in the suit
proceedings.

23. We are of the view that the High Court committed an egregious error in condoning delay of 586
days in filing the regular first appeal on mere asking. We are not convinced with the sufficient cause
assigned by the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 respectively for the delay of 586 days. In the facts and
circumstances of the case, it cannot be said that the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 were vigilant of their
so called rights. The High Court should have put an end to the entire litigation by declining to
condone the delay itself far from granting leave to appeal.

24. Having taken the view that the High Court committed an egregious error in condoning the delay,
we could have closed this matter without observing or saying anything further by setting aside the
impugned order passed by the High Court. However, we would like to say something also as regards
the grant of leave to appeal by the High Court in favour of the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 respectively,
more particularly in light of two submissions canvassed by Mr. Nuli, the learned counsel appearing
for the appellants herein. The first submission canvassed by the learned counsel is that once the
impleadment application filed by the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 respectively herein invoking the
provisions of Order I Rule 10 CPC came to be rejected by the Trial Court and the said order attained
finality, thereafter there is no question of seeking leave to appeal against the final decree granting
specific performance, and the second submission canvassed by the learned counsel is that the
findings recorded by the Trial Court while rejecting the impleadment application would operate as
re judicata in the appeal that may be filed by the transferee pendente lite against the final decree of
specific performance.

LAW GOVERNING THE GRANT OF LEAVE TO APPEAL

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63497145/

7

H. Anjanappa vs A. Prabhakar on 29 January, 2025

25. Sections 96 and 100 respectively of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (for short, the “CPC”)
provide for preferring an appeal from any original decree or from decree in appeal respectively. The
aforesaid provisions do not enumerate the categories of persons who can file an appeal. However, it
is a settled legal proposition that a stranger cannot be permitted to file an appeal in any proceedings
unless he satisfies the court that he falls within the category of aggrieved persons. It is only where a
judgment and decree prejudicially affects a person who is not a party to the proceedings, he can
prefer an appeal with the leave of the appellate court. [see : Sri V.N. Krishna Murthy and another vs.
Sri Ravikumar and others (Civil Appeal Nos.2701-2704 of 2020, decided on 21st August 2020)].

26. A five-Judge Bench of the Privy Council in Nagendra Nath Dey vs. Suresh Chandra Dey, AIR
1932 PC 165, speaking through Sir Dinshaw Mulla observed that there is no definition of appeal in
the CPC, but there is no doubt that any application by a party to an appellate Court, asking it to set
aside or revise a decision of a subordinate Court, is an appeal within the ordinary acceptation of the
term, and that it is no less an appeal because it is irregular or incompetent.

27. A party to a suit adversely affected by a decree or any of his representatives-in-interest may file
an appeal. But a person who is not a party to a decree or order may, with the leave of the court,
prefer an appeal from such decree or order if he is either bound by a decree or order or is aggrieved
by it or is otherwise prejudicially affected by it.

28. In Adi Pherozshah Gandhi vs. H.M.Seervai, AIR 1971 SC 385, a Constitution Bench of this Court
in paragraph 46 held thus:

“46. Generally speaking, a person can be said to be aggrieved by an order which is to
his detriment, pecuniary or otherwise or causes him some prejudice in some form or
other. A person who is not a party to a litigation has no right to appeal merely
because the judgment or order contains some adverse remarks against him. But it has
been held in a number of cases that a person who is not a party to suit may prefer an
appeal with the leave of the appellate court and such leave would not be refused
where the judgment would be binding on him under Explanation 6 to section 11 of
the Code of Civil Procedure.”

29. In Smt. Sukhrani (dead) by L.R’s and others vs. Hari Shanker and others, AIR 1979 SC 1436, the
interlocutory order was not challenged. The same was challenged after the final order was passed by
the court. This Court in paragraph 5 of the report held thus:

“5. It is true that at an earlier stage of the suit, in the proceeding to set aside the
award, the High Court recorded a finding that the plaintiff was not entitled to seek
reopening of the partition on the ground of unfairness when there was neither fraud
nor misrepresentation. It is true that the plaintiff did not further pursue the matter at
that stage by taking it in appeal to the Supreme Court but preferred to proceed to the
trial of his suit. It is also true that a decision given at an earlier stage of a suit will
bind the parties at later stages of the same suit. But it is equally well settled that
because a matter has been decided at an earlier stage by an interlocutory order and

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63497145/

8

H. Anjanappa vs A. Prabhakar on 29 January, 2025

no appeal has been taken therefrom or no appeal did lie, a higher Court is not
precluded from considering the matter again at a later stage of the same litigation.”

30. We may also refer to the observations of this Court in the case of Smt. Jatan Kumar Golcha vs.
Golcha Properties Private Limited, reported in (1970) 3 SCC 573. The same reads thus:

“It is well settled that a person who is not a party to the suit may prefer an appeal
with the leave of the Appellate Court and such leave should be granted if he would be
prejudicially affected by the Judgment.”

31. This Court in the case of State of Punjab and others vs. Amar Singh and another, reported in
(1974) 2 SCC 70, while dealing with the maintainability of appeal by a person who is not party to a
suit, has observed thus:

“Firstly, there is a catena of authorities which, following the dictum of Lindley, L.J.,
in re Securities Insurance Co., [(1894) 2 Ch 410] have laid down the rule that a
person who is not a party to a decree or order may with the leave of the Court, prefer
an appeal from such decree or order if he is either bound by the order or is aggrieved
by it or is prejudicially affected by it.”

32. In the case of Baldev Singh vs. Surinder Mohan Sharma and others, reported in (2003) 1 SCC 34,
this Court held that an appeal under Section 96 of the CPC would be maintainable only at the
instance of a person aggrieved by and dissatisfied with the judgment and decree. While dealing with
the concept of person aggrieved, it was observed in paragraph 15 as under:

“A person aggrieved to file an appeal must be one whose right is affected by reason of
the judgment and decree sought to be impugned.”

33. In the aforesaid judgment, a compromise decree was passed in a suit between husband and wife
to the effect that their marriage stood dissolved from an earlier date by virtue of a memorandum of
customary dissolution of marriage. The said decree was sought to be challenged by a person who
was having a property dispute with the husband and who had filed complaints against the husband
to the employer of the husband, in contravention of the Employment Rules having contracted a
second marriage. This Court, while holding that the person who was seeking to challenge the decree
had no locus standi to do so, held: (a) that there is no dispute that as against the decree, an appeal
would be maintainable in terms of Section 96 of the CPC; such an appeal, however would be
maintainable only at the instance of a person aggrieved by and dissatisfied with the judgment and
decree; (b) that the dispute between the said person and the husband was in relation to a property
and the said person, save for making complaints to the employer of the husband, had nothing to do
with the marital status of the husband; (c) locus of a person to prefer an appeal in a matter of this
nature is vital; (d) the court cannot enlarge the scope of locus, where the parties are fighting
litigations;

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63497145/

9

H. Anjanappa vs A. Prabhakar on 29 January, 2025

(e) the pleas of the said person did not disclose as to how and in what manner he would be
prejudiced if the compromise decree was allowed to stand; (f) that the challenge by the said person
was not bona fide; and, (g) even if the compromise decree was a judgment in rem, the said person
could not have challenged the same as he was not aggrieved therefrom.

34. In the case of A. Subash Babu vs. State of A.P. and another, reported in (2011) 7 SCC 616, this
Court held as under:

“The expression ‘aggrieved person’ denotes an elastic and an elusive concept. It
cannot be confined that the bounds of a rigid, exact and comprehensive definition. Its
scope and meaning depends on diverse, variable factors such as the content and
intent of the statute of which contravention is alleged, the specific circumstances of
the case, the nature and extent of the complainant’s interest and the nature and
extent of the prejudice or injuries suffered by him.”

35. The expression ‘person aggrieved’ does not include a person who suffers from a psychological or
an imaginary injury; a person aggrieved must, therefore, necessarily be one, whose right or interest
has been adversely affected or jeopardized (see : Shanti Kumar R. Canji vs. Home Insurance Co. of
New York, (1974) 2 SCC 387 and State of Rajasthan & Ors. vs. Union of India & Ors., (1977) 3 SCC
592).

36. We may also refer to a Division Bench decision of the Madras High Court in the case of Srimathi
K. Ponnalagu Ammani vs. The State of Madras represented by the Secretary to the Revenue
Department, Madras and Ors., reported in AIR 1953 Madras 485. The High Court laid down the test
to find out when it would be proper to grant leave to appeal to a person not a party to a proceeding
against the decree or judgment passed in such proceedings in following words:

“Now, what is the test to find out when it would be proper to grant leave to appeal to
a person not a party to a proceeding against the decree or judgment in such
proceedings? We think it would be improper to grant leave to appeal to every person
who may in some remote or indirect way be prejudicially affected by a decree or
judgment. We think that ordinarily leave to appeal should be granted to persons who,
though not parties to the proceedings, would be bound by the decree or judgment in
that proceeding and who would be precluded from attacking its correctness in other
proceedings.”

37. We may look into the decision in the case of Province of Bombay vs. W.I. Automobile
Association, reported in AIR 1949 Bombay 141, and the English practice on which that decision is
based. In the Province of Bombay case, Chagla C.J. and Bhagwati J. held that a person not a party to
a suit may prefer an appeal if he is affected by the order of the Trial Court provided he obtained
leave from the Court of appeal. The learned Chief Justice observed as follows:

“The Civil Procedure Code does not in terms lay down as to who can be a party to an
appeal. But it is clear and this fact arises from the very basis of appeals, that only a

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63497145/

10

H. Anjanappa vs A. Prabhakar on 29 January, 2025

party against whom a decision is given has a right to prefer an appeal. Even in
England the position is the same. But it is recognised that a person who is not a party
to the suit may prefer an appeal if he is affected by the order of the trial Court,
provided he obtains leave from the Court of appeal; therefore whereas in the case of a
party to a suit he has a right of appeal, in the case of a person not a party to the suit
who is affected by the order he has no right but the court of appeal may in its
discretion allow him to prefer an appeal.” (Emphasis supplied)

38. Bhagwati J. referred to the decision of the Madras High Court in Indian Bank Limited, Madras
vs. Seth Bansiram Jashamal Firm through its Managing Partner, AIR 1934 Mad 360, and accepted it
as authority for the position that no person who is not a party to a suit or proceeding has a right of
appeal. But if he was aggrieved by a decision of the court, the remedy open to him was to approach
the appellate court and ask for leave to appeal which the appellate court would grant in proper cases.
The learned Judge cites a passage from the decision in In re Securities Insurance Company, (1894) 2
Ch D 410, where Lindley L.J. said that the practice of the Courts of Chancery, both before and after
1862, was well-settled that while a person who was a party could appear without any leave a person
who without being a party was either bound by the order or was aggrieved by it or was prejudicially
affected by it could not appeal without leave.

39. The law has been succinctly explained as regards the grant of leave to appeal in In re Markham
Markham vs. Markham, (1881) 16 Ch D 1; In re Padstow Total Loss and Collision Assurance
Association, (1882) 20 Ch. D 137 at p. 142; Attorney General vs. Marquis of Ailesbury, (1885) 16
QBD 408 at p. 412, and In re Ex Tsar of Bulgaria, (1921) 1 Ch D 107 at p. 110. The position is thus
stated in the Annual Practice for 1951 at page 1244:

“Persons not parties on the record may, by leave obtained on an 'ex parte' application
to the Court of appeal, appeal from a judgment or order affecting their interests, as
under the old practice.”

40. Halsbury's Laws of England, Vol. 26, page 115, gives the same rule in a different form:

“A person who is not a party and who has not been served with such notice (notice of
the judgment or order) cannot appeal without leave, but a person who might properly
have been a party may obtain leave to appeal.”

41. In more or less similar terms, the rule and its limits are stated in Seton on Judgments and
Orders, 7th Edn., Vol. 1, at p. 824:

“Where the appellant is not a party to the record he can only appeal by leave to be
obtained on motion 'ex parte' from the Court of Appeal..... Leave to appeal will not be
given to a person not a party unless his interest is such that he might have been made
a party.” (Emphasis supplied)

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63497145/

11

H. Anjanappa vs A. Prabhakar on 29 January, 2025

42. On the anvil of the decisions cited supra, the instant case may be examined. Admittedly, the
application filed by the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 respectively under Order I Rule 10 CPC for being
impleaded as party to the suit was rejected by the Trial Court. The said order was not challenged. In
view of the authoritative pronouncement of the cases cited supra, the conclusion is irresistible that
rejection of the application filed under Order I Rule 10 CPC is per se not a ground to reject the
application for leave to file appeal. The appellate court has to see whether the transferee pendente
lite is aggrieved by a decree or is otherwise prejudicially affected by it. The appellate court has to
examine that if the decree is allowed to stand, the same will operate res judicata.

43. The principles governing the grant of leave to appeal may be summarised as under:

i. Sections 96 and 100 of the CPC respectively provide for preferring an appeal from
an original decree or decree in appeal respectively;

ii. The said provisions do not enumerate the categories of persons who can file an
appeal;

iii. However, it a settled legal proposition that a stranger cannot be permitted to file
an appeal in any proceedings unless he satisfies the court that he falls within the
category of an aggrieved person;

iv. It is only where a judgment and decree prejudicially affects a person who is not a
party to the proceedings, he can prefer an appeal with the leave of the court;

v. A person aggrieved, to file an appeal, must be one whose right is affected by reason
of the judgment and decree sought to be impugned;

vi. The expression “person aggrieved” does not include a person who suffers from a
psychological or an imaginary injury;

vii. It would be improper to grant leave to appeal to every person who may in some
remote or indirect way be prejudicially affected by a decree or judgment; and viii.
Ordinarily leave to appeal should be granted to persons who, though not parties to
the proceedings, would be bound by the decree or judgment in that proceeding and
who would be precluded from attacking its correctness in other proceedings.

44. The issue can also be examined from a different angle.

45. Section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act reads thus:

“52. Transfer of property pending suit relating thereto.— During the pendency in any
Court having authority within the limits of India excluding the State of Jammu and
Kashmir or established beyond such limits by the Central Government of any suit or
proceedings which is not collusive and in which any right to immoveable property is

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63497145/

12

H. Anjanappa vs A. Prabhakar on 29 January, 2025

directly and specifically in question, the property cannot be transferred or otherwise
dealt with by any party to the suit or proceeding so as to affect the rights of any other
party thereto under any decree or order which may be made therein, except under the
authority of the Court and on such terms as it may impose.”

46. A transfer pendete lite is not illegal ipso jure but remains subservient to the pending litigation.
In Nagubai Ammal & Ors. vs. B. Shama Rao & Ors., AIR 1956 SC 593, this Court while interpreting
Section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act observed:

“…The words “so as to affect the rights of any other party thereto under any decree or
order which may be made therein", make it clear that the transfer is good except to
the extent that it might conflict with rights decreed under the decree or order. It is in
this view that transfers pendente lite have been held to be valid and operative as
between the parties thereto.”

47. To the same effect is the decision of this Court in Vinod Seth v. Devinder Bajaj, (2010) 8 SCC 1,
where this Court held that Section 52 does not render transfers affected during the pendency of the
suit void but only render such transfers subservient to the rights as may be eventually determined by
the Court. The following passage in this regard is apposite:

“42. It is well settled that the doctrine of lis pendens does not annul the conveyance
by a party to the suit, but only renders it subservient to the rights of the other parties
to the litigation. Section 52 will not therefore render a transaction relating to the suit
property during the pendency of the suit void but render the transfer inoperative
insofar as the other parties to the suit. Transfer of any right, title or interest in the
suit property or the consequential acquisition of any right, title or interest, during the
pendency of the suit will be subject to the decision in the suit.”

48. In Thomson Press (India) Ltd. vs. Nanak Builders & Investors P. Ltd., [2013] 2 SCR 74, Justice
T.S. Thakur (As His Lordship then was), while concurring with Justice M.Y. Eqbal, summed up the
legal position as follows:

“There is, therefore, little room for any doubt that the transfer of the suit property
pendete lite is not void ab initio and that the purchaser of any such property takes the
bargain subject to the rights of the plaintiff in the pending suit. Although the above
decisions do not deal with a fact situation where the sale deed is executed in breach of
an injunction issued by a competent Court, we do not see any reason why the breach
of any such injunction should render the transfer whether by way of an absolute sale
or otherwise ineffective. The party committing the breach may doubtless incur the
liability to be punished for the breach committed by it but the sale by itself may
remain valid as between the parties to the transaction subject only to any directions
which the competent Court may issue in the suit against the vendor.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63497145/

13

H. Anjanappa vs A. Prabhakar on 29 January, 2025

The third dimension which arises for consideration is about the right of a transferee
pendete lite to seek addition as a party defendant to the suit under Order I, Rule 10
CPC. I have no hesitation in concurring with the view that no one other than parties
to an agreement to sell is a necessary and proper party to a suit. The decisions of this
Court have elaborated that aspect sufficiently making any further elucidation
unnecessary. The High Court has understood and applied the legal propositions
correctly while dismissing the application of the appellant under Order I, Rule 10
CPC.

What must all the same be addressed is whether the prayer made by the appellant
could be allowed under Order XXII Rule 10 of the CPC, which is as under:

“Procedure in case of assignment before final order in suit. – (1) In other cases of an
assignment, creation or devolution of any interest during the pendency of a suit, the
suit may, by leave of the court, be continued by or against the person to or upon
whom such interest has come or devolved. (2) The attachment of a decree pending an
appeal therefrom shall be deemed to be an interest entitling the person who procured
such attachment to the benefit of sub-rule (1).” A simple reading of the above
provision would show that in cases of assignment, creation or devolution of any
interest during the pendency of a suit, the suit may, by leave of the Court, be
continued by or against the person to or upon whom such interest has come or
devolved. What has troubled us is whether independent of Order I Rule 10 CPC the
prayer for addition made by the appellant could be considered in the light of the
a b o v e   p r o v i s i o n s   a n d ,   i f   s o ,   w h e t h e r   t h e   a p p e l l a n t   c o u l d   b e   a d d e d   a s   a
party-defendant to the suit. Our answer is in the affirmative. It is true that the
application which the appellant made was only under Order I Rule 10 CPC but the
enabling provision of Order XXII Rule 10 CPC could always be invoked if the fact
situation so demanded. It was in any case not urged by counsel for the respondents
that Order XXII Rule 10 could not be called in aid with a view to justifying addition of
the appellant as a party defendant. Such being the position all that is required to be
examined is whether a transferee pendete lite could in a suit for specific performance
be added as a party defendant and, if so, on what terms.” (Emphasis supplied)

49. We shall now look into Section 146 CPC. It provides:

“146. Proceedings by or against representatives ─ Save as otherwise provided by this
Court or by any law for the time being in force, where any proceeding may be taken or
application made by or against any person, then the proceeding may be taken or
application may be made by or against any person claiming under him.”

50. A lis pendens transferee from the defendant, though not arrayed as a party in the suit, is still a
person claiming under the defendant. The same principle of law is recognized in a different
perspective by Rule 16 of Order XXI of the CPC which speaks of transfer or assignment inter vivos or
by operation of law made by the plaintiff-decree-holder. The transferee may apply for execution of

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63497145/

14

H. Anjanappa vs A. Prabhakar on 29 January, 2025

the decree of the Court and the decree will be available for execution in the same manner and
subject to the same conditions as if the application were made by the decree-holder. It is relevant to
note that a provision like Section 146 of the CPC was not be found in the preceding Code of Civil
Procedure, 1859 and was for the first time incorporated in the CPC. In Order XXI Rule 16 also an
explanation was inserted through amendment made by Act No. 104 of 1976 w.e.f. 01.02.1977 where
by the operation of Section 146 CPC was allowed to prevail independent of Order XXI Rule 16 CPC.

51. A decree passed against the defendant is available for execution against the transferee or
assignee of the defendant-judgment-debtor and it does not make any difference whether such
transfer or assignment has taken place after the passing of the decree or before the passing of the
decree without notice or leave of the Court.

52. The law laid down by a four-Judge Bench of this Court in Smt. Saila Bala Dassi vs. Sm. Nirmala
Sundari Dassi and Anr., [1958] SCR 1287, is apt for resolving the issue arising for decision herein. A
transferee of property from defendant during the pendency of the suit sought himself to be brought
on record at the stage of appeal. The High Court dismissed the application as it was pressed only by
reference to Order XXII Rule 10 of the CPC and it was conceded by the applicant that, not being a
person who had obtained a transfer pending appeal, he was not covered within the scope of Order
22 Rule 10. In an appeal preferred by such transferee, this Court upheld the view of the High Court
that a transferee prior to the filing of the appeal could not be brought on record in appeal by
reference to Order XXII Rule 10 of the CPC. However, the Court held that an appeal is a proceeding
for the purpose of Section 146 and further the expression “claiming under” is wide enough to include
cases of devolution and assignment mentioned in Order XXII Rule 10. Whoever is entitled to be but
has not been brought on record under Order XXII Rule 10 in a pending suit or proceeding would be
entitled to prefer an appeal against the decree or order passed therein if his assignor could have filed
such an appeal, there being no prohibition against it in the CPC. A person having acquired an
interest in suit property during the pendency of the suit and seeking to be brought on record at the
stage of the appeal can do so by reference to Section 146 of the CPC which provision being a
beneficent provision should be construed liberally and so as to advance justice and not in a
restricted or technical sense. Their Lordships held that being a purchaser pendente lite, a person
will be bound by the proceedings taken by the successful party in execution of decree and justice
requires that such purchaser should be given an opportunity to protect his rights. [See : Raj Kumar
vs. Sardari Lal, (2004) 2 SCC 601]

53. In Dhurandhar Prasad Singh vs. Jai Prakash University, reported in (2001) 6 SCC 534, this
Court held that the plain language of Order XXII Rule 10 CPC does not suggest that leave can be
sought by that person alone upon whom the interest has devolved. It simply says that the suit may
be continued by the person upon whom such an interest has devolved and this applies in a case
where the interest of the plaintiff has devolved. Likewise, in a case where interest of the defendant
has devolved, the suit may be continued against such a person upon whom interest has devolved,
but in either eventuality, for continuance of the suit against the persons upon whom the interest has
devolved during the pendency of the suit, leave of the court has to be obtained. If it is laid down that
leave can be obtained by that person alone upon whom interest of a party to the suit has devolved
during its pendency, then there may be preposterous results as such a party might not be knowing

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63497145/

15

H. Anjanappa vs A. Prabhakar on 29 January, 2025

about the litigation and consequently not feasible for him to apply for leave and if a duty is cast upon
him, then in such an eventuality he would be bound by the decree even in cases of failure to apply
for leave. As a rule of prudence, initial duty lies upon the plaintiff to apply for leave in case the
factum of devolution was within his knowledge or with due diligence could have been known by him.
The person upon whom the interest has devolved may also apply for such a leave so that his interest
may be properly represented as the original party, if it ceased to have an interest in the
subject-matter of dispute by virtue of devolution of interest upon another person, may not take
interest therein, in ordinary course, which is but natural, or by colluding with the other side. If the
submission of Mr. Nuli is accepted, a party upon whom interest has devolved, upon his failure to
apply for leave, would be deprived from challenging correctness of the decree by filing a properly
constituted suit on the ground that the original party having lost interest in the subject of dispute,
did not properly prosecute or defend the litigation or, in doing so, colluded with the adversary.

54. In Amit Kumar Shaw vs. Farida Khatoon, AIR 2005 SC 2209, this Court held that a transferee
pendente lite to the extent he has acquired interest from the defendant is vitally interested in the
litigation, where the transfer is of the entire interest of the defendant; the latter having no more
interest in the property may not properly defend the suit. He may collude with the plaintiff. Hence,
though the plaintiff is under no obligation to make a lis pendens transferee a party, under Order
XXII Rule 10 an alienee pendente lite may be joined as party. As already noticed, the court has
discretion in the matter which must be judicially exercised and an alienee would ordinarily be joined
as a party to enable him to protect his interests. The court has held that a transferee pendente lite of
an interest in immovable property is a representative-in-interest of the party from whom he has
acquired that interest. He is entitled to be impleaded in the suit or other proceedings where his
predecessor-in-interest is made a party to the litigation; he is entitled to be heard in the matter on
the merits of the case. This judgment has been followed in Thomson Press (India) Ltd. (supra).

55. In fact, the scope of Order I Rule 10 and Order XXII Rule 10 CPC is similar. Therefore, the
principles applicable to Order XXII Rule 10 CPC, in order to bring a purchaser pendente lite on
record, are applicable to Order I Rule 10 CPC. Under Order I Rule 10(2) CPC, the Court is required
to record a finding that person sought to be impleaded as party in the suit is either necessary or
proper party. While Section 146 and Order XXII Rule 10 CPC confers right upon the legal
representative of a party to the suit to be impleaded with the leave of the Court and continue the
litigation. While deciding an application under Section 146 and Order XXII Rule 10 CPC, the Court
is not require to go in the controversy as to whether person sought to be impleaded as party in the
suit is either necessary or proper party. If the person sought to be impleaded as party is legal
representative of a party to the suit, it is sufficient for the Court to order impleadment/substitution
of such person.

56. Thus, a lis pendens transferee though not brought on record under Order XXII Rule 10 CPC, is
entitled to seek leave to appeal against the final decree passed against this transferor, the defendant
in the suit. However, whether to grant such leave or not is within the discretion of the court and
such discretion should be exercised judiciously in the facts and circumstances of each case.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63497145/

16

H. Anjanappa vs A. Prabhakar on 29 January, 2025

57. Having regard to the fact that the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 respectively purchased the suit
property during the pendency of the suit instituted for specific performance and that too, while the
injunction against the original owner (transferor) was operating, the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2
respectively could not be said to have even made out any good case for grant of leave to appeal.

58. From a conspectus of all the aforesaid judgments, touching upon the present aspect, broadly, the
following would emerge:

i. First, for the purpose of impleading a transferee pendente lite, the facts and
circumstances should be gone into and basing on the necessary facts, the Court can
permit such a party to come on record, either under Order I Rule 10 CPC or under
Order XXII Rule 10 CPC, as a general principle;

ii. Secondly, a transferee pendente lite is not entitled to come on record as a matter of
right;

iii. Thirdly, there is no absolute rule that such a transferee pendente lite, with the
leave of the Court should, in all cases, be allowed to come on record as a party;

iv. Fourthly, the impleadment of a transferee pendente lite would depend upon the
nature of the suit and appreciation of the material available on record;

v. Fifthly, where a transferee pendente lite does not ask for leave to come on record,
that would obviously be at his peril, and the suit may be improperly conducted by the
plaintiff on record;

vi. Sixthly, merely because such transferee pendente lite does not come on record, the
concept of him (transferee pendente lite) not being bound by the judgment does not
arise and consequently he would be bound by the result of the litigation, though he
remains unrepresented;

vii. Seventhly, the sale transaction pendente lite is hit by the provisions of Section 52
of the Transfer of Property Act; and, viii. Eighthly, a transferee pendente lite, being
an assignee of interest in the property, as envisaged under Order XXII Rule 10 CPC,
can seek leave of the Court to come record on his own or at the instance of either
party to the suit.

CONCLUSION

59. In the overall view of the matter, we are convinced that the impugned order passed by the High
Court is unsustainable in law.

60. In the result, the appeals succeed and are hereby allowed. The impugned order passed by the
High Court is set aside.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63497145/

17

H. Anjanappa vs A. Prabhakar on 29 January, 2025

61. If the Respondent Nos. 1 & 2 feel that they have been duped or cheated by the Respondent No.
7/Defendant No. 3, then it shall be open for them to avail appropriate legal remedy before the
appropriate forum in accordance with law for the purpose of recovery of the amount towards sale
consideration paid at the time of execution of the sale deed.

62. Pending application(s), if any, stand disposed of accordingly.

… … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … J   ( J . B .   P A R D I W A L A )   … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … J   ( R .
MAHADEVAN) New Delhi January 29, 2025

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63497145/

18

