Ex Const/ Dvr Mukesh Kumar Raigar vs Union Of India on 16 January, 2023

Ex Const/ Dvr Mukesh Kumar Raigar vs Union Of India on 16
January, 2023

Author: Bela M. Trivedi

Bench: Bela M. Trivedi, Ajay Rastogi

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 10499 OF 2022

EX-CONST/DVR MUKESH KUMAR RAIGAR .... PETITIONER

VERSUS

UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                           .... RESPONDENTS

JUDGMENT

BELA M. TRIVEDI, J.

1. The present special leave petition is directed against the judgment and order dated 16.11.2021
passed by the High Court of Judicature for Rajasthan Bench at Jaipur, whereby the Division Bench
has allowed the D.B. Special Appeal Writ No. 637 of 2021 filed by the respondents-Union of India
(appellants before the Division Bench), and has set aside the order dated 17.02.2021 passed by the
Single Bench, which had allowed the Civil Writ Petition No. 17475 of 2018 filed by the present
petitioner (respondent before the Division Bench).

2. The present petitioner was appointed on the post of constable in the CISF on 03.11.2007. In April,
2009 the petitioner received a notice/Memorandum of charge under the Rule 36 of CISF Rules 2001
(hereinafter referred to as the “the said Rules”) from the office of Commandant Discipline, CISF in
which it was alleged that the petitioner at the time of submitting verification of his character
certificate had suppressed the fact that he was involved in a criminal case for the offence under
sections 323, 324 and 341 of IPC in respect of which an FIR being No. 153/2003 was registered
against him on 21.10.2003; and that on the Investigating Officer in the said proceedings having
submitted the charge-sheet before the concerned Court, the case was pending for trial before the
said Court when the character certificate was submitted by the petitioner to the CISF authorities. It
was also stated therein that since the act of suppression of information regarding pendency of the
criminal litigation in his character certificate filed along with the appointment letter, was under

1

Ex Const/ Dvr Mukesh Kumar Raigar vs Union Of India on 16 January, 2023

the category of gross misconduct and indiscipline, he was not eligible to be appointed
in a very disciplined police force i.e. CISF. Thereafter, disciplinary proceedings were
initiated against the petitioner. During the course of disciplinary proceedings, the
petitioner accepted his mistake. The Commandant Discipline, CISF, keeping in view
the young age and future prospects of the petitioner, imposed punishment of
reduction of pay by one stage from Rs. 6320- 6070/- in the pay band of
Rs.5200-20,200/- with grade pay. However, on 06.10.2009, the Deputy Inspector
General (West Zone), Air Port Head Quarter – Navi Mumbai – suo motu took the
cognizance of the matter revising the order dated 11.07.2009 and remitted the matter
back for fresh departmental enquiry against the petitioner invoking Rule 54 of CISF
Rules, 2001. The said departmental enquiry culminated into the removal of the
petitioner from service on 09.03.2010, against which the petitioner had filed a
departmental appeal, however, the said appeal came to be dismissed by the appellate
authority vide the order dated 23.06.2010. The revision petition filed by the
petitioner before the competent authority assailing the said order dated 23.06.2010
also came to be dismissed by the Revisional Authority vide the order dated
21.12.2010.

3. Being aggrieved by the said orders, passed by the various authorities of CISF, the petitioner filed a
writ petition being No. 8190 of 2012 before the High Court of Judicature for Rajasthan at Jaipur.
The Single Bench vide order dated 16.02.2018 set aside the order of removal passed against the
petitioner and directed the petitioner to file a detailed representation before the appointing
authority for reconsideration of his case in the context of the judgment of the Supreme Court in case
of Avtar Singh Vs. Union of India & Ors1 and directed the appointing authority to decide the
representation of the petitioner by a reasoned and speaking order with reference to the said
judgment. The Commandant CISF Unit CSIA, Mumbai after considering the representation of the
petitioner in the light of the judgment in case of Avtar Singh (supra), held that the CISF being an
Armed Force of Union of India, which is deployed in sensitive sectors, the force personnel are
required to maintain discipline of the highest order, and that the involvement of the petitioner in the
grave offences debarred him from the appointment to such force and, therefore, he was not found
suitable for the appointment in CISF for the post of constable/GD vide order dated 14.05.2018.

4. The petitioner again filed a writ petition being No. 17475/2018 assailing the said order dated
14.05.2018. The Single Bench again set aside the said order and allowed the writ petition directing
the respondents to reinstate the petitioner in service with all consequential benefits vide the order
dated 17.02.2021. The respondents filed the Special Writ Appeal before the Division Bench, against
the order passed by the Sigle Bench, which appeal came to be allowed by the Division Bench vide the
impugned order. 1 (2016) 8 SCC 471

5. Ms. Asifa Rashid Mir, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner vehemently submitted that the
petitioner was involved in a criminal case when he was hardly aged about 19 years and the said case
had resulted into a compromise between the parties. According to her, on the basis of the said
compromise, the Trial Court had closed the case on 21.11.2007, and the petitioner was appointed as
constable in CISF on 03.11.2007. Relying upon the various decisions of this Court and other High

2

Ex Const/ Dvr Mukesh Kumar Raigar vs Union Of India on 16 January, 2023

Courts, she further submitted that considering the nature of offence in which the petitioner was
allegedly involved, the removal from service on the ground of non-disclosure of pendency of the said
case could not be said to be a grave misconduct attracting the harsh punishment of removal from
service. The Division Bench of the High Court, runs the submissions of the counsel for the
petitioner, should not have interfered with the well-reasoned order passed by the Single Bench
which had found the involvement of the petitioner in a case of trivial nature. According to her, even
if a deliberate suppression by the petitioner as alleged by the respondents was found to have taken
place at the time of filing the character certificate, a lenient view should have been taken by the
respondents considering his age and considering the fact that the petitioner had accepted his
mistake.

6. The Senior Advocate Mr. R. Bala Subramanian, appearing for the respondents however, taking
the Court to the CISF Rules 2001, the circulars applicable to all Central Armed Police Force (CAPF)
including the CISF regarding the policy guidelines to be followed in respect of the candidates against
whom criminal cases are pending vide OM dated 01.02.2012, dealing with suppression of
information or submitting false information in the verification form, submitted that the CISF being
very disciplined police force and the post of constable being very sensitive post, the petitioner who
was found to be guilty of gross misconduct of suppressing the material fact of his involvement in the
criminal case at the time of seeking appointment, could not have been continued in service, and that
the Division Bench has rightly considered the facts of the case and upheld the decision of the
respondent authority, which may not be interfered with.

7. In the instant case, both the learned counsels for the parties have relied upon decision of this
Court in Avtar Singh (supra) in which a three-judge Bench emphasizing the need of verification of
character and antecedents of the person to be appointed in the government service and after
considering the various previous judgments of this Court, had summarized the principles in para 38
which reads as under:

“38. We have noticed various decisions and tried to explain and reconcile them as far
as possible. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we summarise our conclusion thus:

38.1. Information given to the employer by a candidate as to conviction, acquittal or
arrest, or pendency of a criminal case, whether before or after entering into service
must be true and there should be no suppression or false mention of required
information.

38.2. While passing order of termination of services or cancellation of candidature for
giving false information, the employer may take notice of special circumstances of the
case, if any, while giving such information.

3 8 . 3 .   T h e   e m p l o y e r   s h a l l   t a k e   i n t o   c o n s i d e r a t i o n   t h e   g o v e r n m e n t
orders/instructions/rules, applicable to the employee, at the time of taking the
decision.

3

Ex Const/ Dvr Mukesh Kumar Raigar vs Union Of India on 16 January, 2023

38.4. In case there is suppression or false information of involvement in a criminal
case where conviction or acquittal had already been recorded before filling of the
application/verification form and such fact later comes to knowledge of employer,
any of the following recourses appropriate to the case may be adopted:

38.4.1. In a case trivial in nature in which conviction had been recorded, such as
shouting slogans at young age or for a petty offence which if disclosed would not have
rendered an incumbent unfit for post in question, the employer may, in its discretion,
ignore such suppression of fact or false information by condoning the lapse.

38.4.2. Where conviction has been recorded in case which is not trivial in nature,
employer may cancel candidature or terminate services of the employee.

38.4.3. If acquittal had already been recorded in a case involving moral turpitude or
offence of heinous/serious nature, on technical ground and it is not a case of clean
acquittal, or benefit of reasonable doubt has been given, the employer may consider
all relevant facts available as to antecedents, and may take appropriate decision as to
the continuance of the employee.

38.5. In a case where the employee has made declaration truthfully of a concluded
criminal case, the employer still has the right to consider antecedents, and cannot be
compelled to appoint the candidate.

38.6. In case when fact has been truthfully declared in character verification form
regarding pendency of a criminal case of trivial nature, employer, in facts and
circumstances of the case, in its discretion, may appoint the candidate subject to
decision of such case.

38.7. In a case of deliberate suppression of fact with respect to multiple pending cases
such false information by itself will assume significance and an employer may pass
appropriate order cancelling candidature or terminating services as appointment of a
person against whom multiple criminal cases were pending may not be proper.

38.8. If criminal case was pending but not known to the candidate at the time of
filling the form, still it may have adverse impact and the appointing authority would
take decision after considering the seriousness of the crime.

38.9. In case the employee is confirmed in service, holding departmental enquiry
would be necessary before passing order of termination/removal or dismissal on the
ground of suppression or submitting false information in verification form.

38.10. For determining suppression or false information attestation/verification form
has to be specific, not vague. Only such information which was required to be
specifically mentioned has to be disclosed. If information not asked for but is relevant

4

Ex Const/ Dvr Mukesh Kumar Raigar vs Union Of India on 16 January, 2023

comes to knowledge of the employer the same can be considered in an objective
manner while addressing the question of fitness.

However, in such cases action cannot be taken on basis of suppression or submitting false
information as to a fact which was not even asked for.

38.11. Before a person is held guilty of suppressio veri or suggestio falsi, knowledge of the fact must
be attributable to him”.

8. It may be noted that even after the guiding principles laid down in the case of Avtar Singh by the
three-judge Bench, divergent views were expressed by the various benches of this Court. Therefore,
this Court in case of Satish Chandra Yadav Vs. Union of India & Others. 2, after taking into
consideration the inconsistent views taken in the cases of Union of India & Ors. Vs Methu Meda3;
Union of India vs. Dilip Kumar Mallick4; Pawan Kumar vs. Union of India & Anr. 5; Rajasthan
Rajya Vidyut Prasaran Nigam Limited & Anr. vs. Anil Kanwariya6; Mohammed Imran Vs. State of
Maharashtra & Others7; etc., further laid down following principles:

“89. The only reason to refer to and look into the various decisions rendered by this
Court as above over a period of time is that the principles of law laid therein
governing the subject are bit inconsistent. Even after, the larger Bench 2 (2022) SCC
Online SC 1300 3 (2022) 1 SCC 1 4 (2022) 6 Scale 108 5 (2022) SCC Online SC 532 6
(2021) 10 SCC 136 7 (2019) 17 SCC 696 decision in the case of Avtar Singh (supra)
different courts have enunciated different principles.

90. In such circumstances, we undertook some exercise to shortlist the broad
principles of law which should be made applicable to the litigations of the present
nature. The principles are as follows:

a) Each case should be scrutinised thoroughly by the public employer concerned,
through its designated officials-more so, in the case of recruitment for the police
force, who are under a duty to maintain order, and tackle lawlessness, since their
ability to inspire public confidence is a bulwark to society's security. [See Raj Kumar
(supra)]

b) Even in a case where the employee has made declaration truthfully and correctly of
a concluded criminal case, the employer still has the right to consider the
antecedents, and cannot be compelled to appoint the candidate. The acquittal in a
criminal case would not automatically entitle a candidate for appointment to the
post. It would be still open to the employer to consider the antecedents and examine
whether the candidate concerned is suitable and fit for appointment to the post.

c) The suppression of material information and making a false statement in the
verification Form relating to arrest, prosecution, conviction etc., has a clear bearing
on the character, conduct and antecedents of the employee. If it is found that the

5

Ex Const/ Dvr Mukesh Kumar Raigar vs Union Of India on 16 January, 2023

employee had suppressed or given false information in regard to the matters having a
bearing on his fitness or suitability to the post, he can be terminated from service.

d) The generalisations about the youth, career prospects and age of the candidates
leading to condonation of the offenders' conduct, should not enter the judicial verdict
and should be avoided.

e) The Court should inquire whether the Authority concerned whose action is being
challenged acted mala fide.

f) Is there any element of bias in the decision of the Authority?

g) Whether the procedure of inquiry adopted by the Authority concerned was fair and
reasonable?”

9. Having regard to the guiding principles, laid down in case of Avtar Singh (supra) and in case of
Satish Chandra Yadav (supra), this Court has no hesitation in holding that the Single Bench of the
H i g h   C o u r t   h a d   c o m m i t t e d   a n   e r r o r   i n   i n t e r f e r i n g   w i t h   t h e   o r d e r   p a s s e d   b y   t h e
respondents-authorities. The respondents-authorities had after taking into consideration the
decision in case of Avtar Singh terminated the services of the petitioner holding inter-alia that while
the petitioner was appointed in CISF, a criminal case was pending against him at the time of his
enrolment in the force, but he did not reveal the same and that there was deliberate suppression of
facts which was an aggravating circumstance. It was also held that CISF being an armed force of
Union of India, is deployed in sensitive sectors such as airports, ports, department of atomic energy,
department of space, metro, power and steel, for internal security duty etc., and therefore, the force
personnel are required to maintain discipline of the highest order; and that the involvement of the
petitioner in such grave offences debarred him from the appointment.

Such a well-reasoned and well considered decision of the respondent-authorities should not have
been interfered by the Single Bench in exercise of its powers under Article 226 of the Constitution,
more particularly when there were no allegations of malafides or of non-observance of rules of
natural justice or of breach of statutory rules were attributed against the respondent authorities.

10. The Constitution Bench, in case of State of Orissa & Others vs. Bidyabhushan Mohapatra8 had
observed way back in 1963 that having regard to the gravity of the established misconduct, the
punishing authority had the power and jurisdiction to impose punishment. The penalty was not
open to review by the High Court under Article 226. A three-judge Bench in case of B.C. Chaturvedi
vs. Union of India & Ors 9 had also held that judicial review is not an appeal from a decision but a
review of the manner in which the decision is made. Power of judicial review is meant to ensure that
the individual receives fair treatment and not to ensure that the conclusion which the authority
reaches is necessarily correct in the eye of the Court. When an inquiry is conducted on the charges of
8 AIR 1963 SC 779 9 (1995) 6 SCC 749 misconduct by a public servant, the Court or Tribunal would
be concerned only to the extent of determining whether the inquiry was held by a competent officer
or whether the rules of natural justice and statutory rules were complied with.

6

Ex Const/ Dvr Mukesh Kumar Raigar vs Union Of India on 16 January, 2023

11. In Om Kumar & Others vs. Union of India 10 this Court had also after considering the
Wednesbury Principles and the doctrine of proportionality held that the question of quantum of
punishment in disciplinary matters is primarily for the disciplinary authority, and the jurisdiction of
the High Courts under Article 226 of the Constitution or of the Administrative Tribunals is limited
and is confined to the applicability of one or the other of the well-known principles known as
“Wednesbury Principles”11 namely whether the order was contrary to law, or whether relevant
factors were not considered, or whether irrelevant factors were considered or whether the decision
was one which no reasonable person could have taken.

12. Again, a three-judge Bench in case of Deputy General Manager (Appellate Authority) & Ors. vs.
Ajai Kumar Srivastava 12 10 (2001) 2 SCC 386 11 Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd. vs.
Wednesbury Corporation [1948] 1 KB 223 12 (2021) 2 SCC 612 circumscribing the power of judicial
review by the constitutional courts held as under:

“24. It is thus settled that the power of judicial review, of the constitutional courts, is
an evaluation of the decision-making process and not the merits of the decision itself.
It is to ensure fairness in treatment and not to ensure fairness of conclusion. The
court/tribunal may interfere in the proceedings held against the delinquent if it is, in
any manner, inconsistent with the rules of natural justice or in violation of the
statutory rules prescribing the mode of enquiry or where the conclusion or finding
reached by the disciplinary authority is based on no evidence. If the conclusion or
finding be such as no reasonable person would have ever reached or where the
conclusions upon consideration of the evidence reached by the disciplinary authority
are perverse or suffer from patent error on the face of record or based on no evidence
at all, a writ of certiorari could be issued. To sum up, the scope of judicial review
cannot be extended to the examination of correctness or reasonableness of a decision
of authority as a matter of fact.

25. xxxxxxx

26. xxxxxxx

27.xxxxxxxx

28. The constitutional court while exercising its jurisdiction of judicial review under
Article 226 or Article 136 of the Constitution would not interfere with the findings of
fact arrived at in the departmental enquiry proceedings except in a case of mala fides
or perversity i.e. where there is no evidence to support a finding or where a finding is
such that no man acting reasonably and with objectivity could have arrived at those
findings and so long as there is some evidence to support the conclusion arrived at by
the departmental authority, the same has to be sustained.”

13. In view of the afore-stated legal position, we are of the opinion that the Division Bench of the
High Court had rightly set aside the order passed by the Single Bench, which had wrongly interfered

7

Ex Const/ Dvr Mukesh Kumar Raigar vs Union Of India on 16 January, 2023

with the order of removal passed by the respondent authorities against the petitioner. The petitioner
having been found to have committed gross misconduct right at the threshold of entering into
disciplined force like CISF, and the respondent authorities having passed the order of his removal
from service after following due process of law and without actuated by malafides, the court is not
inclined to exercise its limited jurisdiction under Article 136 of the Constitution.

14. In that view of the matter the SLP is dismissed.

..………………………. J.

[AJAY RASTOGI] …..................................J. [BELA M. TRIVEDI] NEW DELHI 16.01.2023

8