H.R.Sundara vs State Of Karnataka on 26 September, 2023

H.R.Sundara vs State Of Karnataka on 26 September, 2023

Author: Abhay S. Oka

Bench: Sanjay Karol, Abhay S. Oka

2023INSC858

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 247 OF 2011

H. D. SUNDARA & ORS.                          …APPELLANT(S)

VERSUS

STATE OF KARNATAKA                          …RESPONDENT(S)

JUDGMENT

ABHAY S. OKA, J.

1. This is an appeal preferred by the accused challenging the impugned judgment of the High Court
of Karnataka at Bangalore by which the order of their acquittal, passed by the Sessions Court, was
overturned. The appellants were convicted for the offences punishable under Part I of Section 304
and Section 324 read with Section 149 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short, ‘IPC’). They were
sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for seven years and pay a fine of Rs. 5,000/-.

FACTUAL ASPECTS

2. We may refer to a few factual aspects of the case. PW-1 (Jagadeesha) is the complainant. The
complainant’s family had property in the village Hebbale. The appellant no.1 - accused
no.1-Mariyappa is PW-1’s uncle, with whom PW-1’s family was having a dispute over water.
Manjunatha and Shivarama are the brothers of PW-1, who are the victims of the offence. On 29th
August 1999, both entered the village Hebbale to engage labourers for plucking ginger. PW-1
followed them. On the road to the village, he found that PW-2 (Sundara) and PW-6 (Ravi) were
sitting on a culvert. When he was talking to them, they heard the hue and cry from the village, and
therefore, they rushed to the village and found that the appellants, who are relatives of PW-1, were
holding various weapons like sticks, kathi and club and they were assaulting Manjunatha and
Shivarama. It is alleged that accused no.1-Mariyappa assaulted Shivarama by using a club. Accused

1

H.R.Sundara vs State Of Karnataka on 26 September, 2023

no.8-Puttappa also assaulted Manjunatha by using a club. Accused no.7- Rajappa used a stick as a
weapon of assault for assaulting Shivarama. Accused no.5-Somashekara stabbed Shivarama by
using a knife. Accused no.6-Krishnappa assaulted Manjunatha on his head by using a club. Further,
an assault was made by accused no.3-Chandrahasa by putting a stone on the chest of Shivarama.
Even accused no.4-Rajakumara crushed the leg of Shivarama with a stone. Though PW-1, PW-2 and
PW-6 tried to rescue the deceased, they could not save the deceased. Accused no.3-Chandrahasa
caught hold of PW-2 (Sundara) and assaulted him by using a sickle (kathi). Accused no. 1 assaulted
PW-1 with a club. Accused no.1 also assaulted PW- 1’s mother on the right hand.

3. The Trial Court acquitted all the accused. However, by the impugned judgment, the High Court
has interfered and convicted the appellants as narrated above.

4. Accused no.6 died during the pendency of the trial. The accused no.1 - appellant no.1 and accused
no.7 – appellant no.7 died during the pendency of this appeal. Counsel for the appellants has filed
I.A. No. 71417 of 2023 – application for permission to file additional documents. Annexure A-1 and
A- 2 are copies of the Death Certificates of appellant no.1 and appellant no.7 respectively. The said
application is allowed and the Cause Title stands modified accordingly. Formal amendment to the
Cause Title be carried out accordingly. The appeal stands abated as regards these two appellants.
Accused no.2 - appellant no.2, accused no.3 - appellant no.3, accused no.4 - appellant no.4 and
accused no.6 - appellant no.6 have so far undergone incarceration for a period of about one year and
two months. Accused no.5 – appellant no.5-Somashekar has been incarcerated for five years and
three months.

SUBMISSIONS

5. Mr. S. Nagamuthu, the learned senior counsel appearing for the appellants submitted that the
High Court did not apply its mind to the evidence on record. Moreover, the High Court has not
recorded any finding that the only conclusion possible was that the guilt of the accused has been
established beyond a reasonable doubt. Without recording any such finding, the High Court has
overturned the order of acquittal. Moreover, no specific finding is recorded by the High Court that
every accused or any particular accused caused the death of the two deceased persons. He pointed
out that there is no finding about the applicability of Section 149 of IPC. He would, therefore, submit
that the impugned judgment cannot be sustained. Moreover, there is a delay in recording FIR. The
learned senior counsel also pointed out that though a grievous injury was suffered by accused no.1 -
appellant no.1, the prosecution offered no explanation about the said injury. He submitted that in
view of the said injury, in fact, a First Information Report (for short, ‘FIR’) ought to have been
registered, and an investigation ought to have been carried out.

6. Mr. Nishanth Patil, the Additional Advocate General for the State of Karnataka, submitted that
the delay in registering the FIR may be of a very few hours, which has been explained. Moreover, the
evidence of eyewitnesses PW-1, PW-2, PW-3, PW- 6 and PW-7 proves the appellants' guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt. In fact, that would have been the only conclusion which could be drawn on the
basis of evidence on record. He submitted that if the impugned judgment is not satisfactory, this
Court, after re-appreciating the evidence of the prosecution witnesses and other material on record,

2

can satisfy its conscience about the correctness of the ultimate conclusion of the High Court.

H.R.Sundara vs State Of Karnataka on 26 September, 2023

CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS

7. In this appeal, we are called upon to consider the legality and validity of the impugned judgment
rendered by the High Court while deciding an appeal against acquittal under Section 378 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short, ‘Cr.P.C.’). The principles which govern the exercise of
appellate jurisdiction while dealing with an appeal against acquittal under Section 378 of Cr.P.C. can
be summarised as follows: -

(a) The acquittal of the accused further strengthens the presumption of innocence;

(b) The Appellate Court, while hearing an appeal against acquittal, is entitled to
re-appreciate the oral and documentary evidence;

(c) The Appellate Court, while deciding an appeal against acquittal, after
re-appreciating the evidence, is required to consider whether the view taken by the
Trial Court is a possible view which could have been taken on the basis of the
evidence on record;

(d) If the view taken is a possible view, the Appellate Court cannot overturn the order
of acquittal on the ground that another view was also possible; and

(e) The Appellate Court can interfere with the order of acquittal only if it comes to a
finding that the only conclusion which can be recorded on the basis of the evidence
on record was that the guilt of the accused was proved beyond a reasonable doubt
and no other conclusion was possible.

8. Normally, when an Appellate Court exercises appellate jurisdiction, the duty of the Appellate
Court is to find out whether the verdict which is under challenge is correct or incorrect in law and on
facts. The Appellate Court normally ascertains whether the decision under challenge is legal or
illegal. But while dealing with an appeal against acquittal, the Appellate Court cannot examine the
impugned judgment only to find out whether the view taken was correct or incorrect. After
re-appreciating the oral and documentary evidence, the Appellate Court must first decide whether
the Trial Court's view was a possible view. The Appellate Court cannot overturn acquittal only on the
ground that after re-appreciating evidence, it is of the view that the guilt of the accused was
established beyond a reasonable doubt. Only by recording such a conclusion an order of acquittal
cannot be reversed unless the Appellate Court also concludes that it was the only possible
conclusion. Thus, the Appellate Court must see whether the view taken by the Trial Court while
acquitting an accused can be reasonably taken on the basis of the evidence on record. If the view
taken by the Trial Court is a possible view, the Appellate Court cannot interfere with the order of
acquittal on the ground that another view could have been taken.

3

H.R.Sundara vs State Of Karnataka on 26 September, 2023

9. There is one more aspect of the matter. In many cases, the learned Trial Judge who eventually
passes the order of acquittal has an occasion to record the oral testimony of all material witnesses.
Thus, in such cases, the Trial Court has the additional advantage of closely observing the
prosecution witnesses and their demeanour. While deciding about the reliability of the version of
prosecution witnesses, their demeanour remains in the back of the mind of the learned Trial Judge.
As observed in the commentary by Sarkar on the Law of Evidence, the demeanour of a witness
frequently furnishes a clue to the weight of his testimony. This aspect has to be borne in mind while
dealing with an appeal against acquittal.

10. Coming back to the facts of the case, after having carefully perused the impugned judgment, we
find that there is no discussion about the testimony of eyewitnesses for deciding whether their
testimony could be believed. In fact, there are no findings recorded by the High Court after re-
appreciating the evidence. There is not even a finding to indicate that the High Court considered the
question whether the view taken by the Trial Court was a possible view. Without recording any
reasons and without recording any finding regarding the role played by the appellants individually
and collectively, the High Court has jumped to the conclusion that the guilt of the accused has been
established. The judgment does not throw any light on the question who were the authors of the
injuries sustained by the deceased and the injured witnesses. There is no finding as to how Section
149 of IPC gets attracted.

11. Thus, the only conclusion which can be drawn is that the High Court, as an Appellate Court,
while hearing the appeal against acquittal, has not done its duty.

12. However, we cannot take recourse to the order of remand since the subject offence has taken
place about twenty-three and half years back. We have perused the evidence of the eyewitnesses,
namely PW-1, PW-2, PW-3, PW-6 and PW-7, and the Trial Court findings. We find that the Trial
Court has made a very detailed analysis of the depositions of the witnesses. The incident was of 9:00
p.m. The Trial Court noted that at 11:40 p.m. on the date of the incident, PW-1 was examined by a
doctor in a hospital. FIR was not lodged immediately thereafter. It was registered at 1:30 a.m. on the
next date. The Trial Court noted that the appellant no.1’s thumb was disfigured. For this grievous
injury suffered by the appellant no.1 - accused no.1, there was no explanation by the prosecution.

13. The Trial Court found that the failure to investigate the cause of injury suffered by the accused
no.1 is a serious lacuna in a prosecution case. On facts, it is further noted by the Trial Court that on
the basis of prior complaint filed by the accused no.1 - appellant no.1 alleging commission of assault
by PW-1, PW-2, PW-7, and PW-12, all of them got anticipatory bail from the competent court.

14. There was a fight over property between the accused and the family of the complainant. After
in-depth scrutiny of the testimony of the eyewitnesses, for the reasons recorded, the Trial Court was
unable to accept their testimony. After having examined the evidence of the material prosecution
witnesses and findings of the Trial Court, we must hold that the conclusions recorded by the Trial
Court were possible conclusions which could have been recorded on the basis of the evidence on
record.

4

H.R.Sundara vs State Of Karnataka on 26 September, 2023

15. Therefore, the appeal succeeds, and we set aside the impugned Judgment dated 21st September
2010. We direct that unless the appellants are required to be detained in custody in connection with
some other case, they shall be forthwith set at liberty.

16. The Appeal is accordingly allowed.

……………………..J. (Abhay S. Oka) ……………………..J. (Sanjay Karol) New Delhi;

September 26, 2023

5