Haji Iqbal @ Bala vs State Of U.P. on 8 August, 2023

Haji Iqbal @ Bala vs State Of U.P. on 8 August, 2023

Author: B.R. Gavai

Bench: B.R. Gavai

2023 INSC 688
NON-REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2345 OF 2023
(Arising out of S.L.P. (Criminal) No. 3613 of 2023)

HAJI IQBAL @ BALA                       …APPELLANT(S)
THROUGH S.P.O.A.

VERSUS

STATE OF U.P. & ORS.                   …RESPONDENT(S)

JUDGMENT

J.B. PARDIWALA, J. :

1. Leave granted.

2. This appeal is at the instance of one of the accused persons of the First Information
Report (FIR) No. 0007 of 2023 registered on 10.01.2023 at the Mirzapur Police
Station, District Saharanpur, State of U.P. and is directed against the order passed by
the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad dated 30.01.2023 in the Criminal
Miscellaneous Writ Petition No. 982 of 2023 filed by the appellant herein by which
the High Court rejected the Writ Petition and thereby declined to quash the FIR for
the offences punishable under Sections 395, 386, 365, 342 and 506 resply of the
Indian Penal Code (IPC).

3. Respondent No. 3 herein is the original first informant.

He lodged the FIR in question which reads as thus:-

“The complainant is a contractor. In the year 2012, his firm by name V.S. Contractor
received contracts for the construction work of a school building in Glocal University
for Rs. 4.80 crore, a corporate office for Rs. 40 lakh and a girls’ hostel for Rs. 14 lakh.
The work order was issued by the owner of the Glocal University viz. Mohd. Haji

1

Haji Iqbal @ Bala vs State Of U.P. on 8 August, 2023

Iqbal alias Bala S/o Abdul Wahid, R/o Mirzapur. All the agreements were signed by
the then Manager Saifuddin working with the Glocal University. Copy of the
agreements is attached with the complaint. The construction work was completed by
the company by the end of the year 2015. I received some money. However, a sum of
Rs.

1,20,00,000/- was left outstanding to be paid by the owner of the Glocal University, Mohd. Haji
Iqbal alias Bala S/o Abdul Wahid. A lot of construction material like 9849-iron plates, 3215 channel,
998 joint pins, 7780 prop. Jack, 407 laser pipes, 250 cup lop, 70 clip, 560 iron sheets were kept in
the University campus worth around Rs. 1,86,00,000/-. I had gone to meet Mohd. Haji Iqbal alias
Bala and his brother Mehmood Ali Iqbal in the year 2016 with a request to allow me to take back the
construction material back and also for recovery of the outstanding bill amount. They kept on
ignoring me for many years in the guise of giving me new a contract and later, they even declined to
meet me. In the year 2021, when the rent of my construction material went about Rs. 4 crore, too
much pressure was put on me by the owner of the goods owner and therefor once again, I went to
meet Mohd. Haji Iqbal alias Bala in the Global University in March, 2021. Mohd. Haji Iqbal alias
Bala and his brother Mehmood Ali and the sons of Bala viz. Javed, Afzal and Alishan refused to give
back the construction material and goods and threatened to kill me if I came back again. I again
visited the Glocal University on the following Monday with my partner Yogesh Kumar S/o Dharam
Singh R/o, Shiv Puri, Yamuna Nagar requesting to give back the construction material and the
goods. I found a person at the university gate itself (who seemed to be very close to Iqbal, as he
spoke on the phone, may be an employee of Glocal University or looking after Iqbal’s land related
work). I can recognise him when he comes face to face or by seeing his photo. He spoke to the
owners and asked me to come with him. He took us to Haji Iqbal’s residence, where Haji Iqbal alias
Bala and his brother Mahmood Ali and Iqbal’s sons Javed, Afzal and Alishan were present. When I
demanded my money, they became very angry on us and forcefully snatched away car key, mobiles,
a sum of Rs. 80,000/- from our pocket and I.D. Card. They asked us to bring the original copy of all
the agreements and a sum of Rs. 10 lakh and threatened that they would kill both of us if we tell
anyone about this. Later, after about 6 hours, around 5 p.m., one of our employee Karan Singh S/o
Om Veer R/o Balu, District Saharanpur came at their residence with all the agreements and a sum
of Rs. 10 lakh. Thereafter, they returned us the car key and mobiles only but did not return Rs.
80,000/-. Somehow, we escaped from there. They have great influence and power in the area, so we
did not take any action against them fearing safety of our families. But now I have come to know
through another contractor Karamjit Singh R/o Yamuna Nagar who is now doing construction
related work in Global University that the owners of the Glocal University filed a case against me
and my brother. Through the said new contractor, I also came to know that all the construction
materials are kept in the steel yard of the University campus. Thereafter I came to the police station
with the hope of getting justice through the administration. You are requested to kindly take legal
action against all of them by registering the complaint against them. I want to inform that all the
original agreements and documents relating to the goods are kept at Haji Iqbal’s residence at
Mirzapur and his residence/Glocal office, New Bhagat Singh Colony, Bajoriya Road because when
Iqbal forcefully took the documents from me, he kept them in his house at New Bhagat Singh
Colony, Bajoriya Road, Balraj Sethi S/o Banshi Lal R/o 58, Vishnu Nagar, Yamuna Nagar
(Haryana).”

2

Haji Iqbal @ Bala vs State Of U.P. on 8 August, 2023

4. Thus, the allegations in the aforenoted FIR are that in the year 2012 the complainant Balraj
Sethi’s (Respondent No. 3 herein) Company namely, V.S. Contractor got the contract for
construction work of a School Building in Glocal University (owned by the appellant) for Rs. 4.80
crore. All the agreements were made by the then Manager namely, Saifuddin in Glocal University.
The said construction work was completed by the Complainant in the year 2015 after which a
balance amount of Rs. 1.20 crore was left to be paid by the owner of Glocal University. It is further
alleged that several construction articles worth Rs. 1.86 crore were also kept in Glocal University. In
the year 2016 when the Complainant had gone to meet Mehmood Ali and Mohammad Wajid and
asked them to return the said construction articles as well as the balance amount, they promised to
give him a new contract and later kept refusing to meet the Complainant. On March 2021 when the
Complainant had gone to meet the appellant to ask him to return the balance amount, the accused
persons namely, Mahmood Ali, Javed, Afzal and Alishan refused to return the balance amount as
well as the construction articles and further threatened to kill the Complainant. It is further alleged
that on a Monday when the Complainant along with his partner Yogesh Kumar had gone to Glocal
University, they were taken by an unknown person to the appellant’s residence, where all the
accused persons were present and when the Complainant asked them to return the balance amount
they forcibly snatched the Complainant’s car key, mobile phone, a sum of Rs. 80,000/- (from their
pocket) and their ID card. The accused persons then demanded the Complainant to hand over the
original copy of all the agreements and a sum of Rs. 10 lakh, which was handed over to the accused
persons on the same day. The accused persons kept all the agreements along with Rs. 10 lakh with
them and returned only the Complainant’s car key and mobile phones but did not return the amount
Rs. 80,000/. Thereafter the Complainant and Yogesh Kumar managed to escape from there.

5. It appears from the materials on record that the appellant herein went before the High Court by
filing Criminal Miscellaneous Writ Petition No. 982 of 2023 for the purpose of getting the FIR
quashed. The High Court declined to quash the FIR and accordingly rejected the Writ Petition. The
impugned order of the High Court reads thus:-

“Heard Sri Indra Bhan Yadav, learned counsel for the petitioner, Sri Ankit Srivastava
holding brief of Sri Vikas Mani Srivastava, learned counsel appearing for the
informant and learned A.G.A for the State respondents. Vide order dated 20.1.2023
learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the matter may be referred to the
Mediation Centre of this Court to which learned counsel appearing for the
informant-respondent no. 3 sought time to seek instructions.

Today, learned counsel appearing for the informant stated in categorical terms that
there is no possibility of mediation.

The relief sought in this petition is for quashing of the F.I.R. dated 10.1.2023
registered as Case Crime No. 7 of 2023 under Sections 395, 386, 365, 342, 506 IPC,
Police Station Mirzapur, District Saharanpur. Further prayer has been made not to
arrest the petitioner in the aforesaid case.

3

Haji Iqbal @ Bala vs State Of U.P. on 8 August, 2023

Submission of learned counsel for the petitioner is that the petitioner has been falsely
implicated in the present case due to political reasons and the civil dispute is being
given colour of criminal case.

Per contra, learned A.G.A. as well as learned counsel appearing for the informant
confirmed that the petitioner has criminal history of 36 cases and in addition to that
learned counsel appearing for the informant submitted that 11 cases have also been
instituted as complaint case against the petitioner. Learned AGA as well as learned
counsel appearing for the informant opposed the prayer for quashing of the FIR,
which discloses cognizable offence.

Perusal of the impugned first information report prima facie reveals commission of
cognizable offence. Therefore, in view Neutral Citation No. - 2023:AHC:23870-DB of
the law laid down by Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of State of Haryana and
others vs. Bhajan Lal and others, 1992 Supp. (1) SCC 335 and M/s Neeharika
Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. vs. State of Maharashtra, AIR 2021 SC 1918 and in Special
Leave to Appeal (Crl.) No.3262/2021 (Leelavati Devi @ Leelawati & another vs. the
State of Uttar Pradesh) decided on 07.10.2021, no case has been made out for
interference with the impugned first information report.

Therefore, the writ petition is dismissed leaving it open for the petitioner to apply
before the competent court for anticipatory bail/bail as permissible under law and in
accordance with law.”

6. Feeling aggrieved with the aforesaid order passed by the High Court, the appellant is before this
Court with the present appeal.

SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT

7. Mr. Siddhartha Dave, the learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant herein in his written
submissions has stated as under:-

“a) It is respectfully submitted that the alleged First Information Report is absolutely
false and frivolous, and on a reading of the said FIR, the offence of dacoity is clearly
not made out against the Petitioner. It is highly doubtful that the Complainant, who
was aware of the criminal history of the Petitioner, would go to the house of the
accused Petitioner with a huge sum of money, that is, Rs. 80,000/- in his pocket and
after the alleged incident would remain silent for two years.

b) The allegations in the First Information Report are not only vague but also highly
improbable given that apart from the bald allegation that the incident occurred on a
Monday in the year 2021, there is no mention of the date and time of incident in the
FIR. The said incident allegedly occurred in the year 2021 while the FIR has been
lodged after an inordinate delay of 2 years, that is, on 10.01.2023. On a reading of the

4

Haji Iqbal @ Bala vs State Of U.P. on 8 August, 2023

FIR it is evident that the entire dispute is with respect to the contract of construction
work of the School building in Glocal University (owned by the Petitioner). Although
the construction work had commenced in the year 2012 and was completed in the
year 2015 but no complaint during this period was ever lodged by the Complainant
while allegedly there was a due amount of Rs. 1.20 crore along with construction
articles lying in Glocal University. It is submitted that the nature of dispute is
essentially civil and has been deliberately given a criminal colour. Moreover the
alleged agreement for contractual work was entered into between the Complainant
and Saifuddin (who was not made an accused in the FIR), the then Manager of Glocal
University, for which payment was made by Glocal University thus there is no
involvement of the Petitioner in fulfilling any demand of the Complainant.

c) It is submitted that although the Respondents have alleged that the Petitioner is a
mining mafia in western Uttar Pradesh but there is not even a single case registered
against the Petitioner with respect to illegal mining. Further the Petitioner has not
been declared as a mining mafia by any authority or court of law.

d) The Respondents are maliciously attempting to project the Petitioner, who is a
Chancellor of Glocal University, as a hardened criminal when the fact is that every
time the Petitioner and his family members were granted protection by the Courts,
the Police immediately registered new FIRs against them, It is submitted that the
State of Uttar Pradesh is misusing its administrative as well as police machinery to
harass the Petitioner and his family members by registering false cases against them.
Further the State authorities have not only illegally demolished three residential
houses of the Petitioner but has also registered false criminal cases against even those
persons who stand surety for the Petitioner and his family members in cases where
bail or anticipatory bail has been granted to them.

e) It is submitted that after the change of Government in the State of Uttar Pradesh in
the year 2017, the ruling party came to power and immediately after the change of
Government the Petitioner along with his family members were falsely implicated in
more than 30 criminal cases at the behest of the ruling party. The Petitioner is being
unnecessarily harassed by the State machinery including the Police. Although the
Respondent State is heavily relying upon the criminal cases registered against the
Petitioner and his family members to show that they are habitual offenders but till
date the Petitioner has not been convicted by any Court of law and moreover every
time the Petitioner or his family members gets protection (anticipatory bail or stay of
arrest) from either this Hon’ble Court or the Hon’ble High Court, the local Police
immediately registers false cases against them.

f) It is submitted that the alleged Look Out Notice dated 10.05.2022 was issued much
prior to the registration of the present FIR No. 07 of 2023 which was registered on
10.01.2023 and as such is inconsequential.

5

Haji Iqbal @ Bala vs State Of U.P. on 8 August, 2023

g) It is respectfully submitted that the alleged First Information Report has been maliciously
instituted at the behest of the present ruling party in the State of Uttar Pradesh to wreak vengeance
and to settle political scores with the Petitioner as he belongs to a rival political party and he was
also a Member of Legislative Council from the period 2011 to 2016. The Petitioner belongs to a
respectable family of Saharanpur and he is running several Charitable Institutions. The allegations
made in the First Information Report do not prima facie constitute any offence or make out a case
under Sections 395, 386, 365, 342 and 506 IPC against the Petitioner and thus, the FIR is liable to
be quashed. It is pertinent to mention that even after the charge sheet has been filed, the petition for
quashing of a FIR is well within the powers of a Court of law [Please see: ANAND KUMAR
MOHATTA & ANOTHER VS. STATE (NCT OF DELHI), DEPARTMENT OF HOME & ANOTHER
(2019) 11 SCC 706 at paragraph 14 & 16].

h) For the reasons mentioned above, the Special Leave Petition may be allowed and the order of the
Hon’ble High Court refusing to quash the FIR No. 07 of 2023 dated 10.01.2023 be set aside.”
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE STATE

8. Ms. Garima Prasad, the learned Additional Advocate General appearing for the State of U.P. in
her written submissions has stated as under:-

“a) That on the basis of written complaint of the Complainant i.e. Balraj Sethi S/o
Bansi Lal, an FIR/Crime No. 7 of 2023 dated 10.01.2023 under section 395, 386, 365,
342, 506 IPC, registered at P.S. Mirzapur, District Saharanpur, wherein it was alleged
that Petitioner i.e. Haji Iqbal @ Balais very much influential person. Further, it was
alleged in the said FIR that the Complainant received a contract for construction
work of school building in Glocal University for Rs. 4.80 Crore, corporate for Rs. 40
Lakh, Girls Hostel for Rs. 14 Lakh and agreements were executed. In terms of the
agreement, the complainant completed the work and received only part payments.
The Petitioner duped an amount of Rs. 1,20,00,000/- of the complainant. The
complainant tried to ask the said amount, the Petitioner refused to pay the said
amount and threaten the Complainant with dire consequences. It is also alleged in
the FIR that when the complainant went to the petitioner’s residence, the petitioner,
his brother Mahmood Ali and other accused persons namely Javed, Afjal and Alishan
forcefully snatched the car keys of the complainant’s car, mobile phone, a sum of Rs.
80,000/- and ID card from the complainant’s pocket. It is further alleged that the
above accused persons threatened the complainant and asked him to handover the
original copies of the agreements and a sum of Rs. 10,00,000/- otherwise the
accused persons will kill the complainant. Thereafter, when one of the employee of
the complainant, Karan Singh S/o Om Veer came at the residence of the petitioner
and handedover all the original agreements and Rs. 10,00,000/- then the accused
persons returned the car keys and mobile phone of the complainant.

b) During investigation, the statement of Complainant was recorded under section
161 Cr.P.C. and other material evidence was collected wherein the claim of the
complainant is proved.

6

Haji Iqbal @ Bala vs State Of U.P. on 8 August, 2023

c) Further, the Investigation also recorded the statement of the independent
witnesses to know that the complainant was duped by the Petitioner and other
accused person, which proves that the Complainant was duped by the Petitioner and
other accused persons.

d) The Investigation has been completed and chargesheet is ready to file against the
Petitioners but due to stay order of this Hon’ble Court, the chargesheet could not be
submitted.

e) It is pertinent to mention that the chargesheet has been filed against the other
accused Persons.

f) It is submitted that the Petitioner Mohd. Iqbal @ Bala is the mining mafia in
western Uttar Pradesh and several number of criminal cases are registered against
him and his family members.

g) It is submitted that the Petitioner No. 1 is Ex-

MLC and powerful persons and he is having all sources in the previous Government(s), due to fear &
threat given by the Petitioner, the complainant did not raise his voice against the Petitioner No. 1
and his family members.

In view of the aforementioned factual & legal submissions, it is most respectfully submitted that the
present special leave petition of the Petitioners is liable to be dismissed with exemplary cost and the
impugned order dated 30.01.2023 passed by the Hon’ble High Court in Criminal Misc. Writ Petition
No. 982 of 2023 is liable to be upheld.” ANALYSIS

9. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having gone through the
materials on record, the only question that falls for our consideration is whether the FIR bearing No.
0007 of 2023 registered for the offences enumerated above discloses commission of any offence?

10. We are of the view that even if the entire case of the prosecution is believed or accepted to be
true, none of the ingredients to constitute the offence of dacoity punishable under Section 395 of the
IPC is made out. What amounts to dacoity has been explained by us in detail in the judgment and
order delivered by this very Bench in Criminal Appeal arising out of Special Leave Petition
(Criminal) No. 10656 of 2022 titled Mohammad Wajid & Anr. v. State of U.P. & Ors..

11. In the same manner, none of the ingredients to constitute the offence punishable under Section
365, 342 and 506 resply of the IPC are disclosed on plain reading of the FIR.

The FIR is nothing but abuse of the process of law.

12. It is also pertinent to note that the FIR came to be lodged after a period of almost two years from
the alleged incident of so-called dacoity, kidnapping, extortion, etc. The incident is shown to be of

7

Haji Iqbal @ Bala vs State Of U.P. on 8 August, 2023

the year 2021 and the FIR relating to the same came to be lodged in the year 2023 and that too,
without specifying any date and time of the alleged incident.

13. The entire case put up by the first informant on the face of it appears to be concocted and
fabricated. At this stage, we may refer to the parameters laid down by this Court for quashing of an
FIR in the case of State of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal, AIR 1992 SC 604. The parameters are:-

“(1) Where the allegations made in the first information report or the complaint, even
if they are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie
constitute any offence or make out a case against the accused.

(2) Where the allegations in the first information report and other materials, if any,
accompanying the FIR do not disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an
investigation by police officers under Section 156(1) of the Code except under an
order of a Magistrate within the purview of Section 155(2) of the Code.

(3) Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR or complaint and the
evidence collected in support of the same do not disclose the commission of any
offence and make out a case against the accused.

(4) Where, the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a cognizable offence but
constitute only a non-cognizable offence, no investigation is permitted by a police
officer without an order of a Magistrate as contemplated under Section 155(2) of the
Code.

(5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so absurd and inherently
improbable on the basis of which no prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion
that there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused. (6) Where there is
an express legal bar engrafted in any of the provisions of the Code or the concerned
Act (under which a criminal proceeding is instituted) to the institution and
continuance of the proceedings and/or where there is a specific provision in the Code
or the concerned Act, providing efficacious redress for the grievance of the aggrieved
party.

(7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with mala fide and/or where
the proceeding is maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking
vengeance on the accused and with a view to spite him due to private and personal
grudge.”

14. We are of the view that the case of the present appellant falls within the parameters Nos. 1, 5 and
7 resply of Bhajan Lal (supra).

15. At this stage, we would like to observe something important. Whenever an accused comes before
the Court invoking either the inherent powers under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure

8

Haji Iqbal @ Bala vs State Of U.P. on 8 August, 2023

(CrPC) or extraordinary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution to get the FIR or the
criminal proceedings quashed essentially on the ground that such proceedings are manifestly
frivolous or vexatious or instituted with the ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance, then in such
circumstances the Court owes a duty to look into the FIR with care and a little more closely. We say
so because once the complainant decides to proceed against the accused with an ulterior motive for
wreaking personal vengeance, etc., then he would ensure that the FIR/complaint is very well drafted
with all the necessary pleadings. The complainant would ensure that the averments made in the
FIR/complaint are such that they disclose the necessary ingredients to constitute the alleged
offence. Therefore, it will not be just enough for the Court to look into the averments made in the
FIR/complaint alone for the purpose of ascertaining whether the necessary ingredients to constitute
the alleged offence are disclosed or not. In frivolous or vexatious proceedings, the Court owes a duty
to look into many other attending circumstances emerging from the record of the case over and
above the averments and, if need be, with due care and circumspection try to read in between the
lines.

The Court while exercising its jurisdiction under Section 482 of the CrPC or Article 226 of the
Constitution need not restrict itself only to the stage of a case but is empowered to take into account
the overall circumstances leading to the initiation/registration of the case as well as the materials
collected in the course of investigation. Take for instance the case on hand. Multiple FIRs have been
registered over a period of time. It is in the background of such circumstances the registration of
multiple FIRs assumes importance, thereby attracting the issue of wreaking vengeance out of
private or personal grudge as alleged.

16. In State of Andhra Pradesh v. Golconda Linga Swamy, (2004) 6 SCC 522, a two-Judge Bench of
this Court elaborated on the types of materials the High Court can assess to quash an FIR. The Court
drew a fine distinction between consideration of materials that were tendered as evidence and
appreciation of such evidence. Only such material that manifestly fails to prove the accusation in the
FIR can be considered for quashing an FIR. The Court held:-

“5. …Authority of the court exists for advancement of justice and if any attempt is made to abuse
that authority so as to produce injustice, the court has power to prevent such abuse. It would be an
abuse of the process of the court to allow any action which would result in injustice and prevent
promotion of justice. In exercise of the powers court would be justified to quash any proceeding if it
finds that initiation or continuance of it amounts to abuse of the process of court or quashing of
these proceedings would otherwise serve the ends of justice. When no offence is disclosed by the
complaint, the court may examine the question of fact. When a complaint is sought to be quashed, it
is permissible to look into the materials to assess what the complainant has alleged and whether any
offence is made out even if the allegations are accepted in toto.

6. In R.P. Kapur v. State of Punjab, AIR 1960 SC 866 : 1960 Cri LJ 1239, this Court summarised
some categories of cases where inherent power can and should be exercised to quash the
proceedings : (AIR p.

869, para 6)

9

Haji Iqbal @ Bala vs State Of U.P. on 8 August, 2023

(i) where it manifestly appears that there is a legal bar against the institution or continuance e.g.
want of sanction;

(ii) where the allegations in the first information report or complaint taken at its face value and
accepted in their entirety do not constitute the offence alleged;

(iii) where the allegations constitute an offence, but there is no legal evidence adduced or the
evidence adduced clearly or manifestly fails to prove the charge.

7. In dealing with the last category, it is important to bear in mind the distinction between a case
where there is no legal evidence or where there is evidence which is clearly inconsistent with the
accusations made, and a case where there is legal evidence which, on appreciation, may or may not
support the accusations. When exercising jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code, the High
Court would not ordinarily embark upon an enquiry whether the evidence in question is reliable or
not or whether on a reasonable appreciation of it accusation would not be sustained. That is the
function of the trial Judge. Judicial process, no doubt should not be an instrument of oppression, or,
needless harassment. Court should be circumspect and judicious in exercising discretion and should
take all relevant facts and circumstances into consideration before issuing process, lest it would be
an instrument in the hands of a private complainant to unleash vendetta to harass any person
needlessly. At the same time the section is not an instrument handed over to an accused to
short-circuit a prosecution and bring about its sudden death…..” (Emphasis supplied)

17. In the result, this appeal succeeds and is hereby allowed. The impugned order passed by the High
Court of Judicature at Allahabad is hereby set aside. The criminal proceedings arising from FIR No.
0007 of 2023 dated 10.01.2023 registered at Police Station Mirzapur, Saharanpur, State of U.P. are
hereby quashed.

18. It is needless to clarify that the observations made in this judgment are relevant only for the
purpose of the FIR in question and the consequential criminal proceedings. None of the
observations shall have any bearing on any of the pending criminal prosecutions or any other
proceedings.

………………………………..J. ( B.R. GAVAI ) ………………………………..J. ( J.B. PARDIWALA ) NEW
DELHI;

AUGUST 08, 2023

10