Harvinder Singh @ Bachhu vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 13 October, 2023

Harvinder Singh @ Bachhu vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh
on 13 October, 2023

Author: M. M. Sundresh

Bench: A.S. Bopanna, M.M. Sundresh

1

2023 INSC 907
REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 266-267 OF 2015

Harvinder Singh @ Bachhu                                          … Appellant

Versus

The State of Himachal Pradesh                                   … Respondent

JUDGMENT

M. M. Sundresh, J.

1. Conviction rendered for life imprisonment by the Division Bench of the High Court of Himachal
Pradesh, by setting at naught the order of acquittal rendered by the Additional Sessions Judge
(Presiding Officer), Fast Track Court, Solan, Himachal Pradesh, is under challenge in these appeals.

BRIEF FACTS

2. The appellant, along with the co-accused (since deceased), was charged under Sections 302, 376,
511, 454, 380 read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as “IPC”).
The case of the prosecution is that PW1 while making a visit to his cow-shed on 17.06.2003 at about
3.15 pm heard the cries of the deceased frantically asking him for help stating “Mama ji Bachao”. He
went to the house of the deceased, and called out the name of her husband (PW5) but received no
response. Thereafter, he heard the hushed voices of the accused, two in number. He then saw both
of them at the main gate. Accused No. 1 was found with blood stains on his shirt while smelling of
alcohol. The accused threatened him with dire consequences and made an attempt to grab him.
After extricating himself from the accused, he ran towards his house. PW1 informed one
Chandrawati about the incident, who in turn advised him to wait till his wife joins. It was preceded
by an enquiry with the mother-in-law of the deceased.

1

Harvinder Singh @ Bachhu vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 13 October, 2023

3. After the advent of PW2, his wife, he, along with her and Chandrawati made a visit to the house of
the deceased. They saw two children of the deceased who were studying in 5th and 7th standards
respectively, at the house. On inquiry they informed that their mother was sleeping. PW1 and PW2,
along with Chandrawati, entered the room and saw the deceased in a pool of blood, half-naked. PW2
sent telephonic information to the police station, followed by the registration of the first information
report at about 6.30 pm at the instance of PW1.

4. The first information report was sent after about 5 hours, despite the office of the Magistrate
being very near to the police station. The inquest was done on the same day. Of the two witnesses
who signed the inquest report, one has not been examined.

It was found that certain articles including gold jewels were missing while liquor bottles were
recovered.

5. Though, fingerprints were lifted and sent to the expert, there was no report as it appears that
there was no sufficient indication of the availability of adequate marks.

6. A charge-sheet was filed on 14.05.2004, primarily placing reliance upon the statement of PW1,
who was incidentally a literate and presumably a God-fearing man. The children of the deceased
gave their statement under Section 161 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred
to as “CrPC”) but they, along with scores of other witnesses, though, not seen the occurrence, have
not been examined.

7. Both the accused were found absconding and curiously they have been arrested on the same day
and at the same time – 16.01.2006, after they were declared as proclaimed offenders on 10.09.2003.
Recovery of the stolen articles was made, inclusive of gold jewels, from the custody of PW6, a lady
from Tibet, with whom they were allegedly pledged, though the prosecution was not very clear as to
whether they were sold or pledged.

8. A supplementary charge-sheet was filed on 01.04.2006, slightly modifying the earlier
charge-sheet, giving a narration that the accused broke open the house of the deceased and PW5,
her husband, due to previous enmity and when she made her entry into the house, she was raped
and murdered. The murder took place as she was resisting rape and tried to attack the accused with
a sword, recovered from the place of occurrence, which was actually used by them.

9. Before the trial court, the prosecution has examined 16 witnesses, while a police officer has been
examined on behalf of the accused based upon Exhibits D1 and D2, statements recorded under
Section 161 of the CrPC, given by the minor children of the deceased, to elucidate the contradiction
in the case of the prosecution.

10.PW1, as already stated, is the informant and PW2 is his wife. PW3 is the witness to the recoveries
made from the house of the deceased. PW5 is the husband of the deceased and PW6 is the lady from
Tibet to whom jewels were pledged. PW9 is the doctor who conducted the post-mortem. This
witness had deposed that there was no evidence of rape. PW16 and PW13 are the Investigating

2

Harvinder Singh @ Bachhu vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 13 October, 2023

Officers who filed the initial and the supplementary charge sheets respectively.

11.The trial court, after a complete and thorough examination of the evidence placed before it,
rendered an order of acquittal. It disbelieved the testimony of PW1 on account of his unnatural
conduct. This witness had chosen not to react and to take follow-up action even after the accused left
the place. It took into consideration the statement given by the children under Section 161 of the
CrPC that this witness advised the children to tell their mother to give a complaint to the police,
though she was found dead. There were a number of houses adjoining the home of the deceased.

It was not known as to how PW1 could come to the conclusion about the manner of the death, if
according to his statement, he had not actually seen the occurrence.

12.The Court further found that there was no explanation as to why the fingerprint report has not
been placed on record. The children of the deceased, her mother-in-law and her neighbour
Chandrawati have not been examined, despite being material witnesses.

Taking note of the statement of PW6, the trial court observed that the so-called recovery is highly
doubtful as she has stated that the jewels have been pledged, but not sold.

13.The High Court in the impugned order set aside the acquittal rendered by the trial court by
substantially placing reliance upon the evidence of PW1. It held that the evidence of PW1 would
indicate the prior enmity between PW5 and the accused.

PW9 has clearly stated that the death was homicidal. Recovery of the sword and knife has been
proved by the evidence of PW3, from the scene of occurrence. PW1 being a natural, educated and
God-fearing person, his testimony has to be accepted. The evidence of PW2 is also in tune with that
of PW1. PW5 has also deposed that he was informed by PW1 that the accused was seen fleeing away
towards the hillside. The fact that the accused were declared as the proclaimed offenders would add
substance to the case of the prosecution. Non-examination of the material witnesses and the
non-availability of the fingerprint report would not render the prosecution version doubtful.
However, it was held that the offences pertaining to rape and theft are not proved beyond
reasonable doubt. Accordingly, the appellant was convicted for committing murder with a further
conviction for an attempt to rape. Incidentally, conviction was also rendered for house breaking
under Section 454 of the IPC.

SUBMISSIONS OF THE APPELLANT

14. Learned counsel appearing for the appellant made a primary contention that the High Court
without specifically pointing out the conclusion arrived at by the trial court on a factual analysis has
chosen to reverse it. Reliance made on the evidence of PW1, despite existence of contradictions,
ought not to have been undertaken. The question is not as to whether there occurred a homicidal
death or not but who did it.

3

Harvinder Singh @ Bachhu vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 13 October, 2023

The lapses on the part of the prosecution would go to the root of the case especially when there was
no explanation forthcoming. Having not agreed with the version of the prosecution qua the
recovery, the High Court ought not to have placed reliance on the doubtful testimony of PW1.

SUBMISSIONS OF THE RESPONDENT

15. Repelling the contentions made, the learned counsel appearing for the State submitted that it is
well open to the High Court to reappreciate the evidence available on record, which was actually
done. In the absence of any motive on the part of PW1 to implicate the appellant on purpose, the
High Court rightly ignored minor contradictions. Having found the existence of prior enmity
between accused and PW5, a conviction was accordingly rendered. The mere fact that the appellant
was acquitted for rape while holding him guilty for an attempt to rape, is itself a testimony to hold
that there was application of mind by the High Court. Inasmuch as relevant materials having been
taken note of, the order of conviction requires to be confirmed.

REPUTATION IS A FACT Section 3 of the Indian Evidence Act 1872 “3. Interpretation clause.—In
this Act the following words and expressions are used in the following senses, unless a contrary
intention appears from the context:— xxx xxx xxx “Fact”.—“Fact” means and includes— (1) any
thing, state of things, or relation of things, capable of being perceived by the senses;

(2) any mental condition of which any person is conscious.

Illustrations

(a) That there are certain objects arranged in a certain order in a certain place, is a fact.

(b) That a man heard or saw something, is a fact.

(c) That a man said certain words, is a fact.

(d) That a man holds a certain opinion, has a certain intention, acts in good faith or fraudulently, or
uses a particular word in a particular sense, or is or was at a specified time conscious of a particular
sensation, is a fact.

(e) That a man has a certain reputation, is a fact.”

xxx                        xxx                     xxx

(emphasis supplied)

4

Harvinder Singh @ Bachhu vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 13 October, 2023

16. Reputation is indeed a fact as defined under Section 3 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872
(hereinafter referred to as “Evidence Act”). Facts can broadly be divided into external and internal
facts. External facts are those which can be perceived by the five senses while internal facts arise
through thoughts and feelings such as love, anger, fear, hatred and intention etc. A reputation has to
be seen from the point of view of an identifiable group while character is what a person really is.
Character is to be formed while reputation is to be acquired. Character may lead to formation of
one’s reputation but both are distinct and different. Reputation thus forms part of internal facts and
therefore it is required to be proved in the form of opinion of persons who form it accordingly. When
reputation is to be taken as a relevant fact, its evidentiary value becomes restrictive and limited. It is
indeed a weak piece of evidence when becomes relatable to a fact in issue.

17. A court of law cannot declare the reputation of a person based upon its own opinion merely
because a person is educated and said to be God-fearing, that by itself will not create a positive
reputation.

18. Character and reputation do have an element of interconnectivity. Reputation is predicated on
the general traits of character. In other words, character may be subsumed into reputation. Courts
are not expected to get carried away by the mere background of a person especially while acting as
an appellate forum, when his conduct, being a relevant fact, creates serious doubt. In other words,
the conduct of a witness under Section 8 of the Evidence Act, is a relevant fact to decide, determine
and prove the reputation of a witness. When the conduct indicates that it is unnatural from the
perspective of normal human behaviour, the so-called reputation takes a back seat.

19. We wish to place reliance on the decision of this Court in Lahu Kamlakar Patil And Another v.
State of Maharashtra, (2013) 6 SCC 417, “26. From the aforesaid pronouncements, it is vivid that
witnesses to certain crimes may run away from the scene and may also leave the place due to fear
and if there is any delay in their examination, the testimony should not be discarded. That apart, a
court has to keep in mind that different witnesses react differently under different situations. Some
witnesses get a shock, some become perplexed, some start wailing and some run away from the
scene and yet some who have the courage and conviction come forward either to lodge an FIR or get
themselves examined immediately. Thus, it differs from individuals to individuals. There cannot be
uniformity in human reaction. While the said principle has to be kept in mind, it is also to be borne
in mind that if the conduct of the witness is so unnatural and is not in accord with acceptable human
behaviour allowing variations, then his testimony becomes questionable and is likely to be
discarded.

27. Keeping in mind the aforesaid, we shall proceed to scrutinise the evidence of PW

2. As is evincible from his deposition, on seeing the assault he got scared, ran away from the hotel
and hid himself behind the pipes till early morning. He went home, changed his clothes and rushed
to Pune [Ed.: Since the case has been tried by the Additional Sessions Judge, Raigad, Alibag, it
would seem that the incident took place in Alibag, Raigad, which is about 300 km from Pune.] . He
did not mention about the incident to his family members. He left for Pune and the reason for the
same was also not stated to his family members. He did not try to contact the police from his

5

Harvinder Singh @ Bachhu vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 13 October, 2023

residence which he could have. After his arrival at Pune, he did not mention about the incident in
his sister-in-law's house. After coming back from Pune, on the third day of the occurrence, his wife
informed him that the police had come and that Bhau, who had accompanied him, was dead. It is
interesting to note that in the statement under Section 161 of the Code, PW 2 had not stated that he
was hiding himself out of fear or he was scared of the police. In the said statement, the fact that he
was informed by his wife that Bhau was dead was also not mentioned. One thing is clear from his
testimony that on seeing the incident, he was scared and frightened and ran away from the hotel. He
was frightened and hid himself behind the pipes throughout the night and left for home the next
morning. But his conduct not to inform his wife or any family member and leaving for Pune and not
telling anyone there defies normal human behaviour. He has also not stated anywhere that he was
so scared that even after he reached home, he did not go to the police station which was hardly at
any distance from his house. There is nothing in his testimony that he was under any kind of fear or
shock when he arrived at his house. It is also surprising that he had not told his family members and
he went to Pune without disclosing the reason and after he arrived from Pune and on being
informed by his wife that his companion Bhau had died, he went to the police station. We are not
oblivious of the fact that certain witnesses in certain circumstances may be frightened and behave in
a different manner and due to that, they may make themselves available to the police belatedly and
their examination gets delayed. But in the case at hand, regard being had to the evidence brought on
record and, especially, non-mentioning of any kind of explanation for rushing away to Pune, the said
factors make the veracity of his version doubtful. His evidence cannot be treated as so trustworthy
and unimpeachable to record a conviction against the appellants. The learned trial court as well as
the High Court has made an endeavour to connect the links and inject theories like fear, behavioural
pattern, tallying of injuries inflicted on the deceased with the post-mortem report and convicted the
appellants. In the absence of any kind of clinching evidence to connect the appellants with the
crime, we are disposed to think that it would not be appropriate to sustain the conviction.”
(emphasis supplied)

20. In Narendrasinh Keshubhai Zala v. State of Gujarat, 2023 (4) SCALE 478, “8. It is a settled
principle of law that doubt cannot replace proof. Suspicion, howsoever great it may be, is no
substitute of proof in criminal jurisprudence [Jagga Singh v. State of Punjab, 1994 Supp (3) SCC
463]. Only such evidence is admissible and acceptable as is permissible in accordance with law. In
the case of a sole eye witness, the witness has to be reliable, trustworthy, his testimony worthy of
credence and the case proven beyond reasonable doubt. Unnatural conduct and unexplained
circumstances can be a ground for disbelieving the witness. This Court in the case of Anil Phukan v.
State of Assam, (1993) 3 SCC 282 has held that:

“3. … So long as the single eyewitness is a wholly reliable witness the courts have no
difficulty in basing conviction on his testimony alone. However, where the single
eyewitness is not found to be a wholly reliable witness, in the sense that there are
some circumstances which may show that he could have an interest in the
prosecution, then the courts generally insist upon some independent corroboration of
his testimony, in material particulars, before recording conviction. It is only when the
courts find that the single eyewitness is a wholly unreliable witness that his testimony
is discarded in toto and no amount of corroboration can cure that defect…” (emphasis

6

Harvinder Singh @ Bachhu vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 13 October, 2023

supplied)

21. On the issue of appreciation of evidence, we wish to place reliance upon the
decision of this Court in Rajesh Yadav And Another v. State of Uttar Pradesh, (2022)
12 SCC 200, “13. The definition of the word “proved” though gives an impression of a
mere interpretation, in effect, is the heart and soul of the entire Act. This clause,
consciously speaks of proving a fact by considering the “matters before it”. The
importance is to the degree of probability in proving a fact through the consideration
of the matters before the court. What is required for a court to decipher is the
existence of a fact and its proof by a degree of probability, through a logical influence.

14. Matters are necessary, concomitant material factors to prove a fact. All evidence would be
“matters” but not vice versa. In other words, matters could be termed as a genus of which evidence
would be a species. Matters also add strength to the evidence giving adequate ammunition in the
Court's sojourn in deciphering the truth. Thus, the definition of “matters” is exhaustive, and
therefore, much wider than that of “evidence”. However, there is a caveat, as the court is not
supposed to consider a matter which acquires the form of an evidence when it is barred in law.
Matters are required for a court to believe in the existence of a fact.

15. Matters do give more discretion and flexibility to the court in deciding the existence of a fact.
They also include all the classification of evidence such as circumstantial evidence, corroborative
evidence, derivative evidence, direct evidence, documentary evidence, hearsay evidence, indirect
evidence, oral evidence, original evidence, presumptive evidence, primary evidence, real evidence,
secondary evidence, substantive evidence, testimonial evidence, etc.

16. In addition, they supplement the evidence in proving the existence of a fact by enhancing the
degree of probability. As an exhaustive interpretation has to be given to the word “matter”, and for
that purpose, the definition of the expression of the words “means and includes”, meant to be
applied for evidence, has to be imported to that of a “matter” as well. Thus, a matter might include
such of those which do not fall within the definition of Section 3, in the absence of any express bar.

17. What is important for the court is the conclusion on the basis of existence of a fact by analysing
the matters before it on the degree of probability. The entire enactment is meant to facilitate the
court to come to an appropriate conclusion in proving a fact. There are two methods by which the
court is expected to come to such a decision. The court can come to a conclusion on the existence of
a fact by merely considering the matters before it, in forming an opinion that it does exist. This
belief of the court is based upon the assessment of the matters before it. Alternatively, the court can
consider the said existence as probable from the perspective of a prudent man who might act on the
supposition that it exists. The question as to the choice of the options is best left to the court to
decide. The said decision might impinge upon the quality of the matters before it.

18. The word “prudent” has not been defined under the Act. When the court wants to consider the
second part of the definition clause instead of believing the existence of a fact by itself, it is expected
to take the role of a prudent man. Such a prudent man has to be understood from the point of view

7

Harvinder Singh @ Bachhu vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 13 October, 2023

of a common man. Therefore, a Judge has to transform into a prudent man and assess the existence
of a fact after considering the matters through that lens instead of a Judge. It is only after
undertaking the said exercise can he resume his role as a Judge to proceed further in the case.

19. The aforesaid provision also indicates that the court is concerned with the existence of a fact
both in issue and relevant, as against a whole testimony. Thus, the concentration is on the proof of a
fact for which a witness is required. Therefore, a court can appreciate and accept the testimony of a
witness on a particular issue while rejecting it on others since it focuses on an issue of fact to be
proved. However, we may hasten to add, the evidence of a witness as whole is a matter for the court
to decide on the probability of proving a fact which is inclusive of the credibility of the witness.
Whether an issue is concluded or not is also a court's domain.

Appreciation of evidence

20. We have already indicated different classification of evidence. While appreciating the evidence
as aforesaid along with the matters attached to it, evidence can be divided into three categories
broadly, namely, ( i) wholly reliable,

(ii) wholly unreliable, and ( iii) neither wholly reliable nor wholly unreliable. If evidence, along with
matters surrounding it, makes the court believe it is wholly reliable qua an issue, it can decide its
existence on a degree of probability. Similar is the case where evidence is not believable. When
evidence produced is neither wholly reliable nor wholly unreliable, it might require corroboration,
and in such a case, court can also take note of the contradictions available in other matters.

21. The aforesaid principle of law has been enunciated in the celebrated decision of this Court in
Vadivelu Thevar v. State of Madras [1957 SCR 981 : AIR 1957 SC 614] : (AIR p. 619, paras 11-12) “11.
In view of these considerations, we have no hesitation in holding that the contention that in a
murder case, the court should insist upon plurality of witnesses, is much too broadly stated. Section
134 of the Indian Evidence Act has categorically laid it down that ‘no particular number of witnesses
shall in any case, be required for the proof of any fact’. The legislature determined, as long ago as
1872, presumably after due consideration of the pros and cons, that it shall not be necessary for
proof or disproof of a fact to call any particular number of witnesses. In England, both before and
after the passing of the Evidence Act, 1872, there have been a number of statutes as set out in
Sarkar's Law of Evidence — 9th Edn., at pp. 1100 and 1101, forbidding convictions on the testimony
of a single witness. The Indian Legislature has not insisted on laying down any such exceptions to
the general rule recognized in Section 134 quoted above. The section enshrines the well-recognised
maxim that “Evidence has to be weighed and not counted”. Our Legislature has given statutory
recognition to the fact that administration of justice may be hampered if a particular number of
witnesses were to be insisted upon. It is not seldom that a crime has been committed in the presence
of only one witness, leaving aside those cases which are not of uncommon occurrence, where
determination of guilt depends entirely on circumstantial evidence. If the Legislature were to insist
upon plurality of witnesses, cases where the testimony of a single witness only could be available in
proof of the crime, would go unpunished. It is here that the discretion of the presiding Judge comes
into play. The matter thus must depend upon the circumstances of each case and the quality of the

8

Harvinder Singh @ Bachhu vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 13 October, 2023

evidence of the single witness whose testimony has to be either accepted or rejected. If such a
testimony is found by the court to be entirely reliable, there is no legal impediment to the conviction
of the accused person on such proof. Even as the guilt of an accused person may be proved by the
testimony of a single witness, the innocence of an accused person may be established on the
testimony of a single witness, even though a considerable number of witnesses may be forthcoming
to testify to the truth of the case for the prosecution. Hence, in our opinion, it is a sound and
well-established rule of law that the court is concerned with the quality and not with the quantity of
the evidence necessary for proving or disproving a fact. Generally speaking, oral testimony in this
context may be classified into three categories, namely:

(1) Wholly reliable.

(2) Wholly unreliable.

(3) Neither wholly reliable nor wholly unreliable.

12. In the first category of proof, the court should have no difficulty in coming to its conclusion
either way — it may convict or may acquit on the testimony of a single witness, if it is found to be
above reproach or suspicion of interestedness, incompetence or subornation. In the second
category, the court equally has no difficulty in coming to its conclusion. It is in the third category of
cases, that the court has to be circumspect and has to look for corroboration in material particulars
by reliable testimony, direct or circumstantial. There is another danger in insisting on plurality of
witnesses. Irrespective of the quality of the oral evidence of a single witness, if courts were to insist
on plurality of witnesses in proof of any fact, they will be indirectly encouraging subornation of
witnesses. Situations may arise and do arise where only a single person is available to give evidence
in support of a disputed fact. The court naturally has to weigh carefully such a testimony and if it is
satisfied that the evidence is reliable and free from all taints which tend to render oral testimony
open to suspicion, it becomes its duty to act upon such testimony. The law reports contain many
precedents where the court had to depend and act upon the testimony of a single witness in support
of the prosecution. There are exceptions to this rule, for example, in cases of sexual offences or of
the testimony of an approver; both these are cases in which the oral testimony is, by its very nature,
suspect, being that of a participator in crime. But, where there are no such exceptional reasons
operating, it becomes the duty of the court to convict, if it is satisfied that the testimony of a single
witness is entirely reliable. We have, therefore, no reasons to refuse to act upon the testimony of the
first witness, which is the only reliable evidence in support of the prosecution.” (emphasis supplied)
CIRCUMSTANTIAL EVIDENCE “The mind was apt to take a pleasure in adapting circumstances to
one another, and even in straining them a little, if need be, to force them to form parts of one
connected whole; and the more ingenious the mind of the individual, the more likely was it,
considering such matters, to overreach and mislead itself, to supply some little link that is wanting,
to take for granted some fact consistent with its previous theories and necessary to render them
complete.” Warning addressed by Baron Alderson to the jury in Reg. v.

Hodge [(1838) 2 Lewin 227]

9

Harvinder Singh @ Bachhu vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 13 October, 2023

22. Law governing circumstantial evidence has been reiterated quite often by this Court. One has to
be circumspect and cautious while undertaking the exercise of linking the evidence available. Courts
should not lose sight of the fact that such evidence should unerringly lead and point out the accused
alone, of course, on the facts of each case. We wish to quote with profit the Panchsheel of the proof
of a case based on circumstantial evidence, laid down by this Court in Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v.
State of Maharashtra, (1984) 4 SCC 116, “153. A close analysis of this decision would show that the
following conditions must be fulfilled before a case against an accused can be said to be fully
established:

(1) the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should be
fully established.

It may be noted here that this Court indicated that the circumstances concerned ‘must or should’
and not ‘may be’ established. There is not only a grammatical but a legal distinction between ‘may be
proved’ and “must be or should be proved” as was held by this Court in Shivaji Sahabrao Bobade v.
State of Maharashtra [(1973) 2 SCC 793 : 1973 SCC (Cri) 1033 : 1973 Cri LJ 1783] where the
following observations were made: [SCC para 19, p. 807: SCC (Cri) p. 1047] Certainly, it is a primary
principle that the accused must be and not merely may be guilty before a court can convict and the
mental distance between ‘may be’ and ‘must be’ is long and divides vague conjectures from sure
conclusions. (2) the facts so established should be consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt of
the accused, that is to say, they should not be explainable on any other hypothesis except that the
accused is guilty, (3) the circumstances should be of a conclusive nature and tendency, (4) they
should exclude every possible hypothesis except the one to be proved, and (5) there must be a chain
of evidence so complete as not to leave any reasonable ground for the conclusion consistent with the
innocence of the accused and must show that in all human probability the act must have been done
by the accused.

154. These five golden principles, if we may say so, constitute the panchsheel of the proof of a case
based on circumstantial evidence.” (emphasis supplied) DOUBLE PRESUMPTION

23. When the view of the trial court, which had the benefit of seeing the demeanour of the witnesses,
is both a possible and plausible one, it shall not be replaced by yet another one. The presumption of
innocence in favour of the accused gets strengthened by the decision of the trial court when he gets
an order of acquittal. In Jafarudheen and Others v. State of Kerala, (2022) 8 SCC 440, “25. While
dealing with an appeal against acquittal by invoking Section 378 CrPC, the appellate court has to
consider whether the trial court's view can be termed as a possible one, particularly when evidence
on record has been analysed. The reason is that an order of acquittal adds up to the presumption of
innocence in favour of the accused. Thus, the appellate court has to be relatively slow in reversing
the order of the trial court rendering acquittal. Therefore, the presumption in favour of the accused
does not get weakened but only strengthened. Such a double presumption that enures in favour of
the accused has to be disturbed only by thorough scrutiny on the accepted legal parameters.
Precedents

10

Harvinder Singh @ Bachhu vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 13 October, 2023

26. Mohan v. State of Karnataka [(2022) 12 SCC 619 : 2021 SCC OnLine SC 1233] as hereunder :
(SCC paras 20-23) “20. Section 378 CrPC enables the State to prefer an appeal against an order of
acquittal. Section 384 CrPC speaks of the powers that can be exercised by the appellate court. When
the trial court renders its decision by acquitting the accused, presumption of innocence gathers
strength before the appellate court. As a consequence, the onus on the prosecution becomes more
burdensome as there is a double presumption of innocence. Certainly, the Court of first instance has
its own advantages in delivering its verdict, which is to see the witnesses in person while they
depose. The appellate court is expected to involve itself in a deeper, studied scrutiny of not only the
evidence before it, but is duty-bound to satisfy itself whether the decision of the trial court is both
possible and plausible view. When two views are possible, the one taken by the trial court in a case
of acquittal is to be followed on the touchstone of liberty along with the advantage of having seen the
witnesses. Article 21 of the Constitution of India also aids the accused after acquittal in a certain
way, though not absolute. Suffice it is to state that the appellate court shall remind itself of the role
required to play, while dealing with a case of an acquittal.

21. Every case has its own journey towards the truth and it is the Court's role to undertake. Truth
has to be found on the basis of evidence available before it. There is no room for subjectivity nor the
nature of offence affects its performance. We have a hierarchy of courts in dealing with cases. An
appellate court shall not expect the trial court to act in a particular way depending upon the
sensitivity of the case. Rather it should be appreciated if a trial court decides a case on its own merit
despite its sensitivity.

22. At times, courts do have their constraints. We find, different decisions being made by different
courts, namely, the trial court on the one hand and the appellate courts on the other. If such
decisions are made due to institutional constraints, they do not augur well. The district judiciary is
expected to be the foundational court, and therefore, should have the freedom of mind to decide a
case on its own merit or else it might become a stereotyped one rendering conviction on a moral
platform. Indictment and condemnation over a decision rendered, on considering all the materials
placed before it, should be avoided. The appellate court is expected to maintain a degree of caution
before making any remark.

23. This Court, time and again has laid down the law on the scope of inquiry by an appellate court
while dealing with an appeal against acquittal under Section 378 CrPC. We do not wish to multiply
the aforesaid principle except placing reliance on a recent decision of this Court in Anwar Ali v. State
of H.P. [(2020) 10 SCC 166 : (2021) 1 SCC (Cri) 395] : (SCC pp. 182-85, para

14) ‘14.2. When can the findings of fact recorded by a court be held to be perverse has been dealt
with and considered in para 20 of the aforesaid decision, which reads as under : (Babu case [Babu v.
State of Kerala, (2010) 9 SCC 189 : (2010) 3 SCC (Cri) 1179] , SCC p. 199) “20. The findings of fact
recorded by a court can be held to be perverse if the findings have been arrived at by ignoring or
excluding relevant material or by taking into consideration irrelevant/inadmissible material. The
finding may also be said to be perverse if it is “against the weight of evidence”, or if the finding so
outrageously defies logic as to suffer from the vice of irrationality. (Vide Rajinder Kumar Kindra v.
Delhi Admn. [(1984) 4 SCC 635 :

11

Harvinder Singh @ Bachhu vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 13 October, 2023

1985 SCC (L&S) 131], Excise & Taxation Officer-cum-Assessing Authority v. Gopi
Nath & Sons [1992 Supp (2) SCC 312], Triveni Rubber & Plastics v. CCE [1994 Supp
(3) SCC 665], Gaya Din v. Hanuman Prasad [(2001) 1 SCC 501], Arulvelu [Arulvelu v.
State, (2009) 10 SCC 206 : (2010) 1 SCC (Cri) 288] and Gamini Bala Koteswara Rao
v. State of A.P. [(2009) 10 SCC 636 : (2010) 1 SCC (Cri) 372])” It is further observed,
after following the decision of this Court in Kuldeep Singh v. Commr. of Police
[(1999) 2 SCC 10 : 1999 SCC (L&S) 429] , that if a decision is arrived at on the basis of
no evidence or thoroughly unreliable evidence and no reasonable person would act
upon it, the order would be perverse. But if there is some evidence on record which is
acceptable and which could be relied upon, the conclusions would not be treated as
perverse and the findings would not be interfered with.” xxx xxx xxx (emphasis
supplied) NON-EXAMINATION OF MATERIAL WITNESSES

24. Failure on the part of the prosecution in not examining a witness, though material, by itself
would not vitiate the trial. However, when facts are so glaring and with the witnesses available,
particularly when they are likely to give a different story, the Court shall take adequate note of it.
When a circumstance has been brought to the notice of the Court by the defense and the Court is
convinced that a prosecution witness has been deliberately withheld, as it in all probability would
destroy its version, it has to take adverse notice. Anything contrary to such an approach would be an
affront to the concept of fair play. In Takhaji Hiraji v. Thakore Kubersing Chamansing, (2001) 6 SCC
145, “19. So is the case with the criticism levelled by the High Court on the prosecution case finding
fault therewith for non-examination of independent witnesses. It is true that if a material witness,
who would unfold the genesis of the incident or an essential part of the prosecution case, not
convincingly brought to fore otherwise, or where there is a gap or infirmity in the prosecution case
which could have been supplied or made good by examining a witness who though available is not
examined, the prosecution case can be termed as suffering from a deficiency and withholding of
such a material witness would oblige the court to draw an adverse inference against the prosecution
by holding that if the witness would have been examined it would not have supported the
prosecution case. On the other hand if already overwhelming evidence is available and examination
of other witnesses would only be a repetition or duplication of the evidence already adduced, non-
examination of such other witnesses may not be material. In such a case the court ought to
scrutinise the worth of the evidence adduced. The court of facts must ask itself — whether in the
facts and circumstances of the case, it was necessary to examine such other witness, and if so,
whether such witness was available to be examined and yet was being withheld from the court. If the
answer be positive then only a question of drawing an adverse inference may arise. If the witnesses
already examined are reliable and the testimony coming from their mouth is unimpeachable the
court can safely act upon it, uninfluenced by the factum of non-examination of other witnesses…”
(emphasis supplied) EFFECT OF ABSCONDING

25. A subsequent conduct would be a relevant fact under Section 8 of the Evidence Act. However,
such a fact has to be proved. Mere absconding by itself cannot constitute a sole factor to convict a
person. It may be because an accused may abscond as he might fear an illegal arrest. In Durga
Burman Roy v. State of Sikkim, (2014) 13 SCC 35, “13. “To abscond” means, go away secretly or
illegally and hurriedly to escape from custody or avoid arrest. It has come in evidence that the

12

Harvinder Singh @ Bachhu vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 13 October, 2023

accused had told others that they were going from their place of work at Gangtok to their home at
New Jalpaiguri. They were admittedly taken into custody from their respective houses only, at New
Jalpaiguri on the third day of the incident. Therefore, it is difficult to hold that the accused had been
absconding. Even assuming for argument's sake that they were not seen at their workplace after the
alleged incident, it cannot be held that by itself an adverse inference is to be drawn against them as
held by this Court in Sunil Kundu v. State of Jharkhand [(2013) 4 SCC 422 : (2013) 2 SCC (Cri) 427]
. To quote para 28 :

(SCC pp. 433-34) “28. It was argued that the accused were absconding and, therefore,
adverse inference needs to be drawn against them. It is well settled that absconding
by itself does not prove the guilt of a person. A person may run away due to fear of
false implication or arrest. (See Sk. Yusuf v. State of W.B. [(2011) 11 SCC 754 : (2011)
3 SCC (Cri) 620] ) It is also true that the plea of alibi taken by the accused has failed.
The defence witnesses examined by them have been disbelieved. It was urged that
adverse inference should be drawn from this. We reject this submission. When the
prosecution is not able to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt it cannot take
advantage of the fact that the accused have not been able to probabilise their defence.
It is well settled that the prosecution must stand or fall on its own feet. It cannot draw
support from the weakness of the case of the accused, if it has not proved its case
beyond reasonable doubt.” (emphasis supplied) DISCUSSION

26. PW1 has not acted after the deceased pleaded for help, particularly from him.

There is absolutely no evidence available on record as to how the deceased was aware of the fact that
PW1 was outside. Be that as it may, it is rather strange that he did not even venture to get into the
house. Added to that, he went away after being threatened by the accused. Strangely, he undertook
the unnecessary exercise of making further inquiries with the mother-in-law of the deceased. If he
had seen the accused leaving towards the hill area, he should have entered the house of the deceased
and checked her condition. Rather, he was waiting for his wife (PW2). His evidence is also not in
tune with PW5 with respect to motive. PW5 has stated that there was no prior enmity.

We are of the considered view that the High Court has misconstrued the concept of reputation and
blindly believed the evidence of PW1.

27. The fact that PW1 immediately advised the children of the deceased to tell their mother to
register a complaint with the police coupled with the further fact that PW11 deposed that Police
station was near to the Magistrate’s complex creates doubt on the origin of the first information
report.

28. The trial court has given substantial reasons for arriving at its conclusion. One has to keep in
mind that it is the prosecution which has to prove the charges beyond reasonable doubt. The
approach of the High Court in dealing with the case of circumstantial evidence is not in line with the
caution expressed in R. v. Hodge, (1838) 2 Lew 227. The High Court after holding that a homicide
had occurred, blindly placed reliance upon the evidence of PW1.

13

Harvinder Singh @ Bachhu vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 13 October, 2023

29. Apart from the non-availability of the fingerprint report, the non-examination of the witnesses,
as noted by the trial court, would go to the root of the very case of the prosecution. It is nobody’s
case that the witnesses were not available. That is the reason why the defense has marked Exhibits
D1 and D2, statement recorded under section 161 of the CrPC rendered by the children of the
deceased. We have to take into consideration the fact that when PW1 came back the children were
very much available in the house of the deceased. They were not toddlers but studying in 5 th and
7th standard. It is impossible to accept that they did not know that their mother was dead lying in a
pool of blood and that too in half-naked condition.

30. When it comes to the recovery of jewels, even the High Court did not give its approval. But
nonetheless it proceeded to rely upon the recovery made from the place of occurrence on the basis of
the observation in the inquest report. It is the very case of the prosecution that the material
object-sword, was used to commit murder and therefore in the absence of the availability of any
fingerprint belonging to the accused, one cannot come to the conclusion that it was used by them
alone

31. The High Court was persuaded by the homicidal death of the deceased while ignoring multiple
findings rendered by the trial court including the fact that the house of the deceased was surrounded
by numerous other houses. Thus, on the basis of the discussion made, we are constrained to come to
the conclusion that the appellant is entitled to the benefit of doubt as the prosecution has not proved
its case beyond reasonable doubt. The impugned order passed by the High Court is set aside and
resultantly, the order of acquittal passed by the trial court stands restored. The appeals are allowed.
The appellant is directed to be released forthwith, if not required in any other case.

………………………………..J. ( M.M. SUNDRESH) ………………………………..J. (J.B. PARDIWALA) NEW
DELHI;

OCTOBER 13, 2023

ITEM NO.1501                     COURT NO.7                  SECTION II-C

S U P R E M E C O U R T O F            I N D I A
RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

Criminal Appeal    No(s).    266-267/2015

HARVINDER SINGH @ BACHHU                                    Appellant(s)

VERSUS

THE STATE OF HIMACHAL PRADESH                               Respondent(s)

14

Harvinder Singh @ Bachhu vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 13 October, 2023

([ HEARD BY: HON. M.M. SUNDRESH AND HON. J.B. PARDIWALA,JJ. ] ) Date : 13-10-2023
These appeals were called on for hearing today.

For Appellant(s)        Mr. Mansoor Ali, AOR

For Respondent(s)       Mr. Rishi Malhotra, AOR
Mr. Jaydip P., Adv.
Mr. Mohan Lal Sharma, Adv.

UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
O R D E R

Hon'ble       Mr.    Justice        M.M.     Sundresh   pronounced        the
Reportable     judgment     of    the    Bench     comprising   Hon'ble       Mr.
Justice A.S. Bopanna and          His Lordship.

Relevant portion of the judgment is quoted hereunder:

“The impugned order passed by the High Court is set aside and resultantly, the order of acquittal
passed by the trial court stands restored. The appeals are allowed. The appellant is directed to be
released forthwith, if not required in any other case.” Pending application, if any, also stands
disposed of.

(INDU MARWAH)                                            (DIPTI KHURANA)
COURT MASTER (SH)                                     ASSISTANT REGISTRAR
(Signed Reportable judgment is placed on the file)

15