Ifb Agro Industries Limited vs Sicgil India Limited on 4 January, 2023

Ifb Agro Industries Limited vs Sicgil India Limited on 4 January,
2023

Bench: Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha, A.S. Bopanna

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL No. 2030 of 2019

IFB AGRO INDUSTRIES LIMITED                                    ....APPELLANT(S)

VERSUS

SICGIL INDIA LIMITED AND OTHERS                              ....RESPONDENT(S)

JUDGMENT

PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA, J.

1. The short question for our consideration in this appeal relates to the scope of the rectificatory
jurisdiction of the National Company Law Tribunal under Section 59 of the Companies Act, 20131.
In this context, we are called upon to determine the appropriate forum for adjudication and
determination of violations of the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Substantial Acquisition
of Shares and Takeover) Regulations, 19972, and Securities and Exchange Board of India
(Prohibition of Insider 1 hereinafter referred to as the ‘2013 Act’.

2 hereinafter referred to as the ‘SEBI (SAST) Regulations’ Trading) Regulations, 19923, framed
under the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 19924. We have answered both the questions.
On the first issue, following the decision of this Court in Ammonia Supplies Corporation (P) Ltd. v.
Modern Plastic Containers Pvt. Ltd. & Ors.5, we have held that the rectificatory jurisdiction under
Section 59 of the 2013 Act is summary in nature and not intended to be exercised where there are
contested facts and disputed questions. On the second issue, we have held that transactions falling
within the jurisdiction of Regulatory bodies created under a statute must necessarily be subjected to
their ex- ante scrutiny, enquiry and adjudication. We have, therefore, rejected the contention that
the National Company Law Tribunal under Section 59 exercises a parallel jurisdiction with
Securities and Exchange Board of India6 for addressing violations of the Regulations framed under
the SEBI Act.

1

Ifb Agro Industries Limited vs Sicgil India Limited on 4 January, 2023

2. This is an appeal against the judgment of the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal7
(hereinafter referred to as ‘Appellate Tribunal’) whereby the Appellate Tribunal set aside the 3
hereinafter referred to as the ‘SEBI (PIT) Regulations’ 4 hereinafter referred to as ‘the SEBI Act’.

5 (1998) 7 SCC 105 6 hereinafter referred to as ‘the SEBI’ or ‘the Board’. 7 Companies Appeal (AT)
240 of 2017 of the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal dated 06.12.2018 judgment of the
National Company Law Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Tribunal’), allowing the company
petition filed by the Appellant under Section 111A of the Companies Act, 19568, (which is Section 59
of the 2013 Act), for rectification of Members Register. The Tribunal while allowing the petition,
directed the Appellant to buy-back its shares which were held by the Respondents. In appeal, the
Appellate Tribunal set aside this direction on the ground that the Tribunal exceeded its jurisdiction.
It is this order of the Appellate Tribunal which is impugned before us.

Relevant Facts:

3. The Appellant herein is a listed company engaged in the manufacture and sale of
rectified spirit, country liquor, marine products, carbon dioxide gas etc. Respondent
No. 1 is also a listed company which is engaged in the business of producing carbon
dioxide gas and dry ice. Respondent No. 2 is the managing director of Respondent
No. 1, Respondent No. 3 is the wife of Respondent No. 2, and Respondent Nos. 4-6
are close relatives of Respondent Nos. 2-3.

8 hereinafter referred to as the ‘1956 Act’.

4. It is the contention of the Appellant that sometime in August 2003, Respondent No. 2 came up
with a proposal for a business tie-up between the Appellant and Respondent No. 1. The Appellant is
said to have rejected the proposal. It is alleged by the Appellant that after this rejection, the
Respondents started acquiring shares of the Appellant from the open market with a view to
eliminate competition and strengthen its own dominant position in the relevant market. As of
18.01.2004, the Respondents collectively held just under 5% of the Appellant’s total paid-up share
capital.

5. On 19.01.2004, Respondent No. 1 acquired 600 equity shares of the Appellant and this resulted in
the aggregate shareholding of the Respondents crossing 5% of the total paid-up share capital of the
Appellant, thereby triggering Regulation 7(1)9 of the SEBI (SAST) Regulations. Regulation 7(1)
mandates that when an acquirer, either by himself or with any person acting in concert 9 Regulation
7(1) – Any acquirer, who acquires shares or voting rights which (taken together with shares or
voting rights, if any, held by him) would entitle him to more than five per cent or ten per cent or
fourteen per cent or fifty four per cent or seventy four per cent shares or voting rights in a company,
in any manner whatsoever, shall disclose at every stage the aggregate of his shareholding or voting
rights in that company to the company and to the stock exchanges where shares of the target
company are listed. Regulation 2(b) ― acquirer means any person who, directly or indirectly,
acquires or agrees to acquire shares or voting rights in the target company, or acquires or agrees to
acquire control over the target company, either by himself or with any person acting in concert with

2

the acquirer.

Ifb Agro Industries Limited vs Sicgil India Limited on 4 January, 2023

with the acquirer, acquires 5% or more of the total paid-up share capital of a company, then a
disclosure has to be made to the acquiree company and the stock exchange. In compliance with this
Regulation, the Respondents are said to have sent an intimation to the Appellant on the very next
day i.e., on 20.01.2004. This intimation was received by the Appellant on 22.01.2004. The Appellant
contends that the disclosure under Regulation 7(1) was not in the prescribed format.

6. Four months later, on 27.05.2004, Respondent No. 1 acquired additional shares of the Appellant,
as a result whereof, its individual shareholding exceeded 5% of the total paid-up share capital of the
Appellant. This individual crossing of 5% by Respondent No. 1 triggered the SEBI (PIT) Regulations.
Regulation 1310 thereof provides that if any person acquires more than 5% shares of a company,
then it shall make a disclosure to the acquiree Company. Respondent No. 1 admits to having failed
to make this disclosure within the prescribed time. It is the stand of Respondent No. 1 that the
failure to issue a notice was not an 10 Regulation 13 – (1) Any person who holds more than 5%
shares or voting rights in any listed company shall disclose to the company in Form A, the number
of shares or voting rights held by such person, on becoming such holder, within 2 working days of:
(a) the receipt of intimation of allotment of shares; or (b) the acquisition of shares or voting rights,
as the case may be.

intentional mistake. The Appellant claims that it got to know about the said acquisition on
04.06.2004 when it carried out an internal investigation into the total number of shares held by the
Respondents in the Appellant company.

Company Petition under Section 111A of the 1956 Act:

7. It is in the above referred factual background that on 19.07.2004, the Appellant
filed a petition before the Company Law Board11 under Section 111A of the 1956 Act
praying for rectification of its register by deleting the name of the Respondents as the
owner of shares which are over and above the 5% threshold.

As of the date of filing of the Section 111A petition, the Respondents collectively held around 8.22%
of the Appellant’s paid-up share capital.

8. Upon receiving notice of the aforesaid petition, Respondent No. 1, on 16.08.2004, issued an
intimation to the Appellant as mandated under Regulation 13 of the SEBI (PIT) Regulations. Two
days later, on 18.08.2004, Respondent No. 1 allegedly sold a few shares of the Appellant and
brought down its individual shareholding to 4.91%. This fact is contested, as the Appellant claims
that Respondent No. 1 never reduced its shareholding. On 11 hereinafter referred to as ‘the CLB’.

24.08.2004, Respondent No. 1 also wrote to the SEBI that its individual shareholding in the
Appellant had crossed 5% on 27.05.2004 and that there was a delay in disclosing this to the
Appellant. SEBI was informed that the individual shareholding of Respondent No. 1 in the Appellant
now stands below 5%. It has been submitted before us that SEBI has not taken any regulatory

3

action.

Ifb Agro Industries Limited vs Sicgil India Limited on 4 January, 2023

9. During the pendency of the petition under Section 111A, the 2013 Act came into force, and the
matter stood transferred to the Tribunal. The Tribunal framed just one question - Whether the
acquisition of shares by the Respondents without complying with the statutory provisions of
disclosure norms under SEBI Regulations is valid?

Judgment of the Tribunal:

10. By its judgment dated 05.07.2017, the Tribunal held that the intimation dated 16.08.2004 is in
violation of the SEBI (PIT) Regulations since the said declaration had to be filed within four working
days of the receipt of intimation of allotment of shares or the acquisition of shares or voting rights,
as the case may be. The Tribunal also held that the term ‘person’ in the SEBI (PIT) Regulations can
be construed to include all other Respondents, besides Respondent No. 1, as persons acting in
concert. The reason for this was that the exercise of control in the management of the Appellant
would be done jointly by all the Respondents. Further, the Tribunal also held that there has been a
violation of the SEBI (SAST) Regulations as the Respondents did not make the disclosure in the
proper format.

11. In so far as the exercise of power under Section 111A of the 1956 Act is concerned, the Tribunal
held that in case of violation of SEBI regulations, Section 111A empowers a company to apply for
rectification, and in such cases, the Tribunal is entitled to pass an order to undo the mischief. The
Tribunal opined that the regulatory jurisdiction of SEBI would not bar the Tribunal from exercising
its power under Section 111A of the 1956 Act. However, the Tribunal held that the powers exercised
by the CLB and SEBI fall in different and distinct jurisdictional fields and therefore, the present
order will not preclude SEBI from deciding any violation of its regulations. Allowing the company
petition, the Tribunal held that the acquisition of shares in excess of 5% was in violation of the SEBI
(PIT) Regulations and the SEBI (SAST) Regulations. The final order passed by the Tribunal is as
follows:

“The present Company Petition is allowed. The Respondents having furnished the
declaration at a later point of time are hereby barred from exercising their rights as to
the shares acquired by them in the Petitioner Company in excess of 5% the company
is hereby authorised to buy back the shares that the Respondents hold in excess of 5%
of the shareholding in the Company at the rate which was prevailing on the date of
presentation of the Petition or market value, whichever is higher. The Respondents
are directed to hand over the share certificates and share transfer forms within 30
days of the order to the Company and in response to that the Petitioner will be liable
to pay the buyback price which shall be the value of shares which was prevailing on
the date of presentation of the petition or market value whichever is higher.

It is clear that the power exercised by the Company Law Board and the powers
exercised by the SEBI fall in different and distinct jurisdictional fields. Therefore, the
present order shall not preclude the jurisdiction of SEBI as an adjudicating authority

4

Ifb Agro Industries Limited vs Sicgil India Limited on 4 January, 2023

for deciding on the violation of SEBI Regulations as have been laid down in the
present petition.” Judgment of the Appellate Tribunal:

12. The Respondents herein carried the matter to the Appellate Tribunal in appeal. The limited
question before the Appellate Tribunal was whether the Tribunal was empowered to pass an order of
buyback while entertaining a petition under Section 111A of the 1956 Act. The Appellate Tribunal, by
its order dated 06.12.2018, allowed the appeal and set aside the order of the Tribunal.
Unfortunately, there is neither analysis nor any reasoning in the order of the Appellate Tribunal. In
the normal course, we would have set aside the judgment of the Appellate Tribunal and remanded
the matter for reconsideration. However, as a period of four years has already lapsed since the
passing of the impugned order, we considered it appropriate to dispose of the present appeal finally.
It is in this context that the matter was heard in detail. We will now refer to the submissions made
by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the parties. Submissions of the Parties:

13. Mr. P. Chidambaram, learned Senior Advocate on behalf of the Appellant,
contended that – (i) no timely intimation in the prescribed format was given by the
Respondents when Regulation 7(1) of the SEBI (SAST) Regulations got triggered; (ii)
Respondent Nos. 1 – 6, as “connected persons” (as per 2(c) of the SEBI (PIT)
Regulations) were “acting in concert” (as per 2(e) of the SEBI (SAST) Regulations)
thereby violating Regulations 13 and 14 of the SEBI (PIT) Regulations. He
emphasized that the Respondents have admitted to the non-disclosure, and (iii) as
Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 199212, must be read in addition to, and
not in derogation of the Companies Act. The Appellant is entitled to approach the
Tribunal under Section 111A of the 1956 Act for rectification of the register. In
support of these submissions, reliance was placed on the decisions of this Court in 12
hereinafter referred to as ‘the SEBI Act’.

Mannalal Khetan & Ors. v. Kedar Nath Khetan & Ors.13, Chairman, SEBI v. Shriram Mutual Fund &
Another14.

14. Mr. Shyam Divan, learned Senior Advocate appearing for the Respondents, contended that – (i)
filing of a petition under Section 111A is an abuse of process; (ii) there is no violation of the SEBI
(SAST) Regulations as the Respondents had given a timely intimation in the prescribed format; (iii)
the Section 111A Petition did not allege any violation of the SEBI (SAST) Regulations, and no
attempt was made to make any amendment to the same; (iv) the SEBI (PIT) Regulations are not
applicable to Respondent Nos. 2-6 as their individual shareholding never crossed 5%. It was only
Respondent No. 1 whose shareholding crossed 5%, which it inadvertently failed to disclose; (v) the
SEBI (PIT) Regulations are not applicable to Respondent Nos. 2-6 as there is no concept of ‘persons
acting in concert’ under the said Regulations; (vi) under section 111A (3), the Tribunal has no power
to annul the transfer or to direct the buy-back of the shares.

15. Having heard both sides, we formulate the following questions for our consideration.

5

Ifb Agro Industries Limited vs Sicgil India Limited on 4 January, 2023

13 (1977) 2 SCC 424 14 (2006) 5 SCC 361 What is the scope and ambit of Section 111A of the 1956
Act, as amended by Section 59 of the 2013 Act, to rectify the register of members? Which is the
appropriate forum for adjudication and determination of violations and consequent actions under
the SEBI (SAST) Regulations 1997 and the SEBI (PIT) Regulations 1992? Re: Interpretation and
scope of Section 111A of the 1956 Act as replaced by Section 59 of the 2013 Act:

16. The reliefs claimed by the Appellant in its Company Petition under Section 111A of
the 1956 Act is as under: -

“(a) Declaration that the acquisition of shares of and in the company by the
Respondent Nos.1 to 6 are illegal, null and void and of no effect;

(b) Necessary directions be given for rectifying the records by deleting the names of
the Respondents as owners of all shares of and in the company acquired by the
Respondents;

(c) Permanent injunction restraining the Respondents whether by themselves or
their servants or agents or assigns or otherwise howsoever from exercising any rights
or receiving any benefit in respect of the shares held by the Respondents in the
company in any manner whatsoever;

(d) …….

(e) …….”

17. The declaration to hold the acquisition of shares by the Respondents as null and
void in a petition under Section 111A has to be examined in the context of the scope
and ambit of the rectificatory jurisdiction of the Tribunal and, in particular, the
specific wordings of the said provision.

18. The rectificatory powers of a Board/Company Court under Section 38 of the
Companies Act, 1913, then under Section 155 of the 1956 Act, followed by Section
111A introduced by the 1996 Amendment to the 1956 Act, and finally, Section 59 of
the 2013 Act, demonstrate that its essential ingredients have remained the same. It is
a summary power to carry out corrections or rectifications in the register of
members. The rectification must relate to and be confined to the facts that are
evident and need no serious enquiry. The following is a comparative table indicating
the legislative changes. For the purpose of the present proceeding, we can confine the
examination between the 1956 Act with its 1996 amendment and the 2013 Act.

Companies Act, 1956 Companies Act, 1956 Companies Act, 2013 (Section 155). (Section 111A)
(Section 59)

155. Power of court to 111A. Rectification of Section 59:

6

Ifb Agro Industries Limited vs Sicgil India Limited on 4 January, 2023

rectify Register of register on transfer. Rectification of register Members (1) In this
section, unless of members (1) If— the context otherwise 59. (1) If the name of any

(a) the name of any requires, "company" person is, without person— means a
company other sufficient cause, entered than a company referred to in the register of

(i) is without in sub- section (14) of members of a company, sufficient cause, section
111 of this Act. or after having been entered in the entered in the register, is, Register
of without sufficient cause, Members of a (2) Subject to the omitted therefrom, or if a
company, or provisions of this section, default is made, or

(ii) after having the shares or debentures unnecessary delay takes been entered in the
and any interest therein of place in entering in the Register, is, a company shall be
freely register, the fact of any without sufficient transferable: person having become
or cause, omitted [Provided that if a ceased to be a member, therefrom; or company
without the person aggrieved, or

(b) default is made, or sufficient cause refuses to any member of the unnecessary
delay takes register transfer of shares company, or the place, in entering on the
within two months from company may appeal in Register the fact of any the date on
which the such form as may be person having become, instrument of transfer or
prescribed, to the or ceased to be, a the intimation of transfer, Tribunal, or to a
member:” as the case may be, is competent court outside the person aggrieved, or
delivered to the company, India, specified by the any member of the the transferee
may appeal Central Government by company, or the to the [Tribunal] and it
notification, in respect of company, may apply to shall direct such company foreign
members or the court for to register the transfer of debenture holders rectification of
the share]. residing outside India, Register. for rectification of the (3) The [Tribunal]
may, on register.

an application made by a depository, company, (2) The Tribunal may, participant or investor or
after hearing the parties the Securities and to the appeal under sub-

Exchange Board of India, section (1) by order, if the transfer of shares or either dismiss the appeal
debentures is in or direct that the transfer contravention of any of the or transmission shall be
provisions of the Securities registered by the and Exchange Board of company within a period India
Act, 1992 (15 of of ten days of the receipt 1992) or regulations made of the order or direct thereunder
or the Sick rectification of the Industrial Companies records of the depository (Special Provisions)
Act, or the register and in the 1985 (1 of 1986 ) or any latter case, direct the other law for the time
company to pay being in force, within two damages, if any, months from the date of sustained by the
party transfer of any shares or aggrieved.

debentures held by a depository or from the date (3) The provisions of this on which the instrument
of section shall not restrict transfer or intimation of the right of a holder of the transmission was

7

Ifb Agro Industries Limited vs Sicgil India Limited on 4 January, 2023

securities, to transfer delivered to the company, such securities and any as the case may be, after
person acquiring such such inquiry as it thinks fit, securities shall be direct any depository or
entitled to voting rights company to rectify its unless the voting rights register or records.] have been
suspended by an order of the Tribunal.

(4) The [Tribunal] while
acting under sub-section         (4) Where the transfer of
(3), may at its discretion       securities       is     in
make such interim order as       contravention of any of
to suspend the voting            the provisions of the
rights before making or          Securities       Contracts
completing such enquiry.         (Regulation) Act, 1956,
(42 of 1956), the
(5) The provisions of this       Securities and Exchange
section shall not restrict       Board of India Act, 1992
the right of a holder of         (15 of 1992) or this Act
shares or debentures, to         or any other law for the
transfer such shares or          time being in force, the
debentures and any person        Tribunal may, on an
acquiring such shares or         application made by the
debentures shall be entitled     depository,      company,
to voting rights unless the      depository participant,
voting rights have been          the holder of the
suspended by an order of         securities      or     the
the [Tribunal].                  Securities and Exchange
Board,      direct    any
(6) Notwithstanding              company or a depository
anything contained in this       to    set     right    the
section,    any     further      contravention and rectify
transfer,    during      the     its register or records
pendency        of       the     concerned.
application    with      the
[Tribunal], of shares or         (5) [***]

debentures shall entitle the 1. Omitted by the transferee to voting rights Companies unless the
voting rights in (Amendment) Act, 2020, respect of such transferee w.e.f. 21.12.2020[S.O. have been
suspended. 4646(E) dated 21.12.2020], the sub-

(7) The provisions of sub- section:

sections (5), (7), (9), (10) and (12) of section 111 "(5) If any default is shall, so far as
may be, made in complying with apply to the proceedings the order of the Tribunal
before the [Tribunal] under under this section, the this section as they apply
company shall be to the proceedings under punishable with fine this section.] which
shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees and
every officer of the company who is in default shall be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which shall not be less than one
lakh rupees but which may extend to three lakh rupees, or with both."

8

Ifb Agro Industries Limited vs Sicgil India Limited on 4 January, 2023

19. The scope and ambit of Section 155 of the 1956 Act, as it then existed, fell for
consideration in a decision of this Court in Ammonia Supplies (supra). The
application for rectification in Ammonia’s case was filed under Section 155, and it
was submitted that the scope for rectification under Section 155 is enlarged in
comparison with the position as it were under Section 38 of the 1913 Act. Rejecting
the argument, this Court in Ammonia held that the jurisdiction exercised by the court
for rectification of the register of members is essentially limited. The comparative
analysis in Ammonia assumes importance as a similar submission is made before us
by Mr. Chidambaram that the scope and jurisdiction of the Tribunal under Section 59
of the 2013 Act is wide when compared with Section 111A of the 1956 Act as amended
in 1996. The relevant portion of the judgment in Ammonia is as under: -

“26. …. There could be no doubt any question raised within the peripheral field of
rectification, it is the court under Section 155 alone which would have exclusive
jurisdiction. However, the question raised does not rest here. In case any claim is
based on some seriously disputed civil rights or title, denial of any transaction or any
other basic facts which may be the foundation to claim a right to be a member and if
the court feels such claim does not constitute to be a rectification but instead seeking
adjudication of basic pillar some such facts falling outside the rectification, its
discretion to send a party to seek his relief before the civil court first for the
adjudication of such facts, it cannot be said such right of the court to have been taken
away merely on account of the deletion of the aforesaid proviso. Otherwise under the
garb of rectification one may lay claim of many such contentious issues for
adjudication not falling under it. Thus in other words, the court under it has
discretion to find whether the dispute raised is really for rectification or is of such a
nature that unless decided first it would not come within the purview of rectification.
The word “rectification” itself connotes some error which has crept in requiring
correction. Error would only mean everything as required under the law has been
done yet by some mistake the name is either omitted or wrongly recorded in the
Register of the company.

27. In other words, in order to qualify for rectification, every procedure as prescribed
under the Companies Act before recording the name in the register of the company
has to be stated to have been complied with by the applicant…. The Court has to
examine on the facts of each case whether an application is for rectification or
something else. So field or peripheral jurisdiction of the court under it would be what
comes under rectification, not projected claims under the garb of rectification. So far
exercising of power for rectification within its field there could be no doubt the Court
as referred under Section 155 read with Section 2 (11) and Section 10, it is the
Company Court alone has exclusive jurisdiction…But this does not mean by
interpreting such “court having exclusive jurisdiction to include within it what is not
covered under it, merely because it is clocked under the nomenclature rectification
does not mean the court cannot see the substance after removing the cloak.

9

Ifb Agro Industries Limited vs Sicgil India Limited on 4 January, 2023

28. Question for scrutiny before us is the peripheral field within which the Court
could exercise its jurisdiction for rectification. As aforesaid, the very word
“rectification” connotes something what ought to have been done but by error not
done and what ought not to have been done was done requiring correction.
Rectification in other words is the failure on the part of the company to comply with
the directions under the Act.

…

31. Sub-section (1)(a) of Section 155 refers to a case where the name of any person is
without sufficient cause entered or omitted in the Register of Members of a company.
The word “sufficient cause” is to be tested in relation to the Act and the Rules.
Without sufficient cause entered or omitted to be entered means done or omitted to
do in contradiction of the Act and the Rules or what ought to have been done under
the Act and the Rules but not done. Reading of this sub-clause spells out the
limitation under which the court has to exercise its jurisdiction. It cannot be doubted
that in spite of exclusiveness to decide all matters pertaining to the rectification it has
to act within the said four corners and adjudication of such matters cannot be
doubted to be summary in nature. So, whenever a question is raised the court has to
adjudicate on the facts and circumstances of each case. If it truly is rectification, all
matters raised in that connection should be decided by the court under Section 155
and if it finds adjudication of any matter not falling under it, it may direct a party to
get his right adjudicated by a civil court.….”

20. It is evident from the above that while interpreting Section 155, this Court has
held that the power of CLB is narrow and can only consider questions of rectification.
If a petition seeks an adjudication under the garb of rectification, then the CLB would
not have jurisdiction, and it would be duty-bound to re-direct the parties to approach
the relevant forum. The Court also held that the words ‘sufficient cause’ cannot be
interpreted in a manner which would enlarge the scope of the provision.

21. The decision in Ammonia was followed by this Court even after the deletion of
Section 155 and insertion of Section 111A.

This Court, in Standard Chartered Bank v. Andhra Bank Financial Services Ltd. & Ors.15 and Jai
Mahal Hotels (P) Ltd. v. Devraj Singh & Ors.16, held that even though Section 111(7) of the 1956
Act17 seemingly enlarges the power of the CLB, the power of rectification continues to remain
summary in nature and if any seriously disputed questions arise, the Company Court should
relegate the 15 (2006) 6 SCC 94 16 (2016) 1 SCC 423 17 Section 111(7) - On any application under
this section, the Tribunal - (a) may decide any question relating to the title of any person who is a
party to the application to have his name entered in, or omitted from, the register; (b) generally,
may decide any question which it is necessary or expedient to decide in connection with the
application for rectification.

10

Ifb Agro Industries Limited vs Sicgil India Limited on 4 January, 2023

parties to a forum which is more appropriate for investigation and adjudication of such disputed
questions.

22. In Kesha Appliances (P) Ltd. & Ors. v. Royal Holdings Services Ltd.& Ors.18, the High Court of
Bombay has held that:

“41. .....The contention of the learned counsel for the plaintiff that there was a
pre-existing common law right under section 9 of the CPC and that pre-existing
common law right is not taken away by the provisions of Section 15Y and 20A also
cannot be accepted. It is because the common law right of rectification which is
sought to be enforced and exercised by the plaintiff in the present case arises out of
the right conferred on the basis of Take Over Regulations and once the provisions of
the Take Over Regulations are invoked then the entire jurisdiction by virtue of the
provisions of Section 15Y and 20A is exclusively conferred on the SEBI authorities.
Learned counsel's argument that under Section 15Y the only jurisdiction conferred on
an adjudicating officer is to penalise the party and not for rectification also cannot be
accepted because the provisions of Section 15Y are to be read together with Section
20A of the SEBI Act which inter-alia confers a power on the board to pass any order
which includes direction as contemplated under Regulation 44 of the Takeover
Regulations..... …

43. I am of the opinion that on plain and simple reading of section 15Y read with
section 20A of the Act all the cases arising out of the breach and Take Over
Regulation must fall within the exclusive domain of SEBI and cannot be complained
in the court of Law by virtue of express bar contained under section 15Y and section
20A of the SEBI Act. I am also of the further opinion that there is no doubt that there
is a common law right in a shareholder to apply for rectification of the share register
even though it is not his own share in respect of which he is seeking rectification but
still the said right if it flows from the provisions of Take Over Regulations then
undoubtedly it would fall within the exclusive Jurisdiction of SEBI and not within the
Jurisdiction of this court in view of the 18 (2006) 1 Bom CR 545 express bar
contained under the aforesaid statue. I am of the further opinion that the enactment
of the amendment of Take Over Regulation of Amending provisions of SEBI
(Substantial Acquisition of Shares and Take Over) Second Amendment (Regulation
2002) w.e.f. 9.9.2002 by providing for the remedy under sub clause

(c) and (d) of the Regulation 44 the board has been empowered to give effective relief
of Rectification of Share Register by declaring cancellation of the Allotment and/or
by directing the company not to give an effect to the transfer if they are found to be in
contrary to the Take Over Regulation.”

23. Zandu Pharmaceutical Works Ltd. v. Devkumarvaidya & Ors.19, is another instance where it has
been held that in a case of violation of the SEBI Regulations, the CLB cannot exercise rectificatory
jurisdiction unless and until the SEBI, in the very first instance, decides if there has been a violation

11

or not. The CLB held that:

Ifb Agro Industries Limited vs Sicgil India Limited on 4 January, 2023

“11. Most of the allegations made by the petitioner are yet to be investigated and to be
crystallised/confirmed as violations of the law. The allegations of violation of
Takeover Code and Insider Trading is to be decided by the SEBI and similarly the
allegations of investment beyond the limit under section 372A of the Act and
acquisition of shares creating thereby a dominant undertaking under section 108A of
the Act are to be investigated and crystallised/confirmed as violations by the Central
Government. Unless it is confirmed as a violation of law, the CLB has no power to
issue orders for rectification of register of members and further this Bench has no
power to declare these allegations as violations of law.” 19 (2009) 89 CLA 65

24. The principle enunciated in Ammonia’s case relating to the jurisdiction of a Tribunal with
respect to the rectification of the register is well-recognized and consistently followed. Sub-section
(3) of Section 59 recognizes the overarching right to hold and transfer securities with the
concomitant entitlement of voting. This is a precious right, and that is the reason why the
Parliament found it necessary to caution that the provision of this Section shall not restrict the right
of a holder of securities, to transfer such securities. This is another feature which is indicative of the
limited scope and extent of the power of rectification of the register.

25. For the reason stated above, we are of the opinion that the company petition under Section 111A
of the 1956 Act for a declaration that the acquisition of shares by the Respondents as null and void is
misconceived. The Tribunal should have directed the Appellant to seek such a declaration before the
appropriate forum. The Appellate Tribunal is, therefore, justified in allowing the appeal and setting
aside the order of the Tribunal. Re: appropriate forum for enquiry and adjudication of violations of
the SEBI Regulations:

26. There is another perspective in which the legality and propriety of the company petition under
Section 111A for declaring the acquisition of shares as null and void for violation of SEBI Regulations
could be judged - Which is the appropriate forum for adjudication and determination of violations
and consequent actions under the SEBI (SAST) Regulations and the SEBI (PIT) Regulations?

27. Public administration is dynamic and ever-evolving. It is now established that governance of
certain sectors through independent regulatory bodies will be far more effective than being under
the direct control and supervision of Ministries or Departments of the Government. Regulatory
control by an independent body composed of domain experts enables a consistent, transparent,
independent, proportionate, and accountable administration and development of the sector. All this
is achieved by way of legislative enactments which establish independent regulatory bodies with
specified powers and functions. They exercise powers and functions, which have a combination of
legislative, executive, and judicial features.

28. Another feature of these regulators is that they are impressed with a statutory duty to safeguard
the interest of the consumers and the real stakeholders of the sector. Telecom Regulatory Authority
of India20, Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority21, Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board

12

Ifb Agro Industries Limited vs Sicgil India Limited on 4 January, 2023

of India22, Central23 and State24 Electricity Regulatory Commissions and Airport Economic
Regulatory Authority25, are some of the regulators established under their respective statutes. The
SEBI26 is one such regulator.

29. SEBI was established in 1988 to protect the interest of investors in securities and to promote the
development of, and to regulate, the securities market. This Court had the occasion to consider the
regulatory role of the SEBI in maintaining an orderly and stable securities’ market so as to protect
the interests of investors27.

30. The statutory provisions contained in Chapters-IV, VI-A, read with Section 30, delineate the
legislative28, administrative29 and 20 Section 3, The Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act,
1997. 21 Section 3, The Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India Act, 1999.

22 Section 188, The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016. 23 Section 76, The Electricity Act,
2003.

24 Section 82, The Electricity Act, 2003.

25 Section 3, The Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008. 26 Section 3,
Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992. 27 B.S.E Brokers’ Forum, Bombay & Ors. v.
Securities and Exchange Board of India & Ors., (2001) 3 SCC 482 (Para 17); Sahara India Real
Estate Corporation Ltd. & Ors. v. SEBI & Anr., (2013) 1 SCC 1 (Para 298); Securities and Exchange
Board of India v. Kishore R Ajmera, (2016) 6 SCC 368 (Para 25); Securities and Exchange Board of
India v. Ajay Agarwal, (2010) 3 SCC 765 (Para 33-34); Prakash Gupta v. Securities and Exchange
Board of India, (2021) SCC OnLine SC 485 (para 102). 28 Section 30, Securities and Exchange
Board of India Act, 1992. 29 Chapter IV, Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992.
adjudicatory30 functions of the Board. In its normative or legislative functions, the SEBI can
formulate regulations encompassing various aspects having a bearing on the securities market. It
should be noted that the SEBI Act, Rules, Regulations and Circulars made or issued under the
legislation, are constantly evolving with a concerted aim to enforce order in the securities market
a n d   p r o m o t e   i t s   h e a l t h y   g r o w t h   w h i l e   p r o t e c t i n g   i n v e s t o r   w e a l t h .   I n   s o   f a r   a s   i t s
administrative/executive power goes, it has the power to regulate the business of stock exchanges
and securities market. The Board provides for the registration and regulation of stock brokers, share
transfer agents, depositories, venture capital funds, collective investment schemes etc. It also has
the power to prohibit various transactions which interfere with the health of the securities market.

31. In the exercise of its adjudicatory powers under Section 15-I, the SEBI has the power to appoint
officers for holding an inquiry, give a reasonable opportunity to the person concerned and
determine if there is any transgression of the rules prescribed. The Board has the power to impose
penalties for violations and also restitute the parties. The adjudicatory power also includes the 30
Chapter VI-A, Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992. power to settle administrative and
civil proceedings under Section 15JB of the SEBI Act.

13

Ifb Agro Industries Limited vs Sicgil India Limited on 4 January, 2023

32. The regulatory jurisdiction of the Board also includes ex-ante powers to predict a possible
violation and take preventive measures. The exercise of ex-ante jurisdiction necessitates the calling
of information as provided in Sections 11(2)(i), 11(2)(ia) and 11(2)(ib) of the SEBI Act. Where the
Board has a reasonable ground to believe that a transaction in the securities market is going to take
place in a manner detrimental to the interests of the stakeholders or that any intermediary has
violated the provisions of the Act, it may investigate into the matter under Section 11(C) of the SEBI
Act. In other words, being the real-time security market regulator, the Board is entitled to keep a
watch, predict and even act before a violation occurs. It is in this context, that the SEBI (SAST)
Regulations and the SEBI (PIT) Regulations, with which we are concerned in this case, are to be
understood.

33. The SEBI (PIT) Regulation prohibits dealing, communicating etc., on matters relating to insider
trading. Even if there is a suspicion about the transgression of the prohibition, the Board has the
power to inquire (Regulation 4A) and come to a prime facie conclusion about the need to investigate
(Regulation 5). Chapter III of the said Regulations provides for the entire procedure to be followed
in the inquiry process. This includes – procedural safeguards to be afforded to the insider
(Regulation 6), submission of the report by the investigating authority (Regulation 8),
communication of findings to the insider (Regulation 9), and the final orders/directions to be
passed by the Board (Regulation 11). For an effective exercise of its ex-ante powers, the Board has
provided the policy on disclosures in Chapter IV of the said Regulations. Under Regulation 13, any
person holding more than 5% shares or voting rights in a company, shall disclose to the company
within four working days, the number of shares or the extent of voting rights held by such person.
Regulation 13 places a continual obligation of disclosure. Regulation 14 provides that any person
violating the said Regulations shall be liable for action under Sections 11, 11B, 11D, 24 and Chapter
VI-A of the SEBI Act.

34. The above-referred regulatory regime is all-encompassing. It prescribes the prohibition, which is
normative. The Regulation also provides for the method of detecting the violation, the methods of
investigation, the manner of appointment of the investigating authority, the timeline within which
the report is to be submitted, the opportunity for an insider to respond to the report as well as the
final decision to be taken by the SEBI, and lastly, the consequential orders and restitutionary
directions which the Board is entitled to pass. It is also important to note that the SEBI has the
power under Regulation 11 to pass necessary directions to remedy an act of insider trading in order
to have a complete and comprehensive control over the securities market.

35. Having considered the comprehensive role of the SEBI in regulating the securities market with
respect to insider trading, we are of the opinion that the important role of the Regulator cannot be
circumvented by simply asking for rectification under Section 111A of the 1956 Act. Such an
approach is impermissible. The scrutiny and examination of a transaction allegedly in violation of
the SEBI (PIT) Regulations will have to be processed through the regulations and remedies provided
therein.

36. When Constitutional Courts are called upon to interpret provisions affecting the exercise of
powers and jurisdictions of these regulatory bodies, it is the duty of such Courts to ensure that

14

Ifb Agro Industries Limited vs Sicgil India Limited on 4 January, 2023

transactions falling within the province of the regulators are necessarily subjected to their scrutiny
and regulation. This will ensure that the regulatory body, charged with the duty to protect the
consumers has real time control over the sector, thus, realizing the purpose of their constitution.

37. The position with respect to the SEBI (SAST) Regulations is similar to that of the SEBI (PIT)
Regulations. Regulation 7 of Chapter III obligates the acquirer of more than 5% shares in a company
to disclose the same to the company and the stock exchange. This is the prohibition, and
non-disclosure is punitive. Chapter V deals with investigation and action by the Board, which
includes the power of the Board to appoint an investigating officer (Regulation 38), the issuance of
show-cause notice to the acquirer (Regulation 39), the obligation of the investigating authority to
submit a report at the earliest (Regulation 41), the duty to supply the report to the acquirer and give
him an opportunity of hearing before passing penal orders (Regulation 42) and lastly, the powers of
the Board to take action/pass directions under Chapter VI-A and Section 24 of the SEBI Act
(Regulation 44). It is significant to note that Regulation 45 provides for penalties for
non-compliance with the said Regulations. The liability will be in terms of the Regulations and the
SEBI Act. Here again, the SEBI (SAST) Regulation is a comprehensive scheme providing for inquiry,
investigation, submission of report by the investigating officer, procedural safeguards in favor of the
acquirer, and finally, the restitutionary order/directions to be passed by the Board. This whole
procedure cannot be short-circuited by making an application under Section 111A of the 1956 Act on
the ground that there exists parallel jurisdiction with the SEBI and CLB/Tribunal. The transaction
complained of must suffer scrutiny by the regulator, and it is only for the regulator to determine a
violation of the provisions of the SEBI Act and the Regulations.

38. Having considered the matter from a different perspective, we are of the opinion that the
Appellant is not justified in invoking the jurisdiction of the CLB under Section 111A of the Act for
violation of SEBI regulations. We are also of the opinion that the Tribunal committed an error in
entertaining and allowing the company petition filed under Section 111A of the 1956 Act. Though we
are not in agreement with the reasoning adopted by the Appellate Tribunal in the impugned order,
we are in agreement with its conclusion that the Tribunal exceeded its jurisdiction and therefore, the
Appellate Tribunal was correct in setting aside the judgment dated 05.07.2017.

39. For the reasons stated above, Civil Appeal No. 2030 of 2019 arising out of the judgment dated
06.12.2018 in Company Appeal (AT) No. 240 of 2017 of the National Company Law Appellate
Tribunal, New Delhi stands dismissed. There shall be no order as to costs.

……………………………….J. [A.S. BOPANNA] ……………………………….J. [PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI
NARASIMHA] NEW DELHI;

JANUARY 04, 2023

15