Imtiyaz Ahmad Malla vs The State Of Jammu And Kashmir on 28 February, 2023

Imtiyaz Ahmad Malla vs The State Of Jammu And Kashmir on 28
February, 2023

Author: Bela M. Trivedi

Bench: Bela M. Trivedi, Ajay Rastogi

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO. 678 OF 2021

IMTIYAZ AHMAD MALLA                                            .... PETITIONER

VERSUS

THE STATE OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR
AND OTHERS                                                    .... RESPONDENTS

JUDGMENT

BELA M. TRIVEDI, J.

1. The instant special leave petition is directed against the Judgment and Order dated 09.08.2019
passed by the High Court of Jammu and Kashmir at Srinagar in LPASW No. 71 of 2018, whereby the
High Court has dismissed the appeal filed by the petitioner-

appellant and confirmed the order dated 14.05.2018 passed by the Single Bench dismissing the SWP
No. 1766 of 2017.

2. Briefly stated, the petitioner had successfully participated in the selection process conducted in
2008-2009 for the post of constable in the Jammu and Kashmir Executive Police, and he was issued
an appointment letter dated 20.08.2009. The petitioner thereafter was deputed to the Police
Training School, Manigam for undergoing the nine months BRTC course. It appears that thereafter
the search slips of the ten newly recruited constables including the petitioner, were sent to the
Director, Finger Print Bureau (CPPB) and NCRB East, New Delhi, for record and reference purpose,
and the said Bureau vide the letter dated 07.12.2009 responded that the petitioner was involved in a
case registered as FIR No. 52/2007 under Section 379 of Ranbir Penal Code (RPC) and Section 6 of
Forest Act, at the Police Station, Kralgund. The said case was stated to be pending before the Chief
Judicial Magistrate, Handwara. The matter was taken up with the Deputy Inspector General of
Police, NKR, Baramulla, by the Police District Headquarter, Handwara, for cancellation of the

1

Imtiyaz Ahmad Malla vs The State Of Jammu And Kashmir on 28 February, 2023

selection of the petitioner. During the course of inquiry, a summary of allegations and charge-sheet
were served to the petitioner. It was alleged that in the said criminal case, the petitioner was
released on bail after four days of his arrest, and therefore the petitioner had good knowledge of his
involvement in the criminal case and that he had consciously concealed the said information. It was
also found during the course of inquiry that the petitioner had shown his residence at village
Gundchobotra instead of Pakhribal in order to get a clean chit at the time of police verification.
Under the circumstances, the appointment order dated 20.08.2009 of the petitioner was cancelled
by the order dated 01.03.2010.

3. The petitioner challenged the said order of cancellation of his appointment by filing the writ
petition being SWP No. 2616 of 2011 in the High Court. In the meantime, the petitioner was tried
and acquitted in the criminal case by the Court of Chief Judicial Magistrate, Handwara vide the
Judgment dated 26.04.2011. The said petition therefore came to be disposed of vide the order dated
18.05.2016 whereby the impugned order dated 01.03.2010 was set aside by the High Court. It was
directed to the concerned respondent to take further action in view of the communication dated
27.02.2012 which in respect of the other persons similarly situated as the petitioner. On the
reconsideration, the Director General of Police, Jammu and Kashmir, Srinagar, passed the order
dated 31.07.2017 stating inter alia that in view of the criminal background of the petitioner, he was
found unsuitable for the post of constable in the disciplined force.

4. Being aggrieved by the said order dated 31.07.2017, the petitioner filed the writ petition being
SWP No. 1766 of 2017 seeking reinstatement with consequential benefits. The said writ petition
came to be dismissed by the Single Bench vide the judgment and order dated 14.05.2018, whereby
the Single Bench placing reliance on the decision of Union Territory, Chandigarh Administration
And Others Vs. Pradeep Kumar And Another 1, held that the decision of the Director General of
Police, the highest functionary in the hierarchy of police department, to consider the suitability of
the appellant for induction into police force, could not be called into question. The aggrieved
petitioner therefore filed the LPA, which came to be dismissed by the Division Bench vide the
impugned order.

5. Though the matter was argued at length by the learned counsels for the parties, the precise
question that falls for consideration before this Court is whether the Director General of Police,
Jammu & Kashmir, Srinagar, who after examining the record of the petitioner had come to the
conclusion that the petitioner was not a fit person to hold the post into the police force in view of his
criminal background, could be compelled to reinstate the petitioner on his acquittal in the criminal
case.

6. It was sought to be submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioner that in the criminal trial
proceeded against the petitioner, the prosecution had failed to examine the investigating officer and
also failed to bring home the charges levelled against him, and therefore his acquittal in the said
case was required to be treated as an honorable acquittal. He further submitted that the very basis
for presuming that the petitioner had a criminal background was no 1 (2018) 1 SCC 797 more
available to the respondents, on his having been acquitted by the competent criminal court.

2

Imtiyaz Ahmad Malla vs The State Of Jammu And Kashmir on 28 February, 2023

7. In order to appreciate the said submission made by the learned counsel for the petitioner, it would
be relevant to reproduce the relevant part of the judgment dated 26.04.2011 passed by the Court of
Chief Judicial Magistrate, Handwara, whereby the petitioner was acquitted from the charges
levelled against him.

“That the I.O. has not been produced and examined which is legal infirmity in the prosecution case
as material contradictions have not been answered nor the site plan has been proved. Further, the
seizure of timber has not been proved by the witnesses. None of witnesses has deposed that accused
committed theft in the forest and willow trees were found in possession of the accused persons. On
the basis of contradictory evidence accused cannot be convicted, as benefit of doubt goes to the
accused.

Prosecution has miserably failed to fulfill the ingredients of section 379 RPC, 6 F.Act against the
accused persons. So, prosecution case fails. Challan is dismissed. Accused are acquitted of the
charges for the commission of offence under section 379 RPC 6 F.Act.

Accused are on bail. Their bail bonds and personal bonds stand discharged. Since the confiscation
proceedings were initiated by the Forest department, timber has been disposed of. Challan be
consigned to records after due completion.”

8. Apart from the fact that the phrase “honourable acquittal” has not been defined anywhere in the
Criminal Procedure Code, as transpiring from the afore-stated order passed in the criminal case for
which the petitioner was tried, the petitioner was afforded a benefit of doubt in view of the
contradictory evidence which had come on record, also as the investigating officer was not examined
by the prosecution.

9. In case of Commissioner of Police, New Delhi and Another Vs. Mehar Singh2, this Court on
similar issues as involved in the present case observed as under:

“25. The expression “honourable acquittal” was considered by this Court in S.
Samuthiram [Inspector General of Police v. S. Samuthiram, (2013) 1 SCC 598 :
(2013) 1 SCC (Cri) 566 : (2013) 1 SCC (L&S) 229] . In that case this Court was
concerned with a situation where disciplinary proceedings were initiated against a
police officer. Criminal case was pending against him under Section 509 IPC and
under Section 4 of the Eve-Teasing Act.

He was acquitted in that case because of the non-examination of key witnesses. There was a serious
flaw in the conduct of the criminal case. Two material witnesses turned hostile. Referring to the
judgment of this Court in RBI v. Bhopal Singh Panchal [(1994) 1 SCC 541 : 1994 SCC (L&S) 594 :
(1994) 26 ATC 619] , where in somewhat similar fact situation, this Court upheld a bank's action of
refusing to reinstate an employee in service on the ground that in the criminal case he was acquitted
by giving him benefit of doubt and, therefore, it was not an honourable acquittal, this Court held
that the High Court was not justified in setting aside the punishment imposed in the departmental
proceedings. This Court observed that the expressions “honourable acquittal”, “acquitted of blame”

3

Imtiyaz Ahmad Malla vs The State Of Jammu And Kashmir on 28 February, 2023

and “fully exonerated” are unknown to the Criminal Procedure Code or the Penal Code. They are
coined by judicial pronouncements. It is difficult to define what is meant by the expression
“honourably acquitted”. This Court expressed that when the accused is acquitted after full
consideration of the prosecution case and the prosecution miserably fails to prove the charges
levelled against the accused, it can possibly be said that the accused was honourably acquitted.

2 (2013) 7 SCC 685

26. In light of the above, we are of the opinion that since the purpose of the departmental
proceedings is to keep persons, who are guilty of serious misconduct or dereliction of duty or who
are guilty of grave cases of moral turpitude, out of the department, if found necessary, because they
pollute the department, surely the above principles will apply with more vigour at the point of entry
of a person in the police department i.e. at the time of recruitment. If it is found by the Screening
Committee that the person against whom a serious case involving moral turpitude is registered is
discharged on technical grounds or is acquitted of the same charge, but the acquittal is not
honourable, the Screening Committee would be entitled to cancel his candidature. Stricter norms
need to be applied while appointing persons in a disciplinary force because public interest is
involved in it.”

10. It was further observed therein that if the Screening Committee’s decision was not mala fide or
actuated by extraneous considerations, then the same could not be questioned.

“35. The police force is a disciplined force. It shoulders the great responsibility of maintaining law
and order and public order in the society. People repose great faith and confidence in it. It must be
worthy of that confidence. A candidate wishing to join the police force must be a person of utmost
rectitude. He must have impeccable character and integrity. A person having criminal antecedents
will not fit in this category. Even if he is acquitted or discharged in the criminal case, that acquittal
or discharge order will have to be examined to see whether he has been completely exonerated in the
case because even a possibility of his taking to the life of crimes poses a threat to the discipline of the
police force. The Standing Order, therefore, has entrusted the task of taking decisions in these
matters to the Screening Committee. The decision of the Screening Committee must be taken as
final unless it is mala fide. In recent times, the image of the police force is tarnished. Instances of
police personnel behaving in a wayward manner by misusing power are in public domain and are a
matter of concern. The reputation of the police force has taken a beating. In such a situation, we
would not like to dilute the importance and efficacy of a mechanism like the Screening Committee
created by the Delhi Police to ensure that persons who are likely to erode its credibility do not enter
the police force. At the same time, the Screening Committee must be alive to the importance of the
trust reposed in it and must treat all candidates with an even hand.

36. The Screening Committee's proceedings have been assailed as being arbitrary, unguided and
unfettered. But, in the present cases, we see no evidence of this. However, certain instances have
been pointed out where allegedly persons involved in serious offences have been recommended for
appointment by the Screening Committee. It is well settled that to such cases the doctrine of
equality enshrined in Article 14 of the Constitution of India is not attracted. This doctrine does not

4

Imtiyaz Ahmad Malla vs The State Of Jammu And Kashmir on 28 February, 2023

envisage negative equality (Fuljit Kaur [Fuljit Kaur v. State of Punjab, (2010) 11 SCC 455] ). It is not
meant to perpetuate illegality or fraud because it embodies a positive concept. If the Screening
Committee which is constituted to carry out the object of the comprehensive policy to ensure that
people with doubtful background do not enter the police force, deviates from the policy, makes
exception and allows entry of undesirable persons, it is undoubtedly guilty of committing an act of
grave disservice to the police force but we cannot allow that illegality to be perpetuated by allowing
the respondents to rely on such cases. It is for the Commissioner of Police, Delhi to examine whether
the Screening Committee has compromised the interest of the police force in any case and to take
remedial action if he finds that it has done so.

Public interest demands an in-depth examination of this allegation at the highest level. Perhaps,
such deviations from the policy are responsible for the spurt in police excesses. We expect the
Commissioner of Police, Delhi to look into the matter and if there is substance in the allegations to
take necessary steps forthwith so that policy incorporated in the Standing Order is strictly
implemented.”

11. The expression “honourable acquittal” had also come up for consideration in other cases namely,
Management of Reserve Bank of India, New Delhi Vs. Bhopal Singh Panchal 3; and in R.P. Kapur
Vs. Union of India and Another 4 whereby it was held inter alia that the mere acquittal does not
entitle an employee to the reinstatement in service. The acquittal, it was held, has to be honourable.
As such, the expressions “honourable acquittal”, “acquitted of blame”, “fully exonerated” are
unknown to the Code of Criminal Procedure or the Penal Code, and it is difficult to define precisely
what is meant by expressions “honourable acquittal”.

12. In Pradeep Kumar’s case (supra) also it was reiterated that if a person is acquitted or discharged,
it cannot obviously be inferred that he was falsely involved, or he had no criminal antecedents.

The precise observations made therein are re-produced hereunder:

“10. The acquittal in a criminal case is not conclusive of the suitability of the
candidates in the post concerned. If a person is acquitted or discharged, it cannot
always be inferred that he was falsely involved or he had no criminal antecedents.
Unless it is an honourable acquittal, the candidate cannot claim the benefit of the
case. What is honourable acquittal, was considered by this Court in Inspector General
of Police v. S. Samuthiram [Inspector General of Police v. S. 3 (1994) 1 SCC 541 4 AIR
1964 SC 787 Samuthiram, (2013) 1 SCC 598 : (2013) 1 SCC (Cri) 566 : (2013) 1 SCC
(L&S) 229] , in which this Court held as under: (SCC p. 609, para 24) “24. The
meaning of the expression “honourable acquittal” came up for consideration before
this Court in RBI v. Bhopal Singh Panchal [RBI v. Bhopal Singh Panchal, (1994) 1
SCC 541 : 1994 SCC (L&S) 594] . In that case, this Court has considered the impact of
Regulation 46(4) dealing with honourable acquittal by a criminal court on the
disciplinary proceedings. In that context, this Court held that the mere acquittal does
not entitle an employee to reinstatement in service, the acquittal, it was held, has to
be honourable. The expressions “honourable acquittal”, “acquitted of blame”, “fully

5

Imtiyaz Ahmad Malla vs The State Of Jammu And Kashmir on 28 February, 2023

exonerated” are unknown to the Code of Criminal Procedure or the Penal Code,
which are coined by judicial pronouncements. It is difficult to define precisely what is
meant by the expression “honourably acquitted”. When the accused is acquitted after
full consideration of prosecution evidence and that the prosecution had miserably
failed to prove the charges levelled against the accused, it can possibly be said that
the accused was honourably acquitted.”

11. …….

12. …….

13. It is thus well settled that acquittal in a criminal case does not automatically
entitle him for appointment to the post. Still, it is open to the employer to consider
the antecedents and examine whether he is suitable for appointment to the post.
From the observations of this Court in Mehar Singh [Commr. of Police v. Mehar
Singh, (2013) 7 SCC 685 : (2013) 3 SCC (Cri) 669 : (2013) 2 SCC (L&S) 910] and
Parvez Khan [State of M.P. v. Parvez Khan, (2015) 2 SCC 591 : (2015) 1 SCC (L&S)
544] cases, it is clear that a candidate to be recruited to the police service must be of
impeccable character and integrity. A person having criminal antecedents will not fit
in this category. Even if he is acquitted or discharged, it cannot be presumed that he
was honourably acquitted/completely exonerated. The decision of the Screening
Committee must be taken as final unless it is shown to be mala fide. The Screening
Committee also must be alive to the importance of the trust reposed in it and must
examine the candidate with utmost character.”

13. As regards the suppression of relevant information or false information with regard to the
criminal prosecution, arrest or pendency of criminal case against the candidate, a three-judge Bench
of this Court in Avtar Singh Vs. Union of India and Others5 has laid down the precise guidelines.
Para 38.5 thereof reads as under:

“38.5. In a case where the employee has made declaration truthfully of a concluded
criminal case, the employer still has the right to consider antecedents, and cannot be
compelled to appoint the candidate.”

14. In all the above cases, the requirement of integrity and high standard of conduct in police force
has been highly emphasised.

The High Court in the impugned judgement has also elaborately dealt with each and every aspect of
the issues involved, while upholding the order of the Single Bench to the effect that the Director
General being the highest functionary in the police hierarchy, was the best judge to consider the
suitability of the petitioner for induction into the police force. The impugned order being just and
proper, we are not inclined to interfere with the 5 (2016) 8 SCC 471 same in exercise of our
jurisdiction under Article 136 of the Constitution of India.

6

Imtiyaz Ahmad Malla vs The State Of Jammu And Kashmir on 28 February, 2023

15. It is well settled position of law that though the scope of Article 136 of Constitution of India is
very wide, the power conferred thereunder being a very special and extraordinary power, it has to be
exercised in rare and exceptional cases. Since, we do not find any infirmity or illegality in the
impugned order passed by the High Court, the present petition deserves to be dismissed and is
accordingly dismissed.

..………………………. J.

[AJAY RASTOGI] …..................................J. [BELA M. TRIVEDI] NEW DELHI;

28.02.2023

7