Indrajit Das vs The State Of Tripura on 28 February, 2023

Indrajit Das vs The State Of Tripura on 28 February, 2023

Author: Vikram Nath

Bench: B.R. Gavai, Vikram Nath, Sanjay Karol

REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.609 OF 2015

INDRAJIT DAS                    …APPELLANT

VERSUS

THE STATE OF TRIPURA            …RESPONDENT

JUDGMENT

VIKRAM NATH, J.

1. The appellant has assailed the correctness of the judgment and order of the High Court of Tripura
dated 9 th October, 2013 dismissing the appeal of the appellant while confirming the conviction
recorded by the Trial Court under Section 302/34 of the Indian Penal Code1 and 201 of IPC whereby
he was awarded imprisonment for life and allied sentences to run concurrently.

in short ‘IPC’

2. The prosecution story begins with a telephone message by one Mantu Das (PW-40) informing the
Police Station Kailashahar that huge quantity of blood had been seen on the Kailashahar-Kumarghat
Road near Shantipur. The said telephone message was received by Bindhu Bhushan Das (PW-1)
whereafter he along with Sub-Inspector Kajal Rudrapal proceeded for the said place, after making
due entry in the G.D.Register.

3. At the spot, PW-1 not only noticed the blood on the road side but also found blood-stained vojali
(big knife), one taga (thread) and some broken pieces of glass which could be said to be of the
rear-view mirror of a motor cycle. All these articles were taken into custody, sealed and recovery
memo prepared. Further investigation was made which led to visible marks of dragging some heavy
article in the jungle on the side of the road. These marks continued upto Manu River and thereafter
vanished.

4. While the investigation was still being carried out, the Police Station received information from
Arjun Das (PW-7) that his nephew Kaushik Sarkar was missing since the previous evening, i.e.

1

Indrajit Das vs The State Of Tripura on 28 February, 2023

19.06.2007. The said information was to the effect that Kaushik Sarkar had gone out in the previous
evening on his bike but had not returned. The Investigating Officer came to the residence of Kaushik
Sarkar at village Mohanpur where he recorded the statement of his mother (PW-25). She informed
that Kaushik Sarkar had gone out with two friends namely Indrajit Das (appellant) and one ‘juvenile
K’. Both these persons were called to the police station but they did not report. The Investigating
Officer thereafter went to the house of the appellant.

5. According to the Investigating Officer, both the accused confessed before him that they had gone
to Fatikroy and Kanchanbari area on the bike of the deceased Kaushik Sarkar. On the way they had
purchased a bottle of alcohol and consumed it along with Babul Das. Thereafter, they started driving
towards Kailashahar. At Shantipur, they got down to answer the call of nature. Kaushik was sitting
on the motor cycle. At that stage, both the accused assaulted Kaushik Sarkar with the vojalis. They
threw the helmet, purse and two vojalis in the nearby jungle and dragged the dead body and the
motor cycle to the nearby river and threw them in the river. Then they swam across the river, went
to the house of the appellant and burnt their blood-stained clothes.

6. The accused ‘juvenile K’ was tried under the provisions of the Juvenile Justice (Care and
Protection of Children) Act, 2000. The present appellant was tried by the regular Sessions Court.
Upon charge being framed and read out, he pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried.

7. The prosecution examined as many as 40 witnesses and also led documentary evidence which was
duly proved and exhibited. The Trial Court vide judgment dated 19.04.2011 recorded a finding that
the prosecution had fully established the guilt of the appellant beyond reasonable doubt, and
accordingly convicted him of the offences and sentenced him as recorded earlier.

8. The appellant preferred appeal before the High Court which has since been dismissed by the
impugned judgment as the High Court was also of the view that the prosecution had been successful
in proving the charges beyond reasonable doubt.

9. We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the material evidence on record.

10. The present one is a case of circumstantial evidence as no one has seen the commission of crime.
The law in the case of circumstantial evidence is well settled. The leading case being Sharad
Birdhichand Sarda vs. State of Maharashtra2. According to it, the circumstances 1984 (4) SCC 116
should be of a definite tendency unerringly pointing towards the guilt of the accused; the
circumstances taken cumulatively should form a chain so complete that there is no escape from the
conclusion that within all human probability the crime was committed by the accused and they
should be incapable of explanation on any hypothesis other than that of the guilt of the accused and
inconsistent with his innocence. The said principle set out in the case of Sharad Birdhichand Sarda
(supra) has been consistently followed by this Court. In a recent case – Sailendra Rajdev Pasvan and
Others vs. State of Gujarat Etc.3, this Court observed that in a case of circumstantial evidence, law
postulates two-fold requirements. Firstly, that every link in the chain of circumstances necessary to
establish the guilt of the accused must be established by the prosecution beyond reasonable doubt
and secondly, all the circumstances AIR 2020 SC 180 must be consistent pointing out only towards

2

Indrajit Das vs The State Of Tripura on 28 February, 2023

the guilt of the accused. We need not burden this judgment by referring to other judgments as the
above principles have been consistently followed and approved by this Court time and again.

11. In the above backdrop of the settled legal propositions, we proceed to deal with the facts,
circumstances and evidence of the present case and find out as to whether each link of the chain of
circumstances is fully established by the prosecution or not.

12. The basic links in the chain of circumstances starts with motive, then move on to last seen
theory, recovery, medical evidence, expert opinions if any and any other additional link which may
be part of the chain of circumstances.

13. First of all, we may record that the prosecution has not come forward with any motive
whatsoever as to why the appellant along with the co-accused juvenile ‘K’ would commit the said
crime. Even the Trial Court and the High Court in the absence of any evidence have not been able to
record a finding on the motive for the commission of the crime.

14. The High Court dealt with the aspect of motive in solitary paragraph no.20, a perusal of which
does not reflect that any motive was noticed but that ‘juvenile K’ was the mastermind behind the
crime and that he had purchased the weapon of assault. This, by nowhere would constitute a motive.

15. In a case of circumstantial evidence, motive has an important role to play. Motive may also have
a role to play even in a case of direct evidence but it carries much greater importance in a case of
circumstantial evidence than a case of direct evidence. It is an important link in the chain of
circumstances. Reference may be made to the following two judgments on the importance of motive
in a case of circumstantial evidence:

(1) Kuna Alias Sanjaya Behera vs. State of Odisha4; and (2) Ranganayaki vs. State by
Inspector of Police5.

16. Next, in the present case, the dead body has not been recovered. Only a limb was recovered but
no DNA testing was carried out to establish that the limb was that of the deceased Kaushik Sarkar.
As such the entire case of the prosecution proceeds on presumption that Kaushik Sarkar has died.
The principle of corpus delicti has judgments on both sides stating that conviction can be recorded
in the absence of the recovery of the corpus and the other view that no conviction could be recorded
in the absence of recovery of the corpus. The later view is for the reason that if subsequently the
corpus appears as alive, someone may have been convicted and sentenced and (2018) 1 SCC 296
(2004) 12 SCC 521 suffered incarceration for no crime committed by him. We are not going into the
law on the point. However, we have just recorded this fact and it may have some relevance or
bearing while considering the other links of the chain of circumstances.

17. We now deal with the theory of last seen. In the first information given by Arjun Das (PW-7) in
the morning to the police station, there is no mention that Kaushik left his house along with the
appellant and ‘juvenile K’. Arjun Das (PW-7) has only stated that his nephew Kaushik had left in the
evening on the motor bike and had not returned. Although in his statement before the Trial Court he

3

Indrajit Das vs The State Of Tripura on 28 February, 2023

stated that Kaushik had gone with the appellant and juvenile ‘K’ but when confronted with his
statement under Section 161 CrPC and also about the entry in the police records, he had no
explanation for the same.

18. PW-25 is the main witness of the last seen. She is mother of Kaushik. She has stated that when
she returned from the office around 5 PM on 19.06.2007, she saw Kaushik going out on the motor
bike of his father. When she inquired from him, he said he was going to Fatikroy with the appellant
and juvenile ‘K’. She further stated that she followed her son upto the gate and saw the appellant
and ‘juvenile K’ standing at the gate. This witness in her cross-examination when confronted with
her statement under Section 161 CrPC said that no such statement is there, although according to
her, she had told the Investigating Officer that she had seen the appellant and ‘juvenile K’ at her
gate.

19. The conviction is based upon, apart from the prosecution witnesses, on the extra-judicial
confession of the appellant as also ‘juvenile K’. According to both the confessions, the appellant as
also ‘juvenile K’ were waiting at a culvert near the Fatikroy bazar where Kaushik Sarkar came on his
bike at about half past 5. From there all three of them left on the bike. However, near the circuit
house he stopped the bike and wanted to check whether his mother has come home from office.
Both of them waited near the circuit house and Kaushik Sarkar after checking at home again came
back to circuit house from where they left for Kumarghat. If the extra-judicial confession is to be
accepted, the statement of last seen theory given by the mother (PW-25) becomes difficult to be
given any credibility. However, even if we ignore the extra-judicial confession, the statement of
PW-25 appears to be an improvement only to develop the last seen theory. Inasmuch as neither in
the telephone call of Arjun Das (PW-7) recorded at the police station refers to Kaushik leaving in the
evening along with the appellant and juvenile ‘K’ nor do the statements of PW-7 and PW-25 under
Section 161 CrPC mention the name of the appellant and juvenile ‘K’ having been seen leaving with
Kaushik from his residence. Two other witnesses were also examined in support of the last seen
theory but they also do not inspire any confidence.

20. Insofar as the recoveries are concerned which again is an important link in the chain of
circumstances, the recoveries have been from an open place. The dragging of some heavy object
from the place where the blood-stains were noticed and ‘vojali’ was recovered, up to the edge of the
river and then recovering the motor bike from the place from the bed of the river just below where
the dragging marks had come to an end is something quite normal and expected. It was not a place
which could be in the exclusive knowledge of the appellant.

21. The extra-judicial confession is a weak piece of evidence and especially when it has been
retracted during trial. It requires strong evidence to corroborate it and also it must be established
that it was completely voluntary and truthful. In view of the discussion made above, we do not find
any corroborating evidence to support the extra- judicial confession, rather the evidence led by
prosecution is inconsistent with the same.

22. In view of the discussion made above, we find that the major links of the chain of circumstances
have not been proved by the prosecution evidence and as such it would be unjust to uphold the

4

Indrajit Das vs The State Of Tripura on 28 February, 2023

conviction of the appellant. The appellant would be entitled to benefit of doubt. Accordingly, the
appeal is allowed and the appellant is acquitted of all the charges. Appellant is in judicial custody.
However, he was granted parole by the State. He shall be released forthwith.

23. Pending applications, if any, are disposed of.

……................................J. [B.R. GAVAI] .………….........................J. [VIKRAM NATH] NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY 28, 2023.

5