Hansraj vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 10 February, 2025

Hansraj vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 10 February, 2025

Author: Pankaj Mithal

Bench: Pankaj Mithal

 2025 INSC 178                                                          REPORTABLE

                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1387 OF 2012

                      HANSRAJ                                          …APPELLANT(S)

                                                  VERSUS

                      STATE OF CHHATTISGARH                          …RESPONDENT(S)

                                             JUDGMENT

PANKAJ MITHAL, J.

1. The appellant Hansraj is a convict for offence under Section 302 IPC1 for murdering Ramlal of
village Ghotha Sakulpara Bhanupratappur, District Kanker, Chhattisgarh and has been awarded life
imprisonment and fine of Rs.1000/-. Indian Penal Code

2. The order of conviction and sentence of the Trial Court dated 19.12.2002 has been confirmed by
the High Court in appeal by the impugned judgment and order dated 30.07.2010.

3. The appellant preferred the Special Leave Petition with delay of 653 days which was condoned
and leave to appeal was granted. Since the appellant had remained in jail for over 10 years, he was
directed to be released on bail by this Court.

4. The case of the prosecution is based only on circumstantial evidence and there is no eyewitness to
the incident.

5. The argument of the learned counsel for the appellant is that it is a completely false case and that
even the circumstances have not been proved conclusively to hold the appellant guilty and there are
stark contradictions in the testimonies of the prosecution witnesses.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/49193312/

1

Hansraj vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 10 February, 2025

6. The incident is of 28.03.2002. It is alleged that the appellant was residing with the deceased and
was assisting him in his work for the last over two months. On the fateful day the appellant at 7:00
am in the morning left for his native place on cycle with a bag but is set to have returned at around
9:00 am claiming that his cycle got punctured. He therefore asked for money from Budhiyarin Bai
(PW-5) the wife of the deceased, to get the puncture repaired. Budhiyarin Bai told him that she had
no money readily available at home and that he can take paddy and sell it in the market, but he
refused. So, Budhiyarin Bai herself went to the market to sell the paddy, leaving the appellant and
her husband at home. When she returned at about 9:30 am, she saw the appellant fleeing with a
farsi (Ex P/6) in his hand and discovered that her husband is lying on the floor, profusely bleeding
with his neck severed. She therefore raised an alarm and upon hearing her cries her neighbours
Jogeshwar (PW-3) and Jhadu Ram (PW-4) came and they also saw her husband lying dead. The
neighbours informed another villager namely Jogi Ram (PW-1) who also came on the spot and
thereafter proceeded to the Police Station Bhanupratappur to lodge an FIR. He lodged the FIR at
11:15 am on the same day.

7. It is alleged that the relationship of the appellant with the deceased was strained probably on
account of non- payment/untimely payment of his wages. The appellant was the person last seen in
the company of the deceased and that the weapon of recovery i.e., farsi was recovered at his pointing
out. The injuries sustained by the deceased were opined to have been caused by the weapon
recovered. In these circumstances, the prosecution asserts that the evidence on record proves
beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant alone is the person who committed the offence and that
he has been rightly convicted and sentenced by the two Courts below.

8. Undisputedly, the case of the prosecution is based on circumstantial evidence and there is no
eyewitness to the commission of the offence in as much as the wife of the deceased, Budhiyarin Bai,
was also not present at the time of the commission of the offence and had discovered that her
husband was lying on the floor bleeding profusely with neck severed upon returning from the
market. She probably saw the accused fleeing from the scene of crime.

9. The law with regard to a case based purely on circumstantial evidence stands crystalised by the
decision of this Court in the case of Sharad Birdhichand Sarda vs State of Maharashtra2 wherein five
golden principles known as panchsheel proof of a case based on circumstantial evidence were
enshrined namely (i) the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should be
fully established crafting out a distinction between ‘may be’ established and ‘must or should’ be
established; (ii) the facts established should be consistent with the hypothesis of the guilt of the
accused; (iii) the circumstances should be of a conclusive nature; (iv) the circumstance should
exclude every other possible hypothesis except the one to be proved i.e., the guilt of the accused; and
(v) there must be a chain of evidence so complete as not to leave any reasonable ground for
conclusion that the accused is innocent and must show that in all human probability the act must
have been done by the accused.

10. In other words, the chain of events leading to the prosecution of the convict must conclusively be
established with certainty (1984) 4 SCC 116 and there shall not be any room for any second opinion
which may lead to the innocence of the accused.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/49193312/

2

11. The appellant is said to have a motive to kill the deceased.

Hansraj vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 10 February, 2025

The alleged motive being that he was living as a servant of the deceased for the last two months and
there was some discord between him and the deceased in connection with non-payment/untimely
payment of wages. However, such a discord is not of such a nature of extent which may lead to such
a drastic action on part of the appellant to kill the deceased. The issue of non-payment of wages is
hardly material and is so trivial a matter so as to compel anyone to take an extreme step of
committing a crime of such a grave nature. Moreover, there is no material evidence to prove any
discord between the two.

12. In so far as the last seen theory is concerned, that the appellant was in the company of the
deceased at the time when Budhiyarin Bai (PW-5) the wife of the deceased went to the market to sell
paddy also appears to be a little doubtful. It is the consistent case of all the witnesses including
Budhiyarin Bai (PW-5) that the appellant had left in the morning at about 7:00 am for his native
place and that as told by Budhiyarin Bai (PW-5) he returned around 9:00 am as his cycle’s tyre got
punctured. The fact that he actually returned as alleged does not stand established by any
independent evidence except for the statement of Budhiyarin Bai (PW-5). However, her statement
could not be corroborated by any piece of evidence. It is hardly believable that a person whose
relationship with the deceased was not cordial and has left for his native place in disgust would
return soon thereafter. The cycle of the appellant was recovered by the police but no effort was made
to find out if either of the tyres was actually punctured, which could have proved that the appellant
may have returned as the cycle’s tyre got punctured.

13. The weapon of crime i.e., farsi (Ex P/6) was set to have been recovered after 20-25 days of the
incident on the pointing out of the appellant. It has come in evidence that it had some blood stains.
However, no forensic report was brought on record to prove that the blood stains on it matched with
that of the blood of the deceased. Merely for the reason that the doctor opined that the injuries on
the deceased may have been caused by a similar weapon would not conclude that the recovered farsi
was the weapon of crime. Similar and identical instruments like farsi are found in almost every
home in the village as it is one of the most used farming equipment. That apart, Jogi Ram, who
lodged the complaint, in his cross examination stated that the farsi was lying in an open place,
referring to the place of the commission of the crime. The said statement completely belies the fact
that the farsi was recovered subsequently from the field of one Chamaru Ram. The recovery of the
weapon of crime or the farsi, which was recovered, is doubtful and it is also not certain that it was
actually the weapon of crime.

14. One important circumstance pointing to the involvement of the appellant is that he was seen
running from the village both by Budhiyarin Bai (PW-5) and Jogi Ram (PW-1). Budhiyarin Bai in
her statement in unequivocal terms stated that when she returned home after selling the paddy, the
appellant had fled. It means that she had not found and seen the appellant at the place of the crime
after her return as he had already fled. However, in her cross examination she took a summersault
and stated that when she came back, she saw the appellant Hans Raj running from the house with
the farsi. Jogi Ram (PW-1) who at the time of occurrence of the incident was working in his field,
stated that he had seen the appellant running before he came to know about the incident through

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/49193312/

3

Hansraj vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 10 February, 2025

Jogeshwar (PW-3), whereupon he went to the house of the deceased. In his cross examination, he
further stated that the wife of the deceased, Budhiyarin Bai, told him that when she came back after
selling paddy, her husband was lying on the spot and the appellant had disappeared. PW-1 nowhere
stated that Budhiyarin Bai saw the appellant fleeing from the spot rather, she only informed that the
appellant had already disappeared when she returned from the market. Later, in the
cross-examination, Jogi Ram stated that while working in the field collecting mahuva he only saw a
man running from a distance of more than a furlong. But he never named the person who was
running. Therefore, the evidence of none of the two witnesses could conclusively establish that they
saw the appellant running or fleeing from the place of crime or from the village. The identity of the
person running away had not been established by any evidence.

15. In addition to this, according to the prosecution, the clothes of the appellant which he was
wearing at the time of the incident were produced by one Pritam Singh (PW-9) who was declared to
be hostile. The said clothes again had the blood stains but no forensic report was produced to prove
that the blood of those stains matched with the blood of the deceased.

16. In the aforesaid facts, the circumstances raising finger upon the appellant, are not of a conclusive
nature to prove beyond the shadow of doubt that the appellant was the person responsible for the
commission of the crime. The possibility of innocence of the appellant does not stand excluded as
per the chain of events.

17. Thus, in the facts and circumstances of the case, the appellant cannot be held guilty of the
commission of the offence beyond reasonable doubt and therefore, in such circumstances the
benefit of doubt goes in his favour. Accordingly, we are of the opinion that the Courts below have
manifestly erred in convicting him for the aforesaid offence.

18. The impugned judgment and orders dated 19.12.2002 and 30.07.2012 are hereby set aside and
the appellant is acquitted from the offence charged with. He has already suffered incarceration for
over 10 years. He is already on bail. His sureties and bail bonds are discharged.

19. The appeal is allowed accordingly.

.........………………………….. J.

(PANKAJ MITHAL) ...……………………………….. J.

(AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH) NEW DELHI;

FEBRUARY 10, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/49193312/

4

