Kerala State Co-Operative ... vs The Assessing Officer, Trivandrum on 14 September, 2023

Kerala State Co-Operative ... vs The Assessing Officer,
Trivandrum on 14 September, 2023

Author: B.V. Nagarathna

Bench: B.V. Nagarathna

REPORTABLE

2023INSC830                             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S).10069 OF 2016

KERALA STATE CO-OPERATIVE AGRICULTURAL
AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT BANK LTD.
KSCARDB                                …APPELLANT(S)

VS.

THE ASSESSING OFFICER, TRIVANDRUM
AND ORS.                                                      ...RESPONDENT(S)

WITH

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 5005-5007 OF 2019

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S).______ OF 2023
(@SLP(C) NO(S). 2737 OF 2016)

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S).______ OF 2023
(@SLP(C) NO(S). 5400 OF 2016)

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S).______ OF 2023
(@SLP(C) NO(S). 26756 OF 2016)

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 3881-3882 OF 2019

JUDGMENT

NAGARATHNA, J.

Leave granted in those Special Leave Petitions where it has not yet been granted.

2. These appeals arise out of analogous proceedings against the appellant/assessee, and, inter alia,
impugn the judgement dated 26.11.2015 passed by the Kerala High Court; the order dated
08.08.2016 passed by the Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals), Trivandrum and the order dated

1

Kerala State Co-Operative ... vs The Assessing Officer, Trivandrum on 14 September, 2023

07.02.2019 passed by the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (‘ITAT’).

3. The issue involved in these cases is, whether, the appellant/assessee, a co-operative society, is
entitled to claim deduction of the whole of its profits and gains of business attributable to the
business of banking or providing credit facilities to its members who are all co-operative societies
under Section 80P of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as “the Act”, for the sake of
brevity).

Since the question of law involved in these proceedings are common, the facts only in SLP(C) No(s).
2737 of 2016 impugning the judgement of the High Court of Kerala dated 26.11.2015 are narrated.

4. The facts, in a nutshell, are that the appellant/assessee is a State- level Agricultural and Rural
Development Bank governed by as a co- operative society under the Kerala Co-operative Societies
Act, 1969 (hereinafter referred to as the “State Act, 1969” for the sake of brevity) and is engaged in
providing credit facilities to its members who are co- operative societies only. Initially in the year
1951, the appellant/assessee got registered under Section 10 of the Travancore- Cochin Co-operative
Societies Act, 1951 (for short, “State Act, 1951”). On 04.10.1956, the appellant received a Registration
Certificate bearing No. 4017 from the Registrar of Co-operative Societies, Trivandrum, recognizing it
as a co-operative Central Land Mortgage Bank incorporated on the basis of limited liability under
Section 10 of the State Act, 1951 (X of 1952). The office of the Registrar of Co-operative Societies,
Trivandrum further addressed a communication dated 17.11.1961 bearing No. 36444/61.PR2
including the rules relating to Retirement Benefit Fund and Staff Benefit Fund for Kerala
Co-operative Central Mortgage Bank Ltd.

5. The Kerala Co-operative Societies Act, 1969 was enacted in order to, inter alia, provide for the
orderly development of the co-operative sector in the State and to unify the law relating to
co-operative societies in the State. Vide Section 110 of the State Act, 1969, the State Act, 1951 (X of
1952) was repealed. Therefore, the appellant/assessee came to be registered and regulated under the
State Act, 1969. The appellant/assessee being the Kerala State Co-operative Agricultural and Rural
Development Bank Ltd., Thiruvananthapuram, is also included in Schedule I of the State Act, 1969
as regards the application of the Section 80(3A) thereof that postulates that when direct
recruitments ‘is resorted to’ the same ‘shall be made from a select list of candidates furnished by the
Kerala Public Service Commission.’

6. The State Act, 1969 defines “co-operative society with limited liability” in Section 2(g) as a society
in which the liability of its members for the debts of the society in the event of its being wound up is
limited by its bye-laws (i) to the amount, if any, unpaid on the shares respectively held by them; or
(ii) to such amount as they may, respectively, undertake to contribute to the assets of the society.

7. It would also be apposite to take note of the Kerala State Co- Operative Agricultural Development
Banks Act, 1984 (for short, “State Act, 1984”). This Act was passed ‘to facilitate the more efficient
working of Co-operative “Agricultural and Rural Development Banks” in the State of Kerala.’

2

Kerala State Co-Operative ... vs The Assessing Officer, Trivandrum on 14 September, 2023

8. Section 2(a) of the State Act, 1984 defines “Agricultural and Rural Development Bank” to mean
“the Kerala Co-operative Central Land Mortgage Bank Limited, registered under Section 10 of the
State Act, 1951 (X of 1952), and provides that the same shall be known as the “Kerala State
Co-operative Agricultural and Rural Development Bank Limited” which is the name of the appellant
herein. Section 2(d) thereof defines “co-operative society” to mean a co-operative society registered
or deemed to be registered under the State Act, 1969 (21 of 1969). It is apposite to note that Section
2(iA) of the said Act defines “Rural Development” to mean any activity intended to promote the
development in rural area and includes the following developmental activities:

i) Development of handicrafts and other crafts; ii) Small Industries; iii) Cottage and
Village Industries; iv) Industries in tiny and decentralized section; and v) Rural
housing needs of the rural-population.

9. Having considered the evolution of the statutory framework that governs the appellant/assessee,
it would be appropriate to briefly state relevant facts giving rise to these appeals.

9.1. On 27.10.2007 the appellant/assessee filed its Return of Income for the Assessment Year
2007-08 of Rs. 27,18,052 claiming deduction under Section 80P (2)(a)(i) of the Act. Upon scrutiny,
on 22.12.2009 an Assessment Order under Section 143(3) of the Act, was passed by the Assessing
Officer for the Assessment Year 2007-08, disallowing the deduction of Rs. 36,39,87,058 under
Section 80P(2)(a)(i) holding that the appellant/assessee is neither a primary agricultural credit
society nor a primary co-operative agricultural and rural development bank. The Assessing Officer
held the appellant/assessee is a “co-operative bank” and thus, was hit by the provisions of Section
80(P)(4) and was not entitled to the benefit of Section 80(P)(2) of the Act. The Assessing Officer
observed that with effect from 01.04.2007, Section 80P was amended by the insertion of sub-section
(4) as per which the provisions of Section 80P shall not apply to any co-operative bank other than a
primary agricultural credit society or a primary co-operative agricultural and rural development
bank. The Assessing Officer declared the appellant/assessee to be neither a primary agricultural
credit society nor a primary co-operative agricultural and rural development bank, thus, the
appellant/assessee’s claim was hit by Section 80P (4) of the Act. The total income was assessed at
Rs. 36,69,47,233. 9.2. Aggrieved by the Assessment Order dated 27.12.2009, the appellant/assessee
filed an appeal before the Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) (“CIT(A)”). The CIT(A) vide Order
dated 30.07.2010 confirmed the disallowance made by the Assessing Officer. The CIT (A) was of the
view that the appellant/assessee is actively playing the role of a development bank in the State and is
no longer a land mortgage bank but is a development bank. The appellant/assessee may have earlier
been a land mortgage bank but by virtue of a shift in its activities has become a development bank
and is now governed by the State Act, 1984 and thus, it is in the business of banking as it satisfies all
the tests that are required to qualify as a “co-operative bank”. CIT (A) further observed that with the
insertion of Section 80P (4), co-operative banks are placed at par with other commercial banks and
the appellant/assessee who is in the business of banking through its primary co-operative banks is
definitely a co-operative bank within the meaning of Section 80P (4). Consequently, the appeal was
dismissed. 9.3. Being aggrieved by the Order passed by CIT(A), the appellant/assessee filed further
appeal before the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (“ITAT”). The ITAT vide Order dated 23.02.2011
partly allowed the appeal and held that the appellant/assessee is a co-operative bank and is not a

3

Kerala State Co-Operative ... vs The Assessing Officer, Trivandrum on 14 September, 2023

primary agricultural credit society or a primary co-operative agricultural and rural development
bank and is consequently hit by the provision of Section 80P (4), thus, the deduction claimed was
rightly denied. However, the ITAT also clarified to the extent that the appellant/assessee is acting as
a State Land Development Bank which falls within the purview of the National Bank for Agriculture
and Rural Development Act, 1981 (“NABARD Act, 1981”, for short) and is exigible for financial
assistance from NABARD. Therefore, the appellant/assessee’s claim merits acceptance and it would
be entitled to deduction under Section 80P(2)(a)(i) on the income relatable to its lending activities
as such a bank.

9.4. Aggrieved by the Order passed by the ITAT in only partly allowing its appeal, the
appellant/assessee preferred an appeal being ITA No. 103 of 2011 against the ITAT’s Order dated
23.02.2011. The issue raised by the appellant/assessee was with respect to the ITAT’s finding that
the appellant/assessee was neither a primary agricultural credit society nor a primary co-operative
agricultural and rural development bank, hence, not entitled for exemption of its income under
Section 80P(2)(a)(i) of the Act.

9.5. On 26.11.2015, the Kerala High Court dismissed the Assessee’s Appeal, ITA No. 103 of 2011,
holding that the ITAT’s findings do not warrant any interference as the case did not involve any
substantial question of law. Against the Judgment dated 26.11.2015, the appellant/assessee
preferred a Special Leave Petition (C) bearing No. 2737 of 2016. This Court vide Order dated
01.02.2016, issued notice and granted stay of recovery of demand made by the Income Tax
Authorities from the appellant/assessee for the AY 2007-08. Submissions:

10. The submissions of learned senior counsel for the appellant and learned ASG for the respondent
are as under:

10.1. Learned senior advocate, Sri Krishnan Venugopal, at the outset, submitted that
the appellant is aggrieved by the impugned orders declining to extend the benefit of
deduction under Section 80P of the Act. He submitted that sub-section (4) of Section
80P is in the nature of an exception which was added subsequently to Section 80P
and the said sub-section excludes a ‘co-operative bank’ from the benevolent
provision. However, the appellant is not a co-operative bank within the meaning of
the said sub-section. On the other hand, the appellant is a ‘co-operative society’
engaged in providing credit facilities to its members who are not individuals but are
other co-operative societies and the appellant is an apex co-operative society.

10.2. Highlighting the genesis of the appellant, it was submitted that the appellant
was first registered as a co-operative society under the State Act, 1951 and was
recognised as a co-operative central land mortgage bank and when the State Act,
1969 was enacted, it was recognised as a co-operative society under the said
enactment. The State Act, 1951 was repealed by Section 110 of the State Act, 1969.

Section 2(g) of the State Act, 1969 defines a co-operative society with limited liability. That on the
enactment of the State Act, 1984, Section 2(a) thereof defines “agricultural and rural development

4

Kerala State Co-Operative ... vs The Assessing Officer, Trivandrum on 14 September, 2023

bank” to mean the Kerala Co-operative Central Land Mortgage Bank Limited, registered under
Section 10 of the State Act, 1951 which is known as “Kerala State Co-operative Agricultural and
Rural Development Bank Limited”. Therefore, the appellant is not a co-operative bank within the
meaning of Section 80P of the Act.

10.3. Referring to Explanation (a) to sub-section (4) of Section 80P of the Act which states that a
co-operative bank shall have the same meaning assigned to it in Part V of the Banking Regulation
Act, 1949 (hereinafter referred to as “BR Act, 1949”, for the sake of convenience), Part V of the BR
Act, 1949 which applies to co-operative banks was adverted to. That Section 56 in Part V of the said
Act begins with a non- obstante clause and it states that notwithstanding anything contained in any
other law for the time being in force, the provisions of the BR Act, 1949 shall apply to, or in relation
to, co-operative societies as they apply to, or in relation to banking companies subject to the
following modifications, namely, (a) throughout the said Act, unless the context otherwise requires
references to a ‘banking company’ shall be construed as reference to a ‘co-operative bank’. Further, a
co-operative bank is defined to mean a state co-operative bank, a central co-operative bank and a
primary co-operative bank; that these expressions have the meaning respectively assigned to them
in the NABARD Act, 1981. 10.4. It was contended that the appellant bank is not a banking company
within the meaning of Section 5(c) of the BR Act, 1949 which defines a “banking company” to be any
company which transacts the business of banking in India and Section 5(b) defines “banking” to
mean the accepting, for the purpose of lending or investment, of deposits of money from the public,
repayable on demand or otherwise, and withdrawal by cheque, draft, order or otherwise. That the
appellant is a co-operative society and not a co-operative bank. That initially the appellant was
registered as land mortgage bank under the provision of the State Act, 1951. That if an entity is
engaged in banking business then it would be construed as referring to a co-operative bank in which
case, under Section 22 of the BR Act, 1949, it is necessary for a company to hold a licence issued by
the Reserve Bank if it has to carry on banking business in India and such licence is issued subject to
such conditions as the Reserve Bank may think fit to impose. That in the instant case, the appellant
is not a licenced company under the provisions of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (“RBI Act”,
for short) as the appellant does not transact ‘banking business’ and therefore, does not require any
licence under the RBI Act. Reliance was placed on Section 3 of the BR Act, 1949 as it stood earlier
which stated that the said Act would not apply, inter alia, to (a) a primary agricultural credit society;
(b) a co-operative land mortgage bank; and (c) any other co- operative society, except in the manner
and to the extent specified in Part V. It was submitted that the appellant is a co-operative credit
society engaged in providing credit facilities to its members and its members are other co-operative
societies which are in the nature of primary societies. The appellant is not carrying on the business
of banking within the meaning of Section 80P(2)(a)(i) of the Act. That only a co-operative society
which is engaged in the business of banking and is a co-operative bank within the meaning of Part V
of the BR Act, 1949 would come within the scope of the exclusion under sub-section (4) of Section
80P of the Act.

10.5. In this context, our attention was drawn to Section 56(o) of the BR Act, 1949 which states that
under Section 22, no co-operative society shall carry out banking business in India unless it is a
co-operative bank and holds a licence issued in that behalf by the Reserve Bank. That in the instant
case, the appellant does not hold any licence as per Section 22 of the BR Act, 1949 and in fact such a

5

Kerala State Co-Operative ... vs The Assessing Officer, Trivandrum on 14 September, 2023

licence is not required for the appellant to conduct its business as the appellant is not conducting
banking business within the meaning of BR Act, 1949. Therefore, the appellant bank does not come
under the provisions of Chapter V of the BR Act, 1949. It was submitted that the Reserve Bank of
India reports and the RTI replies categorically indicate that the appellant is not included under the
scope of the provisions of the RBI Act.

10.6. In this regard, learned senior counsel, Sri Krishnan Venugopal, took us through various
documents appended to the paper book in order to buttress his submission that appellant is not a
co-operative bank within the meaning of Chapter V of the BR Act, 1949. 10.7. It was next contended
that the judgment of this Court in Mavilayi Service Co-operative Bank Limited vs. Commissioner of
Income Tax, Calicut, (2021) 7 SCC 90 (“Mavilayi Service Co-operative Bank”) squarely applies to the
case of the appellant inasmuch as, in the said judgment, the touchstone, on the basis of which an
entity could be considered to be a co-operative bank or not within the meaning of provision of BR
Act, 1949, has been elucidated. Learned senior counsel urged that impugned orders may be set aside
by applying the ratio of the judgment in Mavilayi Service Co-operative Bank. That such an approach
has been adopted by the Assessing Officer as per the remand report.

10.8. Per contra, learned ASG, N. Venkataraman, appearing for the respondents, at the outset,
vehemently contended that the appellant is “a co-operative bank” and not simply a land mortgage
bank. That Section 80P(2)(a)(i) of the Act applies to a co-operative society engaged in carrying on
business of banking or providing credit facilities to its members. That the appellant herein is
engaged in the business of banking and is a co-operative bank within the meaning of Part V of the
BR Act, 1949 and the argument of the appellant that it is not a co- operative bank, is incorrect.
According to learned ASG, the status of the appellant is in dispute, as, according to the respondent,
the appellant is a co-operative bank while the appellant has contended that it is not doing banking
business and therefore is not a co-operative bank but is a co-operative credit society. Distinguishing
the judgment of this Court in Mavilayi Service Co-operative Bank, it was submitted that the status of
the appellant therein was not in dispute as it was registered as a primary agriculture society together
with one multi-state co- operative society and therefore such a society did not require Reserve Bank
of India licence but the appellant is not a primary agriculture credit society but a co-operative bank
which is excluded from the benefit of deduction in respect of its income under the provisions of the
Act. It was therefore submitted that the judgment of this Court in Mavilayi Service Co-operative
Bank does not apply to the appellant herein. In this regard, learned ASG submitted that any central
or state co- operative bank is a co-operative bank within the meaning of Section 56 of BR Act, 1949
as it is engaged in banking business. That the appellant is a state co-operative bank. Therefore,
sub-section (4) of Section 80P excludes the benefit of deduction in respect of income to such an
entity. It was submitted that impugned orders are just and proper and do not call for any
interference in these appeals which lack merit and therefore the same may be dismissed.

10.9. By way of reply, learned senior counsel for the appellants reiterated that the appellant is not
engaged in banking business at all and it receives funds from National Bank for Agriculture and
Rural Development and in turn lends money to its member societies and in that sense is an apex
bank. Reliance was placed on Section 2(d) of NABARD Act, 1981 to contend that a central
co-operative bank is a principal co-operative society in a district in a state, the primary object of

6

Kerala State Co-Operative ... vs The Assessing Officer, Trivandrum on 14 September, 2023

which is the financing of other co-operative societies in that district. The appellant is definitely not a
central co-operative bank. That the appellant is also not a state co-operative bank whose primary
object is the financing of other co-operative societies within the state as per Section 2(u) of the
NABARD Act, 1981. That the Kerala State Co- operative Bank is an apex bank coming within the
meaning of clause (u) of Section 2 of NABARD Act, 1981 but not the appellant herein. It was
submitted that the appellant is a scheduled bank functioning within the State of Kerala as per the
Second Schedule of the RBI Act read with Section 2(e) and Section 42 of the said Act. Section 2(e)
defines a scheduled bank in the Second Schedule of RBI Act. The appellant is bound by the mandate
of Section 42 in terms of cash reserves to be kept with the bank.

10.10. That on a reading of Section 42(1)(d) it becomes clear that a scheduled bank is distinct from a
state co-operative bank as well as a co-operative bank inasmuch as the aggregate of the liabilities of
a scheduled bank which is not a state co-operative bank shall be reduced by the aggregate of the
liabilities of such co-operative bank and other bank or institutions to a scheduled bank. Thus, a bank
can be a scheduled bank which is not a state co-operative bank or a co-operative bank within the
meaning of sub-section (4) of the Section 80P of the Act. The appellant herein is a scheduled bank
which is not a state co- operative bank or a co-operative bank within the meaning of the BR Act,
1949.

10.11. Reliance was placed on Apex Co-operative Bank of Urban Bank of Maharashtra and Goa Ltd.
vs. Maharashtra State Co- operative Bank Ltd., (2003) 11 SCC 66 (“Apex Co-operative Bank of
Urban Bank of Maharashtra and Goa Ltd.”) with particular reference to paragraphs 11 to 13 and 18
and the case of A.P. Varghese vs. The Kerala State Co-operative Bank Ltd. reported in AIR 2008 Ker
91 (“A.P. Varghese”) wherein the definition of co-operative bank as per section 56(cci) of the BR Act,
1949 was considered with particular reference to paragraphs 7 and 8, to contend that the Kerala
State Co- operative Bank is a state co-operative bank as defined under the provisions of the
NABARD Act, 1981 and the district co-operative banks are central co-operative banks as defined in
that Act. Hence, they are co-operative banks falling within the notification dated 28.01.2003 issued
under the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security
Interest Act, 2002 (for short, “SARFAESI Act, 2002”). It was contended that the Kerala State
Co-operative Bank is a state co-operative bank which is an apex bank. That a state co- operative
bank, central co-operative bank in the co-operative sector is engaged in the business of banking but
the appellant herein is not engaged in the business of banking within the meaning of BR Act, 1949
and is thus entitled to the benefit of deduction even as per sub-section (4) of Section 80P of the Act
as it is not a co-operative bank. 10.12. In this regard, our attention was drawn to the provisions of
State Act, 1969, namely, Section 2(rb) which defines a “state co- operative bank”; Section 2(ia)
which defines a “district co-operative bank”; Section 2(ra) which defines a state co-operative
agricultural and rural development bank and Section 2(oc) which defines a primary co- operative
agricultural and rural development bank. 10.13. It was further submitted that the appellant herein is
Kerala State Co-operative Agricultural and Rural Development Bank which is as defined in Section
2(ra) of the State Act, 1969 and which is an apex bank having only primary co-operative agricultural
and rural development banks as its members as defined under Section 2(oc) of the State Act, 1969
and functioning in accordance with the State Act, 1984. That Section 2(a) of the State Act, 1984,
defines agricultural and rural development bank to mean the Kerala Co-operative Central Land

7

Kerala State Co-Operative ... vs The Assessing Officer, Trivandrum on 14 September, 2023

Mortgage Bank Limited, registered under Section 10 of the State Act, 1951 which is known as
“Kerala State Co-operative Agricultural and Rural Development Bank Limited”. This bank is
different from “Kerala State Co-operative Bank” which is a state co-operative bank defined under
the NABARD Act, 1981. Therefore, the benefit of Section 80P of the Act was sought by the appellant.

Points for Consideration:

11. Having heard learned senior counsel for the petitioner and learned ASG for the respondent, the
following points would arise for our consideration:

i) Whether the appellant is a “co-operative bank” within the meaning of sub-section
(4) of Section 80P of the Act?

ii) Whether the ratio of the judgment in Mavilayi Service Co-

operative Bank and the tests laid down therein apply to the case of the appellant herein?

iii) What order?

The aforesaid points are inter-connected and shall be considered together.

Legal Framework:

12. At the outset, it would be necessary to garner together the several relevant provisions applicable
in the present case.

i) The Income Tax Act, 1961 (‘the Act’, for short):

Section 80P of the Act reads as under:

“80P. Deduction in respect of income of co-operative societies.-

(1) Where, in the case of an assessee being a co-operative society, the gross total
income includes any income referred to in sub-section (2), there shall be deducted, in
accordance with and subject to the provisions of this section, the sums specified in
sub-section (2), in computing the total income of the assessee.

(2) The sums referred to in sub-section (1) shall be the following, namely :—

(a) in the case of a co-operative society engaged in—

(i) carrying on the business of banking or providing credit facilities to its members, or

(ii) a cottage industry, or

8

Kerala State Co-Operative ... vs The Assessing Officer, Trivandrum on 14 September, 2023

(iii) the marketing of the agricultural produce of its members, or

(iv) the purchase of agricultural implements, seeds, livestock or other articles
intended for agriculture for the purpose of supplying them to its members, or

(v) the processing, without the aid of power, of the agricultural produce of its
members, or

(vi) the collective disposal of the labour of its members, or

(vii) fishing or allied activities, that is to say, the catching, curing, processing,
preserving, storing or marketing of fish or the purchase of materials and equipment
In connection therewith for the purpose of supplying them to its members, the whole
of the amount of profits and gains of business attributable to any one or more of such
activities ;

Provided that in the case of a co-operative society falling under sub-clause (vi), or sub-clause (vii),
the rules and bye-laws of the society restrict the voting rights to the following classes of its members,
namely:-

(1) the individuals who contribute their labour or, as the case may be, carry on the
fishing or allied activities;

(2) the co-operative credit societies which provide financial assistance to the society;

(3) the State Government’

(b) in the case of co-operative society, being a primary society engaged in supplying
milk, oilseeds, fruits or vegetables raised or grown by its members to –

(i) a federal co-operative society, being a society engaged in the business of supplying
of milk, oilseeds, fruits or vegetables, as the case may be; or

(ii) the Government or a local authority; or

(iii) a Government company as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1
of 1956), or a corporation established by or under a Central, State or Provincial Act
(being a company or corporation engaged in supplying milk, oilseeds, fruits or
vegetables, as the case may be, to the public), the whole of the amount of profits and
gains of such business;

(c) in the case of a co-operative society engaged in activities other than those specified in clause (a)
or clause(b) (either independently of, or in addition to, all or any of the activities so specified), so
much of its profits and gains attributable to such activities as does not exceed,-

9

Kerala State Co-Operative ... vs The Assessing Officer, Trivandrum on 14 September, 2023

(i)   where such co-operative      society is a
consumers’   co-operative    society,  one
hundred thousand rupees.

(ii) in any other case, fifty thousand rupees.

Explanation. – In this clause, “consumers’ co-

operative society” means a society for the benefit of the consumers;

(d) in respect of any income by way of interest or dividends derived by the co-operative society from
its investments with any other co-operative society, the whole of such income;

(e) in respect of any income derived by the co-

operative society from the letting of go downs or warehouses for storage, processing or facilitating
the marketing of commodities, the whole of such income;

(f) in the case of a co-operative society, not being a housing society or an urban consumers' society,
or a society carrying on transport business or a society engaged in the performance of any
manufacturing operations with the aid of power, where the gross total income does not exceed
twenty thousand rupees, the amount of any income by way of interest on securities or any income
from house property chargeable under section 22.

Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, an “urban consumers' co-operative society” means a
society for the benefit of the consumers within the limits of a municipal corporation, municipality,
municipal committee, notified area committee, town area, or cantonment.

(3) In a case where the assessee is entitled also to the deduction under section 80HH or section
80HHA or section 80HHB or section 80HHC, or section 80HHD or section 80- 1 or section 80-IA
or section 80J, or section 80JJ, the deduction under sub-

section (1) of this section, in relation to the sums specified in clause (a) or clause (b) or clause (c) of
sub- section (2), shall be allowed with reference to the income, if any, as referred to in those clauses
included in the gross total income as reduced by the deductions under section 80HH, section
80HHA, section 80HHB, section 80HHC, section 80HHD, section 80- 1, section 80-IA, section 80J
and 80JJ.

[(4) The provisions of this section shall not apply in relation to any co-operative bank other than a
primary agricultural credit society or a primary co-operative agricultural and rural development
bank.

Explanation.- For the purposes of this sub-section,-

10

Kerala State Co-Operative ... vs The Assessing Officer, Trivandrum on 14 September, 2023

(a) “co-operative bank” and “primary agricultural credit society” shall have the meanings
respectively assigned to them in Part V of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949);

(b) “primary co-operative agricultural and rural development bank” means a society having its area
of operation confined to a taluk and the principal object of which is to provide for long-term credit
for agricultural and rural development activities.

ii) The Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (BR ACT, 1949):

The relevant provisions of the BR Act, 1949 are extracted as under.

Section 3 of the said Act as it stood at the relevant point of time reads as follows:

3. Act to apply to certain co-operative societies in certain cases.—Nothing in this Act
shall apply to—

(a) a primary agricultural credit society; or

(b) a co-operative land mortgage bank; and

(c) any other co-operative society, except in the manner and to the extent specified in
Part V. X X X

5. Interpretation.— In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or
context, X X X

(b) “banking” means the accepting, for the purpose of lending or investment, of
deposits of money from the public, repayable on demand or otherwise, and
withdrawal by cheque, draft, order or otherwise;

(c) “banking company” means any company which transacts the business of banking in India.

Explanation.—Any company which is engaged in the manufacture of goods or carries on any trade
and which accepts deposits of money from the public merely for the purpose of financing its
business as such manufacturer or trader shall not be deemed to transact the business of banking
within the meaning of this clause;

X X X

22. Licensing of banking companies.—(1) Save as hereinafter provided, no company shall carry on
banking business in India unless it holds a licence issued in that behalf by the Reserve Bank and any
such licence may be issued subject to such conditions as the Reserve Bank may think fit to impose.

11

Kerala State Co-Operative ... vs The Assessing Officer, Trivandrum on 14 September, 2023

(2) Every banking company in existence on the commencement of this Act, before the expiry of six
months from such commencement, and every other company before commencing banking business
in India, shall apply in writing to the Reserve Bank for a licence under this section:

Provided that in the case of a banking company in existence on the commencement of
this Act, nothing in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to prohibit the company from
carrying on banking business until it is granted a licence in pursuance of this section
or is by notice in writing informed by the Reserve Bank that a licence cannot be
granted to it:

Provided further that the Reserve Bank shall not give a notice as aforesaid to a
banking company in existence on the commencement of this Act before the expiry of
the three years referred to in sub-section (1) of section 11 or of such further period as
the Reserve Bank may under that sub-section think fit to allow.

(3) Before granting any licence under this section, the Reserve Bank may require to
be satisfied by an inspection of the books of the company or otherwise that the
following conditions are fulfilled, namely:—

(a) that the company is or will be in a position to pay its present or future depositors
in full as their claims accrue;

(b) that the affairs of the company are not being, or are not likely to be, conducted in
a manner deterimental to the interests of its present or future depositors;

(c) that the general character of the proposed management of the company will not
be prejudicial to the public interest or the interest of its depositors;

(d) that the company has adequate capital structure and earning prospects;

(e) that the public interest will be served by the grant of a licence to the company to
carry on banking business in India;

(f) that having regard to the banking facilities available in the proposed principal area
of operations of the company, the potential scope for expansion of banks already in
existence in the area and other relevant factors the grant of the licence would not be
prejudicial to the operation and consolidation of the banking system consistent with
monetary stability and economic growth;

(g) any other condition, the fulfilment of which would, in the opinion of the Reserve
Bank, be necessary to ensure that the carrying on of banking business in India by the
company will not be prejudicial to the public interest or the interests of the
depositors.

12

Kerala State Co-Operative ... vs The Assessing Officer, Trivandrum on 14 September, 2023

(3A) Before granting any licence under this section to a company incorporated
outside India, the Reserve Bank may require to be satisfied by an inspection of the
books of the company or otherwise that the conditions specified in sub-section (3) are
fulfilled and that the carrying on of banking business by such company in India will
be in the public interest and that the Government or law of the country in which it is
incorporated does not discriminate in any way against banking companies registered
in India and that the company complies with all the provisions of this Act applicable
to banking companies incorporated outside India.

(4) The Reserve Bank may cancel a licence granted to a banking company under this
section —

(i) if the company ceases to carry on banking business in India; or

(ii) if the company at any time fails to comply with any of the conditions imposed
upon it under sub-section (1); or

(iii) if at any time, any of the conditions referred to in sub-

section (3) and sub-section (3A) is not fulfilled:

Provided that before cancelling a licence under clause (ii) or clause (iii) of this
sub-section on the ground that the banking company has failed to comply with or has
failed to fulfil any of the conditions referred to therein, the Reserve Bank, unless it is
of opinion that the delay will be prejudicial to the interests of the company’s
depositors or the public, shall grant to the company on such terms as it may specify,
an opportunity of taking the necessary steps for complying with or fulfilling such
condition.

(5) Any banking company aggrieved by the decision of the Reserve Bank cancelling a
licence under this section may, within thirty days from the date on which such
decision is communicated to it, appeal to the Central Government.

(6) The decision of the Central Government where an appeal has been preferred to it
under sub-section (5) or of the Reserve Bank where no such appeal has been
preferred shall be final.

X X X

56. Act to apply to co-operative societies subject to modifications.—The provisions of
this Act, as in force for the time being, shall apply to, or in relation to, co-operative
societies as they apply to, or in relation to, banking companies subject to the
following modifications, namely:—

13

Kerala State Co-Operative ... vs The Assessing Officer, Trivandrum on 14 September, 2023

(a) throughout this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(i) references to a “banking company” or “the company” or “such company” shall be
construed as references to a co-operative bank,

(ii) references to “commencement of this Act” shall be construed as references to
commencement of the Banking Laws (Application to Co-operative Societies) Act,
1965 (23 of 1965);

(b) in section 2, the words and figures “the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), and” shall be omitted;

(c) in section 5—

(i) after clause (cc), the following clauses shall be inserted namely:— (cci) “co-operative bank”
means a state co-operative bank, a central co-operative bank and a primary co-operative bank;

(ccii) “co-operative credit society” means a co-

operative society, the primary object of which is to provide financial accommodation to its members
and includes a co-operative land mortgage bank;

(cciia) “co-operative society” means a society registered or deemed to have been registered under
any Central Act for the time being in force relating to the multi-State co-operative societies, or any
other Central or State law relating to co-

operative societies for the time being in force; (cciii) “director”, in relation to a co-operative society,
includes a member of any committee or body for the time being vested with the management of the
affairs of that society;

(cciiia) “multi-State co-operative bank” means a multi-

State co-operative society which is a primary co- operative bank;

(cciiib) “multi-State co-operative society” means a multi-State co-operative society registered as
such under any Central Act for the time being in force relating to the multi-State co-operative
societies but does not include a national co-

operative society and a federal co-operative;

(cciv) “primary agricultural credit society” means a co-

operative society,— (1) the primary object or principal business of which is to provide financial
accommodation to its members for agricultural purposes or for purposes connected with
agricultural activities (including the marketing of crops); and (2) the bye-laws of which do not

14

Kerala State Co-Operative ... vs The Assessing Officer, Trivandrum on 14 September, 2023

permit admission of any other co-operative society as a member:

Provided that this sub-clause shall not apply to the admission of a co-operative bank
as a member by reason of such co-operative bank subscribing to the share capital of
such co-operative society out of funds provided by the State Government for the
purpose;

(ccv) “primary co-operative bank” means a co-

operative society, other than a primary agricultural credit society,— (1) the primary object or
principal business of which is the transaction of banking business;

(2) the paid-up share capital and reserves of which are not less than one lakh of rupees;

and (3) the bye-laws of which do not permit admission of any other co-operative society as a
member:

Provided that this sub-clause shall not apply to the admission of a co-operative bank
as a member by reason of such co-operative bank subscribing to the share capital of
such co-operative society out of funds provided by the State Government for the
purpose;

(ccvi)“primary credit society” means a co-operative society, other than a primary
agricultural credit society,— (1) the primary object or principal business of which is
the transaction of banking business;

(2) the paid-up share capital and reserves of which are less than one lakh of rupees;
and (3) the bye-laws of which do not permit admission of any other co-operative
society as a member:

Provided that this sub-clause shall not apply to the admission of a co-operative bank
as a member by reason of such co-operative bank subscribing to the share capital of
such co-operative society out of funds provided by the State Government for the
purpose.

Explanation.—If any dispute arises as to the primary object or principal business of any co-operative
society referred to in clauses (cciv), (ccv) and (ccvi), a determination thereof by the Reserve Bank
shall be final;

(ccvii) “central co-operative bank”, “primary rural credit society” and “state co-operative bank” shall
have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural
Development Act, 1981 (61 of 1981);” X X X

(o) in section 22,—

15

Kerala State Co-Operative ... vs The Assessing Officer, Trivandrum on 14 September, 2023

(i) for sub-sections (1) and (2) the following sub-

sections shall be substituted, namely:— “(1) Save as hereinafter provided, no co-operative society
shall carry on banking business in India unless—

(a) [***]

(b) it is a co-operative bank and holds a licence issued in that behalf by the Reserve Bank, subject to
such conditions, if any, as the Reserve Bank may deem fit to impose:

Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to a co-operative society, not
being a primary credit society or a co-operative bank carrying on banking business at
the commencement of the Banking Laws (Application to Co-operative Societies) Act,
1965 (23 of 1965), for a period of one year from such commencement.

Provided further that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to a primary credit
society carrying on banking business on or before the commencement of the Banking
Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012, for a period of one year or for such further period not
exceeding three years, as the Reserve Bank may, after recording the reasons in
writing for so doing, extend.

(2) Every co-operative society carrying on business as a co-operative bank at the
commencement of the Banking Laws (Application to Co-operative Societies) Act,
1965 (23 of 1965) shall before the expiry of three months from the commencement,
every co-operative bank which comes into existence as a result of the division of any
other co-operative society carrying on business as a co-operative bank, or the
amalgamation of two or more co-operative societies carrying on banking business
shall, before the expiry of three months from its so coming into existence, every
primary credit society which had become a primary co-operative bank on or before
the commencement of the Banking Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012, shall before the
expiry of three months from the date on which it had become a primary co-operative
bank and every co-operative shall before commencing banking business in India,
apply in writing to the Reserve Bank for a licence under this section:

Provided that nothing in clause (b) of sub-section (1) shall be deemed to prohibit—

(i) a co-operative society carrying on business as a co-operative bank at the
commencement of the Banking Law (Application to Co-operative Societies) Act, 1965
(23 of 1965); or

(ii) a co-operative bank which has come into existence as a result of the division of
any other co-operative society carrying on business as a co-operative bank, or the
amalgamation of two or more co-operative societies carrying on banking business at
the commencement of the Banking Laws (Application to Co-operative Societies) Act,

16

Kerala State Co-Operative ... vs The Assessing Officer, Trivandrum on 14 September, 2023

1965 (23 of 1965) or at any time thereafter;

or

(iii) [***] from carrying on banking business until it is granted a licence in pursuance of this section
or is, by a notice in writing notified by the Reserve Bank that the licence cannot be granted to it.];

(ii) sub-section (3A) shall be omitted;

(iii) in sub-section (4) in clause (iii) the words, brackets, figures and letter “and sub-section (3A)”
shall be omitted;

iii) National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development Act, 1981 (‘NABARD Act, 1981’, for short):

The relevant provisions of NABARD Act, 1981 are extracted as under for immediate
reference:

2. Definitions.- In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, -

X X X

(d) “central co-operative bank” means the principal co-

operative society in a district in a State, the primary object of which is the financing of other
co-operative societies in that district:

Provided that in addition to such principal society in a district, or where there is no
such principal society in a district, the State Government may declare any one or
more cooperative societies carrying on the business of financing other co-operative
societies in that district to be also or to be a central co-operative bank or central
co-operative banks within the meaning of this definition;

X X X (u) “State co-operative bank” means the principal co-

operative society in a State, the primary object of which is the financing of other co-operative
societies in the State:

Provided that in addition to such principal society in a State, or where there is no
such principal society in a State, the State Government may declare any one or more
cooperative societies carrying on business in that State to be also or to be a State
cooperative bank or State co-operative banks within the meaning of this definition;

(v) “State land development bank” means the co-operative society which is the
principal land development bank (by whatever name called) in a State and which has

17

Kerala State Co-Operative ... vs The Assessing Officer, Trivandrum on 14 September, 2023

as its primary object the providing of long-term finance for agricultural development:

Provided that, in addition to such principal land development bank in a State, or
where there is no such bank in a State, the State Government may declare any
cooperative society carrying on business in that State and authorised by the bye-laws
of such cooperative society to provide long-term finance for agricultural development
to be also or to be a State land development bank within the meaning of this
definition;

(w) words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Reserve
Bank of India Act, 1934, (2 of 1934), shall have the meanings respectively assigned to
them in that Act;

(x) words and expressions used herein and not defined either in this Act or in the
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934), but defined in the Banking Regulation
Act, 1949 (10 of 1949), shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949.”

iv) The Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (RBI Act):

The relevant provisions of the RBI Act are extracted as under for immediate
reference:

“2.Definitions.- In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or
context,-

X X X

(e) “scheduled bank” means a bank included in the Second Schedule;”

v) The Kerala Co-Operative Societies Act, 1969 (State Act, 1969):

The relevant provisions of the State Act, 1969 are extracted as under for immediate
reference:

“2. Definitions.- In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires— X X X

(g) “co-operative society with limited liability” means a society in which the liability
of its members for the debts of the society in the event of its being wound up is
limited by its bye-laws-

(i) to the amount, if any, unpaid on the shares respectively held by them; or

18

Kerala State Co-Operative ... vs The Assessing Officer, Trivandrum on 14 September, 2023

(ii) to such amount as they may, respectively, undertake to contribute to the assets of
the society;

X X X (ia) District Co-operative Bank” means a Central Society having jurisdiction
over one revenue district and having as its members Primary Agricultural Credit
Societies, Urban Co-operative Banks and the principal object of which is to raise
funds to be lent to its members, including nominal or associate members, which
existed under this Act, immediately before the commencement of the Kerala
Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2019 and which has ceased to exist after
the commencement of the said Amendment Act.” X X X (oc) “Primary Co-operative
Agricultural and Rural Development Bank” means a society having its area of
operation confined to a taluk and the principal object of which is to provide for long
term credit for agricultural and rural development activities:

Provided that no Primary Co-operative Agricultural and Rural Development Bank
shall be registered without the bifurcation of assets and liabilities of the existing
societies having the area of operation in more than one taluk and the societies shall
restrict their operation in the area of the respective society on such bifurcation;

X X X (ra) “State Co-operative Agricultural and Rural Development Bank” means an
apex society having only Primary Co- operative Agricultural and Rural Development
Banks as its members and functioning in accordance with the provisions contained in
the Kerala State Co-operative Agricultural and Rural Development Banks Act, 1984
(20 of 1984)” (rb) a State Co-operative Bank means an apex society having only
district co-operative banks as its members.

X X X “110. Repeal and savings.- The Madras Co-operative Societies Act, 1932 (VI of 1932), as in
force in the Malabar district referred to in sub-section (2) of section 5 of the States Re- organisation
Act, 1956 (Central Act 37 of 1956) and the Travancore-Cochin Co-operative Societies Act, 1951 (X of
1952), are hereby repealed.

(2)Notwithstanding the repeal of the Madras Co-operative Societies Act, 1932 and the
Travancore-Cochin Co- operative Societies Act, 1951 and without prejudice to the provisions of
sections 4 and 23 of the Interpretation and General Clauses Act, 1125 (VII of 1125),—

(i) all appointments, rules and orders made, notifications and notices issued, and suits and other
proceedings instituted ,under any of the Acts hereby repealed shall, so far as may be, be deemed to
have been respectively made, issued and instituted under this Act;

(ii) any society existing in the State on the date of the commencement of this Act which has been
registered or deemed to be registered under any of the aforesaid repealed Acts shall be deemed to be
registered under this Act, and the bye-laws of such society shall, so far as they are not inconsistent
with the provisions of this Act, continue in force until altered or rescinded.”

19

Kerala State Co-Operative ... vs The Assessing Officer, Trivandrum on 14 September, 2023

vi) The Kerala State Co-Operative Agricultural Development Banks Act, 1984 (State Act, 1984):

The relevant provisions of the State Act, 1984 are extracted as under for immediate
reference:

“(2) Definitions.- In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-

(a) “Agricultural and Rural Development Bank” means the Kerala Co-operative
Central Land Mortgage Bank Limited, registered under section 10 of the
Travancore-Cochin Co-operative Societies Act, 1951 (X of 1952), which shall hereafter
be known as the “Kerala State Co-operative Agricultural and Rural Development
Bank Limited”;

X X X (ka) “Kerala State Co-operative Bank” means an apex society having Primary
Agricultural Credit Societies and Urban Co-operative Banks as its members including
nominal or associate members of the District Co-operative Banks who shall continue
as nominal or associate members of the Kerala State Co-operative Bank;

X X X (iA) “Rural Development” means any activity intended to promote the development in rural
area and intends the following developmental activities- (1) Development of handicrafts and other
crafts; (2) Small Industries;

(3) Cottage and Village industries;

(4) Industries in tiny and decentralized section; (5) Rural housing needs of the rural-population.
Judicial Precedent:

13. The relevant judgments of this Court as well as the Kerala High Court, having a
bearing on the issues raised in these appeals could be adverted to at this stage:

a) In Thalappalam Service Coop. Bank Ltd. vs. State of Kerala, (2013) 16 SCC 82, this
Court has referred to Entry 32 of List II of Seventh schedule of the Constitution in
paragraph 26 which reads as under:

26. The cooperative society is a State subject under Schedule VII List II Entry 32 to
the Constitution of India. Most of the States in India enacted their own Cooperative
Societies Act with a view to provide for the orderly development of the cooperative
sector in the State to achieve the objects of equity, social justice and economic
development, as envisaged in the directive principles of State policy, enunciated in
the Constitution of India. For cooperative societies working in more than one State,
the Multi-State Cooperative Societies Act, 1984 was enacted by Parliament under
Schedule VII List I Entry 44 of the Constitution. The cooperative society is essentially
an association of persons who have come together for a common purpose of
economic development or for mutual help.

20

Kerala State Co-Operative ... vs The Assessing Officer, Trivandrum on 14 September, 2023

(Emphasis by us) Entry 32 of List II of Seventh Schedule of the Constitution reads as under:

“32. Incorporation, regulation and winding up of corporations, other than those
specified in List I, and universities; unincorporated trading, literary, scientific,
religious and other societies and associations; co-operative societies.”

b) This Court in Union of India vs. Rajendra N. Shah, 2021 SCC OnLine SC 474 while
considering the vires of the constitution (Ninety Seventh Amendment) Act, 2011 has
reiterated the aforesaid position of law.

c) In Apex Co-operative Bank of Urban Bank of Maharashtra and Goa Ltd., this Court
on considering Section 56 of the BR Act, 1949 along with Section 22 thereof, observed
that the Reserve Bank of India has the right to issue licences to companies to carry
out banking business and no company can carry on a banking business unless it
holds a licence issued by the Reserve Bank of India. After the amendment to Section
22 of the said Act, certain types of co-operative societies, as were brought within the
purview of the BR Act, 1949, could be issued a licence by the Reserve Bank of India.
Under Section 22, the term “co-operative society” would include all types of
co-operative societies. This Court observed that in other words, no co-operative
society can carry on banking business unless it falls within the permitted categories
set out in Section

22. The term “co-operative bank” has been defined under Section 5(cci) as a state
co-operative bank, a central co-operative bank and a primary co-operative bank.
Thus, the term “co-operative bank” does not include all co-operative societies. It only
includes the abovementioned three types of societies which function as banks. By
virtue of Section 5(ccvii), the term state co-operative bank is to be understood as
defined in NABARD Act, 1981. Thus, unless a co-operative society is a state co-

operative bank or a central co-operative bank or a primary co-operative bank as defined under
NABARD Act, 1981, no licence can be issued by Reserve Bank of India.

It was further explained by this Court that under Section 22(1), a primary credit society can carry on
banking business. However, if a co- operative society is not a primary credit society, then, to carry
on banking business, it must be a co-operative bank and hold a licence issued by Reserve Bank of
India. Therefore, a co-operative society other than a primary credit society, has to apply to Reserve
Bank of India for licence before it can commence banking business. However, this does not mean
that Reserve Bank of India can give to any or all co-operative societies, a banking licence. Reserve
Bank of India can give a licence as provided in Section 22(1) only to a co-operative bank, which is
defined under Section 56 of the said Act.

It was further observed by this Court that when a term is specifically defined in a statute, then, for
purposes of that statute, that term cannot bear a meaning assigned to it in another statute. One
cannot ignore the specific definition given in the BR Act, 1949 and apply some other definition set

21

Kerala State Co-Operative ... vs The Assessing Officer, Trivandrum on 14 September, 2023

out in some other statute. Therefore, a co-operative bank must have the meaning assigned to it in
Section 5(cci) of BR Act, 1949. Reserve Bank of India cannot go by any other meaning given to the
term “co-operative bank” for purposes of licensing under BR Act, 1949. Reserve Bank of India has to
go by the meaning given to this term in the said Act only. Therefore, it was concluded that the
Reserve Bank of India, by virtue of its power under Section 22 cannot grant a licence to any
co-operative society unless it is a state co-operative bank or a central co-operative bank or a primary
co-operative bank. For that it would be necessary that a declaration under the NABARD Act, 1981 be
first obtained.

While considering the definition of co-operative society and state co- operative bank under Section
2(f) and Section 2(u) respectively of the NABARD Act, 1981, it was observed that under the
NABARD Act, 1981, co-operative society is a society which is registered or deemed to be registered
under the Co-operative Societies Act, 1912 or any other law relating to co-operative societies for the
time being in force in any State. In the context of the appellant therein, it was observed that the said
entity had not registered under the Co-operative Societies Act, 1912. The question thus was,
whether, the appellant therein was a society registered under any other law relating to co-operative
societies for the time being in force in any State which would include all laws relating to co-operative
societies which are in force in any State. While interpreting Section 2(f) of the NABARD Act, 1981
which defines co-operative society, this Court held that it is only co-operative societies registered
under local or State laws relating to co-operative societies which would be covered under the said
definition. If it is a state co-operative bank, then there would be a declaration only by the State
Government. If a declaration is by the State Government, it must be in respect of a society which is
registered in that State and which can be regulated by the Registrar of Co-operative Societies of that
State. It was concluded that the words “in any State” in Section 2(f) of NABARD Act, 1981 would
mean that the co-operative society must be registered under the law in force in any State in which it
wants to operate. It was also observed that use of words “Co-operative Societies Act, 1912” in the
NABARD Act, 1981 also indicates that the definition is restricted to societies registered under the
law relating to co-operative societies in the State in which they want to operate. Thus, the term “any
other law relating to co-operative societies for the time being in force in any State” necessarily
means only a State law. Further, under the NABARD Act, 1981, a state co-operative bank has to be
the principal co-operative society in the State, the primary object of which must be financing other
co-operative societies in that State. The proviso to Section 2(u) of NABARD Act, 1981 enables the
State to declare, in addition to an existing principal society in the State or where there is no principal
society in the State, any one or more co-operative banks as State co-operative banks. However, this
does not mean that the State Governments can, at their whims and fancies, declare any co-operative
society to be a “State co-operative bank”. Before such a declaration can be made, the State
Government must necessarily be satisfied- (a) that it is a principal co-operative society in the State;
(b) that it is carrying on business in the State; and (c) that the business is of financing other
co-operative societies in that State. Further, elucidating on the expression “carrying on business in
the State” it was held that the same means carrying on banking business only. Further, reading of
the provisions would make it clear that what is necessary is that the co-operative society must be
carrying on the business of financing other co-operative societies. The proviso has to be read in light
of the main provision. If read in light of the main provision, it is clear that even though banking
business, as understood in the strict sense, may not be carried on, yet the business of financing other

22

Kerala State Co-Operative ... vs The Assessing Officer, Trivandrum on 14 September, 2023

co- operative societies in the State must be carried on. It was ultimately observed that the Reserve
Bank of India could not have granted the licence to the appellants in the said case unless they were
first declared to be a state co-operative bank under the NABARD Act, 1981. Since, such a declaration
was struck down, the Reserve Bank of India could not have issued licence to carry on banking
business. Therefore, Reserve Bank of India would have to cancel the licence granted by it to the
appellant therein. Hence, a direction was issued to the Reserve Bank of India to forthwith revoke the
banking licence granted to the appellants therein.

d) In A.P. Varghese, while considering Section 56 of the BR Act, 1949 in the context of co-operative
bank which has been defined to mean a state co-operative bank, a central co-operative bank and a
primary co- operative bank which have been assigned the definitions under NABARD Act, 1981 and
while considering the definitions of clause (u) and (d) in Section 2 of NABARD Act, 1981, it was
observed, inter alia, that a state co-operative bank is one defined in Section 2(rb) of the State Act,
1969 to mean an apex society having only district co-operative banks as its members. District
co-operative bank as defined in clause (ia) of Section 2 of the said Act, is a central society, the
principal object of which is to raise funds to be lent to its members, with jurisdiction over one
revenue district and having as its members any type of primary societies and federal and central
societies having headquarters in such district. Therefore, Kerala State Co-operative Bank is a “state
co-operative bank” as defined in the NABARD Act, 1981 and the district co-operative banks are
central co-operative banks as defined in that Act. Hence, they are “co-operative banks” as defined in
Section 5 (cci) of BR Act, 1949, falling within the BR Act, 1949.

It was further observed that co-operative banks are further divided into apex banks and other banks.
The Kerala State Co-operative Bank is an apex bank and the district co-operative banks are other
banks. The primary object or business of the state co-operative bank, the district co-operative banks
and the urban banks in the co-operative sector is the transaction of banking business.

Further, it was observed that the provisions of the SARFAESI Act and particularly Section 13 thereof
are also applicable to the institutions, namely, the Kerala State Co-operative Bank Ltd., the district
co-operative banks and the urban co-operative banks.

e) In Citizen Co-operative Society Ltd. vs. Commissioner of Income Tax, (2017) 9 SCC 364 (“Citizen
Co-operative Society Ltd.”), appellant therein was a co-operative society which was denied benefit of
Section 80P on the ground that it is a co-operative society of the nature covered by sub-section (4) of
Section 80P of the Act and, therefore, disentitled to get the benefit. The question, therefore, was
whether the appellant therein was barred from getting deduction in view of sub-section (4) of
Section 80P of the Act. The assessee therein was established in the year 1997, initially, as a mutually
aided co-operative credit society registered under Section 5 of the Andhra Pradesh Mutually Aided
Co-operative Societies Act, 1995. As operations of the assessee over the years increased manifold
and as the society spread its activities over the States of the erstwhile Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra
and Karnataka, the assessee was registered under the Multi-State Co-operative Societies Act, 2002.
Assessing officer held that the deduction in respect of income of co-operative societies under Section
80P of the Act was not admissible to the appellant therein as the said appellant was carrying on
banking business for the public at large and for all practical purposes, it was acting like a

23

Kerala State Co-Operative ... vs The Assessing Officer, Trivandrum on 14 September, 2023

co-operative bank governed by the BR Act, 1949 and its operation was not only confined to its
members but outsiders as well. The appellant therein being aggrieved by the dismissal of its appeal
by the High Court which had affirmed the order of the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, had
approached this Court.

On considering the rival submissions, this Court observed that sub-clause (1) of clause (a) of
sub-section (2) of Section 80P recognises two kinds of co-operative societies, namely, (i) those
carrying on the business of banking and; (ii) those providing credit facilities to its members. In this
regard, reliance was placed on Kerala State Coop. Mktg. Federation Ltd. vs. CIT, (1998) 5 SCC 48.
Also, reference was made to CIT vs. Punjab State Coop. Bank Ltd., (2008) 300 ITR 24 which is a
judgment of the Punjab and Haryana High Court and it was observed that Section 80P of the Act is a
benevolent provision which is enacted by Parliament in order to encourage and promote growth of
co- operative sector in the economic life of the country. Therefore, such a provision has to be read
liberally, reasonably and in favour of the assessee with a view to effectuate the object of the
Legislature and not to defeat it. Therefore, all those co-operative societies which fall within the
purview of the Section 80P of the Act are entitled to deduction in respect of any income referred to
in sub-section (2) thereof. Clause (a) of sub-section (2) gives exemption of whole of the amount of
profits and gains of business attributable to any one or more of such activities which are mentioned
in sub-section (2). Sub-section (4) of Section 80P inserted by the Finance Act, 2006 is in the nature
of a proviso and such a deduction under the said Section shall not be admissible to a co- operative
bank. Thus, co-operative banks are now specifically excluded from the ambit of Section 80P of the
Act.

The appellant therein was not a co-operative bank and it did not require a licence of the Reserve
Bank of India to conduct its business. Therefore, it would not come within the mischief of
sub-section (4) of Section 80P of the Act. However, the appellant therein was held to be not entitled
to the benefit under Section 80P of the Act as it was a co- operative society meant only for its
members and providing credit facilities to its member only. There were resident members or
ordinary members but there were also another category of members called nominal members who
were making deposits with the appellant therein for the purpose of obtaining loans, etc. and, they
were not members in real sense. Most of the business of the appellant therein was with this second
category of persons i.e. members of the general public who had been giving deposits which were
kept in fixed deposits with a motive to earn maximum returns. Therefore, this Court held that the
depositors and borrowers being distinct, doctrine of mutuality also did not apply to the activities of
the appellant therein.

f) In Mavilayi Service Co-operative Bank, the appeals before this Court were filed by the co-operative
societies which had been registered as “primary agricultural credit societies”, together with one
“multi-state co-operative society” raising the question as to, whether, deductions could be claimed
under Section 80P(2)(a)(i) of the Act and in particular, whether the assessees are entitled to such
deductions after the introduction of Section 80P(4) of the Act by Section 19 of the Finance Act, 2006
with effect from 01.04.2007. It was noted that the appellants therein were providing credit facilities
to their members for agricultural and allied purposes and had been classified as primary agricultural
credit societies by the Registrar of Co-operative Societies under State Act, 1969, had claimed a

24

Kerala State Co-Operative ... vs The Assessing Officer, Trivandrum on 14 September, 2023

deduction under Section 80P(2)(a)(i) of the Act which had been granted up to assessment year
2007-2008. However, with the introduction of Section 80P(4) of the Act, the Assessing Officer
denied their claims for deduction, relying upon the said provision. The Full Bench of the Kerala
High Court ultimately held that if the assessee-societies ceased to be specific class of society for
which deduction is provided, by reason of sub-section (4) of Section 80P of the Act the deduction
could not be allowed. The Full Bench of the Kerala High Court accordingly answered the question.
Being aggrieved, the assessees approached this Court. It was argued before this Court by the
assessees that co-operative societies which are registered under the said Act are entitled to
deductions under Section 80P. That the insertion of sub-section (4) to Section 80P of the Act had
not led to any change insofar as the assessees therein were concerned. That the moment a co-
operative society is registered under the said Act, whatever be its classification, so long as it provides
credit facilities to its members, it is entitled to a deduction contained in Section 80P(2)(a)(i) of the
Act. A distinction was said to be drawn between eligibility for deduction, and whether the whole of
the amounts of profits and gains of business attributable to any one or more such activities under
the sub-section could be given.

On the other hand, in the said case, it was argued on behalf of the revenue that a society undeserving
of any deduction cannot get a deduction contrary to what has been sought to be achieved by Section
80P(4) of the Act. That the judgment of this Court in Citizen Co- operative Society Ltd. was correctly
read by the Full Bench of the Kerala High Court which is to the effect that the Assessing Officer must
assess the real facts of a case in order to conclude as to whether activities of a primary agricultural
credit society were, in fact, being carried out in the assessment year in question for which such an
entity must adduce facts to show that it is in fact carrying on its business as a primary agricultural
credit society in the assessment year in question. If it was unable to discharge such burden then
such a society cannot avail of any deduction under Section 80P of the Act. This Court considered the
definition of co-operative society under clause (19) of Section 2 of the Act in the context of Section
80P of the Act, specially in light of sub-section (4) thereof as well as Sections 3 and 56 of the BR Act,
1949 and the provisions of State Act, 1969 as well as the bye-laws of some of the societies and
observed in paragraph 18 as under:

“18. It is important to note that though the main object of the primary agricultural
society in question is to provide financial assistance in the form of loans to its
members for agricultural and related purposes, yet, some of the objects go well
beyond, and include performing of banking operations “as per rules prevailing from
time to time”, opening of medical stores, running of showrooms and providing loans
to members for purposes other than agriculture.” Further, this Court referred to
various judgments of this Court including Citizen Co-operative Society Ltd. as
discussed in paragraphs 24 to 24.5 of the judgment and held that Full Bench of the
Kerala High Court had not properly understood the ratio in Citizen Co-

operative Society Ltd. Also, an analysis of Section 80P was made particularly of
sub-section (4) of the said Section in paragraphs 24 to 24.5 and paragraphs 39 to 43.
Paragraphs 24 to 24.5 and paragraphs 39 to 43 are extracted as under:

25

Kerala State Co-Operative ... vs The Assessing Officer, Trivandrum on 14 September, 2023

24. An analysis of this judgment would show that the question of law that was
reflected in para 5 of the judgment was answered in favour of the assessee. The
following propositions may be culled out from the judgment in Citizen Coop. Society
case: 24.1. That Section 80-P of the IT Act is a benevolent provision, which was
enacted by Parliament in order to encourage and promote the growth of the co-

operative sector generally in the economic life of the country and must, therefore, be read liberally
and in favour of the assessee;

24.2. That once the assessee is entitled to avail of deduction, the entire amount of profits and gains
of business that are attributable to any one or more activities mentioned in sub-section (2) of
Section 80-P must be given by way of deduction;

24.3. That this Court in Kerala State Coop. Mktg. Federation Ltd. has construed Section 80-P widely
and liberally, holding that if a society were to avail of several heads of deduction, and if it fell within
any one head of deduction, it would be free from tax notwithstanding that the conditions of another
head of deduction are not satisfied;

24.4. This is for the reason that when the legislature wanted to restrict the deduction to a particular
type of cooperative society, such as is evident from Section 80-P(2)(b) qua milk cooperative
societies, the legislature expressly says so — which is not the case with Section 80-P(2)(a)(i) 24.5.
That Section 80-P(4) is in the nature of a proviso to the main provision contained in Sections
80-P(1) and (2). This proviso specifically excludes only cooperative banks, which are cooperative
societies who must possess a licence from RBI to do banking business. Given the fact that the
assessee in that case was not so licensed, the assessee would not fall within the mischief of Section
80-P(4).

X X X

39. Coming to the provisions of Section 80-P(4), it is important to advert to the speech of the
Finance Minister dated 28-2-2006, which reflects the need for introducing Section 80-P(4). Shri P.
Chidambaram specifically stated:

“166. Cooperative Banks, like any other bank, are lending institutions and should pay
tax on their profits. Primary Agricultural Credit Societies (PACS) and Primary
Cooperative Agricultural and Rural Development Banks (PCARDB) stand on a special
footing and will continue to be exempt from tax under Section 80-P of the Income
Tax Act. However, I propose to exclude all other cooperative banks from the scope of
that section.”

40. Likewise, a Circular dated 28-12-2006, containing explanatory notes on provisions contained in
the Finance Act, 2006, is also important, and reads as follows:

26

Kerala State Co-Operative ... vs The Assessing Officer, Trivandrum on 14 September, 2023

“Withdrawal of tax benefits available to certain cooperative banks *** 22.2. The
cooperative banks are functioning on a par with other commercial banks, which do
not enjoy any tax benefit. Therefore Section 80-P has been amended and a new
sub-section (4) has been inserted to provide that the provisions of the said section
shall not apply in relation to any cooperative bank other than a primary agricultural
credit society or a primary cooperative agricultural and rural development bank.

The expressions “cooperative bank”, “primary agricultural credit society” and “primary cooperative
agricultural and rural development bank” have also been defined to lend clarity to them.”

41. A clarification by the CBDT, in a letter dated 9-5- 2008, is also important, and states as follows:

“Subject.—Clarification regarding admissibility of deduction under Section 80-P of
the Income Tax Act, 1961.

***

2. In this regard, I have been directed to state that sub-section (4) of Section 80-P
provides that deduction under the said section shall not be allowable to any
cooperative bank other than a primary agricultural credit society or a primary
cooperative agricultural and rural development bank.

For the purpose of the said sub-section, cooperative bank shall have the meaning assigned to it in
Part V of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949.

3. In Part V of the Banking Regulation Act, “Cooperative Bank” means a State Cooperative bank, a
Central Cooperative Bank and a primary cooperative bank.

4. Thus, if the Delhi Co-op Urban T & C Society Ltd. does not fall within the meaning of
“Cooperative Bank” as defined in Part V of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, sub-section (4) of
Section 80-P will not apply in this case.

5. Issued with the approval of Chairman, Central Board of Direct Taxes.”

42. The above material would clearly indicate that the limited object of Section 80-P(4) is to exclude
cooperative banks that function on a par with other commercial banks i.e. which lend money to
members of the public. Thus, if the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 is now to be seen, what is clear
from Section 3 read with Section 56 is that a primary cooperative bank cannot be a primary
agricultural credit society, as such cooperative bank must be engaged in the business of banking as
defined by Section 5(b) of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, which means the accepting, for the
purpose of lending or investment, of deposits of money from the public. Likewise, under Section
22(1)(b) of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 as applicable to cooperative societies, no cooperative
society shall carry on banking business in India, unless it is a cooperative bank and holds a licence
issued in that behalf by RBI. As opposed to this, a primary agricultural credit society is a cooperative

27

Kerala State Co-Operative ... vs The Assessing Officer, Trivandrum on 14 September, 2023

society, the primary object of which is to provide financial accommodation to its members for
agricultural purposes or for purposes connected with agricultural activities.

43. As a matter of fact, some primary agricultural credit societies applied for a banking licence to
RBI, as their bye-laws also contain as one of the objects of the Society the carrying on of the business
of banking. This was turned down by RBI in a letter dated 25-10- 2013 as follows:

“Application for licence Please refer to your application dated 10- 4-2013 requesting
for a banking licence. On a scrutiny of the application, we observe that you are
registered as a Primary Agricultural Credit Society (PACS).

In this connection, we have advised RCS vide Letter dated UBD (T) No.
401/10.00/16A/2013-14 dated 18-10- 2013 that in terms of Section 3 of the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949 (AACS), PACS are not entitled for obtaining a banking licence.
Hence, your society does not come under the purview of Reserve Bank of India. RCS
will issue the necessary guidelines in this regard.” Consequently, the judgment of the
Full Bench of the Kerala High Court was set aside by observing that Section 80P of
the Act, being a benevolent provision enacted by Parliament to encourage and
promote the credit of co-operative sector in general must be read liberally and
reasonably, and if there is any ambiguity, in favour of the assessee. A deduction that
is given without any reference to any restriction or limitation cannot be restricted or
limited by implication, as is sought to be done by the Revenue in the said case by
adding the word “agriculture” into Section 80P(2)(a)(i) when it is not there. Further,
sub-section (4) of Section 80P had to be read as a proviso, which specifically excludes
co-

operative banks which are co-operative societies engaged in banking business i.e.,
engaged in lending money to members of the public, which have a licence in this
behalf from Reserve Bank of India. Therefore, the benefit of deduction was extended
to the assessee in the said case notwithstanding that they may also be giving loans to
the members which are not related to agriculture. Also, in case it was found that there
are instances of loans being given to non-members, profits attributable to such loans
obviously cannot be deducted.

Analysis:

14. We shall now analyse the aforesaid judgments in a common conspectus.

14.1. In Apex Co-operative Bank of Urban Bank of Maharashtra and Goa Ltd., it was
categorically held that under Section 56 of the BR Act, 1949 only three co-operative
banks have been defined, namely, state co-operative bank, central co-operative bank
and primary co-

28

Kerala State Co-Operative ... vs The Assessing Officer, Trivandrum on 14 September, 2023

operative bank which are covered under Section 56 (cci) read with (ccvii) read with the provisions of
the NABARD Act, 1981. Thus, it is only these three banks which are co-operative banks which
require a licence under the BR Act, 1949 to engage in banking business. If any bank does not fall
within the nomenclature of the aforesaid three banks as defined under the NABARD Act, 1981, it
would not be a co-operative bank within the meaning of Section 56 of BR Act, 1949 irrespective of
whatever nomenclature it may have or structure it may possess or incorporated under any Act. It
was further stated that if a bank has to be a state co- operative bank, there has to be a declaration
made by the State Government in terms of Section 2(u) of NABARD Act, 1981. Hence, it is necessary
to go into the question as to, whether, the appellant herein has been so declared as a state
co-operative bank. This question would need not detain us for long as the Kerala High Court in A.P.
Varghese had categorically stated that the “Kerala State Co-operative Bank” is a “state co-operative
bank” as defined under the NABARD Act, 1981. Therefore, the appellant bank has not been declared
as a state co- operative bank under the provisions of NABARD Act, 1981. Further, in the case of
Mavilayi Service Co-operative Bank, this Court observed that a co-operative bank would engage in
banking business on obtaining a licence under Section 22(1b) of the BR Act, 1949. In the instant
case, the appellant herein is not a co-operative bank having regard to the aforesaid conspectus of the
provisions so as to require a licence under the aforesaid provision for carrying on banking business.
In the circumstances, the question could still arise as to whether the appellant herein is entitled to
benefit of deduction under Section 80P of the Act. 14.2. In Mavilayi Service Co-operative Bank, it
has been observed that Section 80P of the Act is a beneficial provision which was enacted in order to
encourage and promote the growth of the co-operative sector generally in the economic life of the
country and therefore, has to be read liberally in favour of the assessee. That once the assessee is
entitled to avail of deduction, the entire amount of profits and gains of business that are attributable
to any one or more activities mentioned in sub- section (2) of Section 80P must be given by way of
deduction vide Citizen Co-operative Society. This is because sub-section (4) of Section 80P is in the
nature of a proviso to the main provision contained in sub- sections (1) and (2) of Section 80P. The
proviso excludes co-operative banks, which are co-operative societies which must possess a licence
from the Reserve Bank of India to do banking business. In other words, if an entity does not require
a licence to do banking business within the definition of banking under Section5(b) of the BR Act,
1949, then it would not fall within the scope of sub-section (4) of Section 80P. 14.3. While analysing
Section 80P of the Act in depth, the following points were noted by this Court:

i) Firstly, the marginal note to Section 80P which reads “Deduction in respect of
income of co-operative societies” is significant as it indicates the general “drift” of the
provision.

ii) Secondly, for purposes of eligibility for deduction, the assessee must be a
“co-operative society”.

iii) Thirdly, the gross total income must include income that is referred to in
sub-section (2).

iv) Fourthly, sub-clause (2)(a)(i) speaks of a co-operative society being “engaged in”,
inter alia, carrying on the business of banking or providing credit facilities to its

29

Kerala State Co-Operative ... vs The Assessing Officer, Trivandrum on 14 September, 2023

members.

v) Fifthly, the burden is on the assessee to show, by adducing facts, that it is entitled
to claim the deduction under Section 80P.

vi) Sixthly, the expression “providing credit facilities to its members” does not
necessarily mean agricultural credit alone. It was highlighted that the distinction
between eligibility for deduction and attributability of amount of profits and gains to
an activity is a real one. Since profits and gains from credit facilities given to
non-members cannot be said to be attributable to the activity of providing credit
facilities to its members, such amount cannot be deducted.

vii) Seventhly, under Section 80P(1)(c), the co-operative societies must be registered
either under Co-operative Societies Act, 1912, or a State Act and may be engaged in
activities which may be termed as residuary activities i.e. activities not covered by
sub-clauses (a) and (b), either independently of or in addition to those activities, then
profits and gains attributable to such activity are also liable to be deducted, but
subject to the cap specified in sub-clause (c).

viii) Eighthly, sub-clause (d) states that where interest or dividend income is derived
by a co-operative society from investments with other co-operative societies, the
whole of such income is eligible for deduction, the object of the provision being
furtherance of the co-operative movement as a whole.

14.4. In paragraph 42 of Mavilayi Service Co-operative Bank, this Court observed that the object and
purpose of sub-section (4) of Section 80P is to exclude only co-operative banks that function on par
with other commercial banks i.e. which lend money to members of the public. That on a reading of
Section 3 read with Section 56 of the BR Act, 1949, the primary co-operative bank cannot be a
primary agricultural credit society. As such co-operative bank must be engaged in the business of
banking as defined by Section 5(b) of the BR Act, 1949, which means accepting, for the purpose of
lending or investment, of deposits of money from the public. Also under Section 22(1)(b) of the BR
Act, 1949, no co- operative society can carry on banking business in India, unless it is a co-operative
bank and holds a licence issued in that behalf by Reserve Bank of India. It was pointed out that as
opposed to the above, a primary agricultural credit society is a co-operative society, the primary
object of which is to provide financial accommodation to its members for agricultural purposes or
for purposes connected with agricultural activities.

14.5. It was further observed in the said case that some primary agricultural credit societies had
sought for banking licence from Reserve Bank of India but the same was turned down by observing
that such a society was not carrying on the business of banking and that it did not come under the
purview of Reserve Bank of India requiring a licence for its business.

14.6. Thereafter in paragraph 48 of the judgment, it was observed that a deduction that is given
without any reference to any restriction or limitation cannot be restricted or limited by implication.

30

Kerala State Co-Operative ... vs The Assessing Officer, Trivandrum on 14 September, 2023

That sub- section (4) of Section 80P which is in the nature of a proviso specifically excludes
co-operative banks which are co-operative societies engaged in banking business i.e. engaged in
lending money to members of the public, which have a licence in this behalf from Reserve Bank of
India.

15. It is on the aforesaid touchstone that these appeals must now be further considered from the
point of view of the applicable provisions of law.

15.1. Section 80P speaks about deduction in respect of income of co- operative societies from the
gross total income referred to in sub-section (2) of the said Section. From the said income, there
shall be deducted, in accordance with the provisions of Section 80P, sums specified in sub- section
(2), in computing the total income of the assessee for the purpose of payment of income tax.
Sub-section (2) of Section 80P enumerates various kinds of co-operative societies. Sub-section
(2)(a)(i) states that if a co-operative society is engaged in carrying on the business of banking or
providing credit facilities to its members, the whole of the amount of profits and gains of business
attributable to any one or more of such activities shall be deducted. The sub-section makes a clear
distinction between business of banking on the one hand and providing credit facilities to its
members by co-operative society on the other. Thus, the definition of banking under Section 5(b) of
the BR Act must be borne in mind as opposed to providing credit facilities to its members. 15.2.
Section 80P was inserted to the Act with effect from 01.04.1968, however, sub-section (4) was
reinserted with effect from 01.04.2007, in the present form. Earlier sub-section (4) was omitted
with effect from 01.04.1970. Sub-section (4) of Section 80P in the present form is in the nature of an
exception which states that the provisions of Section 80P shall apply in relation to any co-operative
bank other than a primary agricultural credit society or a primary co-operative agricultural and rural
development bank. The expressions co-operative bank and primary agricultural credit society as
well as primary co-operative agricultural and rural development bank are defined in the Explanation
as co-operative bank and primary agricultural credit society having the meanings respectively
assigned to them in Part V of the BR Act, 1949. 15.3. The controversy in this case is, whether, the
appellant entity is a co-operative bank and if so, it would be covered within the scope and meaning
of sub-section (4) of Section 80P and therefore, would not be eligible to the benefit of deduction as
provided therein. 15.4. Having regard to the Explanation to sub-section (4) of Section 80P, it is
necessary to consider Chapter V of the BR Act, 1949 which states that the said Act shall apply to
co-operative societies subject to modifications made thereunder. Section 56 begins with a
non-obstante clause and states that notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the
time being in force, the provisions of the said Act shall apply to, or in relation to, co-operative
societies as they apply to, or in relation to banking companies subject to the following modifications,
namely, • in clause (a) throughout the said Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (i) references
to a “banking company” or “the company” or “such company” shall be construed as references to a
co- operative bank.

• in clause (c), it is stated that in Section 5 as per clause (cci), “co- operative bank” means a state
co-operative bank, a central co- operative bank and a primary co-operative bank. • clause (ccv)
defines “primary co-operative bank” while clause (ccvii) defines “central co-operative bank” and
“state co-operative bank” to have the meanings assigned to them in the NABARD Act, 1981. Since

31

Kerala State Co-Operative ... vs The Assessing Officer, Trivandrum on 14 September, 2023

the expression ‘banking company’ is defined under the BR Act, 1949, it would be useful to consider
the definition of banking company in Section 5(c) thereof which means any company which
transacts the business of banking in India. “Banking” is defined in Section 5(b) of the said Act to
mean the accepting, for the purpose of lending or investment, of deposits of money from the public,
repayable on demand or otherwise, and withdrawal by cheque, draft, order or otherwise. Therefore,
a banking company must transact banking business vis-à-vis the public. Thus, in the first place a
co-operative society must be engaged in banking business as defined in Section 5(b) of the said Act.
For that, Section 22 of the BR Act, 1949, speaks about licence to be obtained by a bank to do banking
business which is modified as per clause (o) of Section 56 thereof which states that no co- operative
society shall carry on banking business in India unless it is a co-operative bank and holds a licence
issued in that behalf by the Reserve Bank, subject to such conditions, if any, as the Reserve Bank
may deem fit to impose. Secondly, a co-operative society must obtain a licence under Section 22 of
the BR Act, 1949, only if it functions as a co-operative bank and not otherwise. Thus, a co-operative
society including a co-operative credit society which is not a co-operative bank does not require a
licence to function as such.

15.5. Further, Section 2(d) of NABARD Act, 1981 defines central co- operative bank while Section
2(u) defines a state co-operative bank to mean the principal co-operative society in a State, the
primary object of which is financing of other co-operative societies in the State which means, it is in
the nature of an apex co-operative bank having regard to the definition under Section 56 of the BR
Act, 1949, in relation to co- operative bank. The proviso states that in addition to such principal
society in a State, or where there is no such principal society in a State, the State Government may
declare any one or more co-operative societies carrying on business of banking in that State to be
also or to be a state co-operative bank or state co-operative banks within the meaning of the
definition. Section 2(v) of NABARD Act, 1981 defines state land development bank to mean the
co-operative society which is the principal land development bank (by whatever name called) in a
State and which has as its primary object the providing of long-term finance for agricultural
development.

15.6. Section 2(w) states that words and expressions used in the NABARD Act, 1981 which are not
defined therein but defined in the RBI Act, shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in
that Act. Section 2(x) of the said Act states that words and expressions used in the NABARD Act,
1981 and not defined either in the said Act or in the RBI Act, but defined in the BR Act, 1949, shall
have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the BR Act, 1949. Therefore, we revert back to
BR Act, 1949.

15.7. What is central to the controversy in this batch of cases is, whether, the appellant bank is a
co-operative bank. What is of significance to know is, a state co-operative bank or central
co-operative bank under the NABARD Act, 1981 is essentially a principal co- operative society either
in a district or in a State, respectively, the primary object of which is the financing of other
co-operative societies in the district or the State respectively. Further, NABARD Act, 1981 does not
define banking business. Hence, reliance is to be placed, on the definition of banking business in
terms of clause (w) of Section 2 of NABARD Act, 1981 which means the RBI Act has to be seen.
When the RBI Act is perused, it is noted that clause (i) of Section 2 defines “co- operative bank”,

32

Kerala State Co-Operative ... vs The Assessing Officer, Trivandrum on 14 September, 2023

“co-operative credit society”, “director”, “primary agricultural credit society”, “primary co-operative
bank” and “primary credit society” to have the meanings respectively assigned to them in Part V of
the BR Act, 1949. Therefore, we have to again fall back on Part V of the BR Act, 1949 which has
defined a co-operative bank in Section 56 (c)(i)(cci) to be a state co-operative bank, a central
co-operative bank and a primary co-operative bank and central co-operative bank and state
co-operative bank to have the same meanings as NABARD Act, 1981.

15.8. Since the words ‘bank’ and ‘banking company’ are not defined in the NABARD Act, 1981, the
definition in sub-clause (i) of clause (a) of Section 56 of the BR Act, 1949 has to be relied upon. It
states that a co- operative society in the context of a co-operative bank is in relation to or as a
banking company. Thus, co-operative bank shall be construed as references to a banking company
and when the definition of banking company in clause (c) of Section 5 of the BR Act, 1949 is seen, it
means any company which transacts the business of banking in India and as already noted banking
business is defined in clause (b) of Section 5 to mean the accepting, for the purpose of lending or
investment, of deposits of money from the public, repayable on demand or otherwise, and
withdrawal by cheque, draft, order or otherwise. Thus, it is only when a co-operative society is
conducting banking business in terms of the definition referred to above that it becomes a
co-operative bank and in such a case, Section 22 of the BR Act, 1949 would apply wherein it would
require a licence to run a co-operative bank. In other words, if a co-operative society is not
conducting the business of banking as defined in clause (b) of Section 5 of the BR Act, 1949, it would
not be a co-operative bank and not so within the meanings of a state co-operative bank, a central
co-operative bank or a primary co-operative bank in terms of Section 56(c)(i)(cci). Whereas a
co-operative bank is in the nature of a banking company which transacts the business of banking as
defined in clause (b) of Section 5 of the BR Act, 1949. But if a co- operative society does not transact
the business of banking as defined in clause (b) of Section 5 of the BR Act, 1949, it would not be a
co- operative bank. Then the definitions under the NABARD Act, 1981 would not apply. If a
co-operative society is not a co-operative bank, then such an entity would be entitled to deduction
but on the other hand, if it is a co-operative bank within the meaning of Section 56 of BR Act, 1949
read with the provisions of NABARD Act, 1981 then it would not be entitled to the benefit of
deduction under sub-section (4) of Section 80P of the Act.

15.9. Section 56 of the BR Act, 1949 begins with a non-obstante clause which states that
notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the provisions of
the said Act, shall apply to, or in relation to, co-operative societies as they apply to, or in relation to,
banking companies subject to certain modifications. The object of Section 56 is to provide a deeming
fiction by equating a co-operative society to a banking company if it is a co-operative bank within
the meaning of the said provision. This is because Chapter V of the BR Act, 1949, deals with
application of the Chapter to co-operative societies which are co-operative banks within the
meaning of the said chapter. For the purpose of these cases, what is relevant is that throughout the
BR Act, 1949, unless the context otherwise requires, - references to a “banking company” or “the
company” or “such company” shall be construed as references to a co-operative bank. Therefore,
while considering the meaning of a co-operative bank inherently, such a co- operative society must
be a banking company then only it would be construed as a co-operative bank requiring a licence
under Section 22 of BR Act, 1949 in order to function as such a bank. 15.10. Further, while

33

Kerala State Co-Operative ... vs The Assessing Officer, Trivandrum on 14 September, 2023

considering the definition of a co-operative bank under Section 56(cci) of the BR Act, 1949, to mean
a state co- operative bank, a central co-operative bank and a primary co-operative bank which is
defined in (ccviii) thereof, to have meanings respectively assigned to them in the NABARD Act, 1981
would imply that if a state co-operative bank is within the meaning of NABARD Act, 1981 then it
would be excluded from the benefit under Section 80P of the Act. Conversely, if a co-operative
society is not a co-operative bank within the meaning of Section 56 of the BR Act, 1949, it would be
entitled to the benefit of deduction under Section 80P of the Act. 15.11. Looked at from another
angle, a co-operative society which is not a state co-operative bank within the meaning of NABARD
Act, 1981 would not be a co-operative bank within the meaning of Section 56 of the BR Act, 1949. In
the instant case, as already noted in A.P. Varghese case, the Kerala State Co-operative Bank being
declared as a state co-operative bank by the Kerala State Government in terms of NABARD Act, 1981
and the appellant society not being so declared, would imply that the appellant society is not a state
co-operative bank. 15.12. In fact, in Citizen Co-operative Society Ltd., this Court held that the
appellant therein was having both members as well as nominal members who were depositing and
availing loan facilities from the appellant therein and therefore, appellant therein was not entitled to
the benefit of Section 80P of the Act as it was functioning as a co- operative bank. But, the appellant
herein is not a co-operative bank and neither has it been so declared under the provisions of
NABARD Act, 1981 or the State Act. On the other hand, under the provisions of State Act, 1969, the
Kerala State Co-operative Bank has been so declared by the Government of Kerala as a co-operative
bank. 15.13. Further, under the provisions of the State Act, 1984, ‘agricultural and rural
development bank’ means the Kerala Co- operative Central Land Mortgage Bank Limited, registered
under Section 10 of the Travancore-Cochin Co-operative Societies Act, 1951, which shall be known
as Kerala State Co-operative Agricultural and Rural Development Bank Limited i.e. the appellant
herein. Thus, from a conjoint reading of all the relevant statutory as alluded to hereinabove, it is
quite clear that the appellant is not a co-operative bank within the meaning of sub-section (4) of
Section 80P of the Act. The appellant is a co-operative credit society under Section 80P(2)(a)(i) of
the Act whose primary object is to provide financial accommodation to its members who are all
other co-operative societies and not members of the public. 15.14. Therefore, when the definition of
“co-operative bank” in Section 56 of BR Act, 1949 is viewed in terms of Sections 2(u) of the
NABARD Act, 1981, it is clear that only a state co-operative bank would be within the scope and
meaning of a banking company under Section 2(c) of the BR Act, 1949 on obtaining licence under
Section 22 of the said Act.

Conclusion:

In the instant case, although the appellant society is an apex co-

operative society within the meaning of the State Act, 1984, it is not a co-operative
bank within the meaning of Section 5(b) read with Section 56 of the BR Act, 1949.

In the result, the appeals filed by the appellant are allowed and the order(s) of the Kerala High Court
and other authorities to the contrary are set aside. Consequently, we hold that the appellant is
entitled to the benefit of deduction under Section 80P of the Act. The questions for consideration
are answered accordingly.

34

Kerala State Co-Operative ... vs The Assessing Officer, Trivandrum on 14 September, 2023

Parties to bear their respective costs.

…………………………J. (B.V. NAGARATHNA) ………………………..J. (UJJAL BHUYAN) NEW DELHI;

14th SEPTEMBER, 2023.

35