Kishan Chand Jain vs Union Of India on 17 August, 2023

Kishan Chand Jain vs Union Of India on 17 August, 2023

Author: Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha

Bench: Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha, Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud

2023INSC741                                                                                        REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) No. 990 of 2021

KISHAN CHAND JAIN                                                              ....PETITIONER(S)

VERSUS

UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                                         ...RESPONDENT(S)

JUDGMENT

PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA, J.

1. This Writ Petition under Article 32 of the Constitution of India filed by way of a public interest
litigation seeking multiple reliefs, running into three pages, the gist of which is only for a direction
to implement the mandate of Section 4 of the Right to Information Act, 2005.1 As the prayer is only
for implementing the various obligations enlisted under Section 4, it is necessary to reproduce the
Section for ready reference:

“4. Obligations of public authorities-

(I) Every public authority shall—

(a) maintain all its records duly catalogued and indexed in a manner and the form
which facilitates the right to information under this Act and ensure that all records
that are appropriate to be computerised are, within a reasonable time and subject to
availability of resources, computerised and connected through a 17:18:29 IST
Reason:

Hereinafter referred to as ‘Act’ network all over the country on different systems so
that access to such records is facilitated;

1

Kishan Chand Jain vs Union Of India on 17 August, 2023

(b) publish within one hundred and twenty days from the enactment of this Act,—

(i) the particulars of its organisation, functions and duties;

(ii) the powers and duties of its officers and employees;

(iii) the procedure followed in the decision making process, including channels of
supervision and accountability;

(iv) the norms set by it for the discharge of its functions;

(v) the rules, regulations, instructions, manuals and records, held by it or under its
control or used by its employees for discharging its functions;

(vi) a statement of the categories of documents that are held by it or under its control;

(vii) the particulars of any arrangement that exists for consultation with, or
representation by, the members of the public in relation to the formulation of its
policy or implementation thereof

(viii) a statement of the boards, councils, committees and other bodies consisting of
two or more persons constituted as its part or for the purpose of its advice, and as to
whether meetings of those boards, councils, committees and other bodies are open to
the public, or the minutes of such meetings are accessible for public;

(ix) a directory of its officers and employees;

(x) the monthly remuneration received by each of its officers and employees,
including the system of compensation as provided in its regulations;

(xi) the budget allocated to each of its agency, indicating the particulars of all plans,
proposed expenditures and reports on disbursements made;

(xii) the manner of execution of subsidy programmes, including the amounts
allocated and the details of beneficiaries of such programmes;

(xiii) particulars of recipients of concessions, permits or authorisations granted by it;

(xiv) details in respect of the information, available to or held by it, reduced in an
electronic form;

(xv) the particulars of facilities available to citizens for obtaining information,
including the working hours of a library or reading room, if maintained for public
use;

2

Kishan Chand Jain vs Union Of India on 17 August, 2023

(xvi) the names, designations and other particulars of the Public Information
Officers;

(xvii) such other information as may be prescribed; and thereafter update these
publications every year;

(c) publish all relevant facts while formulating important policies or announcing the
decisions which affect public;

(d) provide reasons for its administrative or quasi-judicial decisions to affected
persons.

(2) It shall be a constant endeavour of every public authority to take steps in
accordance with the requirements of clause (b) of sub-section (1) to provide as much
information suo motu to the public at regular intervals through various means of
communications, including internet, so that the public have minimum resort to the
use of this Act to obtain information. (3) For the purposes of sub-section (1), every
information shall be disseminated widely and in such form and manner which is
easily accessible to the public.

(4) All materials shall be disseminated taking into consideration the cost
effectiveness, local language and the most effective method of communication in that
local area and the information should be easily accessible, to the extent possible in
electronic format with the Central Public Information Officer or State Public
Information Officer, as the case may be, available free or at such cost of the medium
or the print cost price as may be prescribed.

Explanation.—For the purposes of sub-sections (3) and (4), "disseminated" means making known or
communicated the information to the public through notice boards, newspapers, public
announcements, media broadcasts, the internet or any other means, including inspection of offices
of any public authority.”

2. The statutory obligations of public authorities under Section 4(1) relate to: (a) maintenance of all
public records, duly catalogued and indexed for easy accessibility of the information; (b) publishing
particulars of the organisational structure, functions and duties of officers, procedures that are
followed for decision-making, salary structure, budget allocation, publication of facts relating to
policies and announcements which includes providing reasons for quasi- judicial decisions.
Sub-section (2) mandates the public authority to take steps for providing information under clause
(b) of sub-section (1) suo motu and further to disseminate the said information for easy accessibility
to the public. The scope and ambit of Section 4 has already been considered by this Court in a
number of decisions.2

3. We may note the observation of this Court in just one of the cases, namely Institute of Chartered
Accountants of India v. Shaunak H. Satya and others (2011) 8 SCC 781:

3

Kishan Chand Jain vs Union Of India on 17 August, 2023

“23. The information to which the RTI Act applies falls into two categories, namely,
(i) information which promotes transparency and accountability in the working of
every public authority, disclosure of which helps in containing or discouraging
corruption, enumerated in clauses (b) and (c) of Section 4(1) of the RTI Act; and (ii)
other information held by public authorities not falling under Sections 4(1)(b) and (c)
of the RTI Act. In regard to information falling under the first category, the public
authorities owe a duty to disseminate the information widely suo motu to the public
so as to make it easily accessible to the public. In regard to information enumerated
or required to be enumerated under Sections 4(1)(b) and (c) of the RTI Act,
necessarily and naturally, the competent authorities under the RTI Act will have to
act in a proactive manner so as to ensure accountability and ensure that the fight
against corruption goes on relentlessly. But in regard to other information which do
not fall under Sections 4(1)(b) and (c) of the Act, there is a need to proceed with
circumspection as it is necessary to find out whether they are exempted from
disclosure.

24. One of the objects of democracy is to bring about transparency of information to
contain corruption and bring about accountability. But achieving this object does not
mean that other equally important public interests including efficient functioning of
the governments and public authorities, optimum use of limited fiscal resources,
preservation of confidentiality of sensitive information, etc. are to be ignored or
sacrificed. The object of the RTI Act is to harmonise the conflicting public interests,
that is, ensuring transparency to bring in accountability and containing corruption on
the one hand, and at the same time ensure that the revelation of information, in
actual practice, does not harm or adversely affect other public interests which include
efficient 2 Central Board of Secondary Education and another v. Aditya
Bandopadhyay and others (2011) 8 SCC 497, Institute of Chartered Accountants of
India v. Shaunak H. Satya and others (2011) 8 SCC 781, Verhoeven, Marie
-Emmanuelle v. Union of India and others. (2016) 6 SCC 456 and Central Public
Information Officer, Supreme Court of India v. Subhash Chandra Agarwal (2020) 5
SCC 481 functioning of the governments, optimum use of limited fiscal resources and
preservation of confidentiality of sensitive information, on the other hand. While
Sections 3 and 4 seek to achieve the first objective, Sections 8, 9, 10 and 11 seek to
achieve the second objective.”

4. Having noted the scope and ambit of the obligations imposed on public authorities under Section
4, as elucidated by this Court, we may now refer to the prayer made by the petitioner in the Writ
Petition. The writ petitioner seeks a direction:

(a) to ensure that public authorities comply with the mandatory suo motu disclosures
under Section 4 on a proactive basis;

(b) to ensure that website disclosures of public authorities are complete, easily
accessible as required by Clause No. 2.2 of the O.M. dated 07.11.2019;

4

Kishan Chand Jain vs Union Of India on 17 August, 2023

(c) to ensure compliance of proactive disclosure package audited by third party under
Section 4 of the Act read with Clause 4.4 of O.M. dated 07.11.2019;

(d) to appoint senior officer as nodal officer for being accountable for compliances
with respect to proactive disclosure guidelines as per Clause 5.1 of the O.M. dated
07.11.2019;

(e) direct Central Information Commission/State Information Commissions to
examine third party audit reports as per Clause 4.5 of the O.M. dated 07.11.2019;

(f) to ensure that details of disclosure guidelines are reflected in the Annual Report as
per Clause 6.1 of the O.M. dated 07.11.2019;

and

(g) to send ‘Action Taken Report’ to the concerned Information Commission as per Clause 4.3 of
O.M. dated 07.11.2019.

5. In other words, the prayers in the Writ Petition are for implementation of Section 4 of the Act,
coupled with the instructions for its execution as provided in the O.M. dated 07.11.2019.

6. Union of India has filed a ‘Note on Submissions’ explaining the steps that have been taken for
implementation of the statutory mandate of Section 4. We will refer to some of these before giving
necessary directions.

7. In order to implement the provisions of the Act, the Department of Personnel and Training
constituted a Task Force on 06.05.2011 to improve quality and quantity of disclosure contemplated
under Section 4. Pursuant to the report submitted by the Task Force, the Department issued certain
Guidelines through its O.M. dated 15.04.2013. These guidelines relate to various issues including
suo motu proactive disclosures under Section 4 and also to put in place a mechanism for compliance
and monitoring.

8. As per the Guidelines each Public Authority must undertake the following steps:

“(a) Comply with the guidelines and send an action taken report to the CIC; (b) Get
the proactive disclosure package [Section 4(1)(b) of the RTI, Act] audited by a third
party audit every year. This should be communicated to the CIC annually through
publication on their own websites. This requirement to publish the needful
information on the website of each public authority would fully take care of the
grievances of the petitioner; (c) The CIC should examine the third-party audit reports
for each Ministry/Public Authority and offer advice/ recommendations to the
concerned Ministry/Public Authority; (d) The CIC should carry out sample audits for
a few of the Ministries/Public Authorities each year with regard to adequacy of the
items included as well as compliance of the Ministry/Public Authority with these

5

Kishan Chand Jain vs Union Of India on 17 August, 2023

guidelines; (e) An officer, not below the rank of a Joint Secretary, should be
appointed as the Nodal officer in the Central Ministry/Public Authority to ensure
c o m p l i a n c e   w i t h   t h e   p r o a c t i v e   d i s c l o s u r e   g u i d e l i n e s ,   a n d   ( f )   E v e r y
Ministry/Department to include a chapter on RTI Act in its Annual Report submitted
to the Parliament, mandatorily containing the details about compliance with
proactive disclosure guidelines.”

9. It is relevant to refer to Clause 4 of O.M. dated 15.04.2013 which deals with the compliance
mechanism:

“4.0 Compliance with Provisions of suo motu (proactive) disclosures under the RTI
Act.

4.1 Each Ministry/Public Authority shall ensure that these guidelines are fully
operationalized within a period of 6 months from the date of their issue.

4.2 Proactive disclosure as per these guidelines would require collating a large
quantum of information and digitizing it. For this purpose, Ministries/Public
Authorities may engage consultants or outsource such work to expeditiously comply
with these guidelines. For this purpose, the plan/non-plan funds of that department
may be utilized. 4.3 The Action Taken Report on the compliance of these guidelines
should be sent, along with the URL link, to the DoPT and Central Information
Commission soon after the expiry of the initial period of 6 months.

4.4 Each Ministry/Public Authority should get its proactive disclosure package
audited by third party every year. The audit should cover compliance with the
proactive disclosure guidelines as well as adequacy of the items included in the
package. The audit should examine whether there are any other types of information
which could be proactively disclosed. Such audit should be done annually and should
be communicated to the Central Information Commission annually through
publication on their own websites. All Public Authorities should proactively disclose
the names of the third party auditors on their website. For carrying out third party
audit through outside consultants also, Ministries/Public Authorities should utilize
their plan/non-plan funds.

4.5 The Central Information Commission should examine the third-party audit
reports for each Ministry/Public Authority and offer advice/recommendations to the
concerned Ministries/Public Authorities.

4.6 Central Information Commission should carry out sample audit of few of the
Ministries/Public Authorities each year with regard to adequacy of items included as
well as compliance of the Ministry/Public Authority with these guidelines.

6

Kishan Chand Jain vs Union Of India on 17 August, 2023

4.7 Compliance with the proactive disclosure guidelines, its audit by third party and
its communication to the Central Information Commission should be included as
RFD target.”

10. The ‘Note on Submissions’ discloses that the Department continued to follow the mandate of
Section 4 and sought compliance of the Guidelines by issuing further O.M.’s such as O.M. issued on
10.12.2013, 22.09.2014 and 09.07.2015.

11. Proceeding further, in its endeavour to make information more accessible, the Department
constituted two more Committees which made recommendations for effective implementation of
Section 4. The first Committee headed by Shri A. N. Tiwari, CIC (Retd) made recommendations with
respect to (a) making online access to information more user-friendly and (b) setting up of grievance
redressal mechanism, amongst others. These recommendations were accepted by the Department
vide O.M. dated 29.06.2015.

12. The second committee headed by Dr. Devesh Chaturvedi, former Joint Secretary also made
certain recommendations and some of them were accepted through O.M. dated 30.06.2016. Some of
the recommendations that were accepted relate to (a) setting up of Consultative Committees by
public authority for systematic and regular interaction with its officials and to advise public
authorities on information which can be uploaded suo motu, (b) setting up of Information and
Facilitation Centres to educate citizens about information available, (c) providing searchable and
retrievable database of information on the website of the public authorities; and importantly (d) to
undertake transparency audits by training institutes under the Ministry/Department/Public
Authority.

13. The Note also indicated that by O.M. dated 15.10.2019, the Department relaxed the audit criteria
by allowing the public authorities to give the transparency audits conducted by any Government
T r a i n i n g   I n s t i t u t e s ,   i . e . ,   i n   c a s e s   w h e r e   t h e r e   i s   n o   i n s t i t u t e   e x i s t i n g   i n   t h e
Ministry/Department/Public Authority.

14. As many Central Authorities faced difficulties on account of, (a) substantial difference in the
audit cost charged by different auditing training institutes, (b) shortage of manpower/adequately
trained manpower, and (c) pre-engagement of the training institute with its scheduled training
activities, a further relaxation through O.M. dated 20.09.2022 was given as per which the task of
transparency audits was permitted to be given to any Government Training Institute by the
Ministry/Department/Public Authority under the Central or State Governments.

15. It is clarified that if a Training Institute is in itself a public authority, then it may give its audits
conducted by Government Training Institute (O.M. 07.09.2021). The Note also states that the
department issued O.M. dated 14.09.2022 directing all Ministries/Departments/Public Authorities
to (a) nominate Training Institute for third party audit; (b) furnish other requisite details to the CIC
as per the Exhaustive Guidelines issued vide OM dated 07.11.2019; (c) adhere to the timelines set by
the CIC for conducting transparency audits; and (d) observe the earlier guidelines issued vide OMs
dated 13.04.2013 and 07.11.2019.

7

Kishan Chand Jain vs Union Of India on 17 August, 2023

16. On 07.11.2019, the Department of Personnel and Training issued an O.M. reiterating the
15.04.2013 Guidelines. Clause 4.4 was revised in the following terms:

“4.4 Each Ministry/Public Authority should get its proactive disclosure package
audited by third party every year. The audit should cover compliance with the
proactive disclosure guidelines as well as adequacy of the items included in the
package. The audit should examine whether there are any other types of information
which could be proactively disclosed. Such audit should be done annually and should
be communicated to the Central Information Commission annually through
publication on their own websites. Further the task of undertaking transparency
a u d i t s   m a y   b e   g i v e n   t o   t h e   r e s p e c t i v e   T r a i n i n g   I n s t i t u t e s   u n d e r   e a c h
Ministry/Department/Public Authority and across the States and Union Territories.
“ H o w e v e r   i n   c a s e s   w h e r e   n o   t r a i n i n g   i n s t i t u t e   e x i s t s   u n d e r   t h e
Ministries/Departments/Public Authorities the tasks of undertaking transparency
audits may be given to any Government Training Institute.” All Public Authorities
should proactively disclose the names of the third party auditors on their website. For
carrying out third party audit through outside consultants also. Ministries/Public
Authorities should utilize their plan/non-plan funds.”

17. It is important to extract the ‘present status’ of compliances as indicated in the Note filed on
behalf of Union of India. Para 17 to 20 of the affidavit is as follows:

“17. Every public authority registered with the CIC is required to submit four
quarterly returns for assessment of its performance in respect of the implementation
of the RTI Act.

18. Out of total 2278 Public Authorities, 2173 of them i.e., 95% public authorities have submitted
their all four quarterly returns to the Commission in the reporting year i.e., 2021-22 (Annual Report
2021-22 of the CIC).

19. The suo motu disclosure under Section 4 of the Act by the public authorities and undertaking the
transparency audit of the disclosure are two different provisions. Whereas the former is a
mandatory provisions stipulated in the RTI Act, the latter was introduced vide OM date 15.04.2013
and is directory.

20. Thus, it is respectfully submitted that those public authorities which have not obtained an audit
of their proactive disclosure packages by a third party cannot be construed to be in violation of
Section 4 of the RTI Act.”

18. On the other hand, the written submission filed on behalf of the petitioner disclosed that only
33% of the public authorities have got transparency audits conducted in the last four years. It is
stated that the poor implementation of third- party audit is adversely commented upon even by the
Department in its O.M. dated 14.09.2022. It is further averred that apart from the poor
implementation of third-party audit, 33% of public authorities which had their transparency audits

8

Kishan Chand Jain vs Union Of India on 17 August, 2023

conducted performed badly, clearly evidences that quality and quantity of proactive disclosure were
not in accordance with Section 4 of the Act.

19. From the information made available to us, one thing is evident. The system needs the
concerned authority’s complete attention, followed by strict and continuous monitoring. It is in this
context that the functioning and duties of the Central and State Information Commissions assume
utmost importance.

20. It is necessary to take note of the statutorily incorporated ‘monitoring and reporting’ mechanism
in section 25 of the Act. This is an important feature of ‘accountability’ of statutory authorities.

“25. Monitoring and reporting.

(1) The Central Information Commission or State Information Commission, as the case may be,
shall, as soon as practicable after the end of each year, prepare a report on the implementation of
the provisions of this Act during that year and forward a copy thereof to the appropriate
Government. (2) Each Ministry or Department shall, in relation to the public authorities within their
jurisdiction, collect and provide such information to the Central Information Commission or State
Information Commission, as the case may be. as is required to prepare the report under this section
and comply with the requirements concerning the furnishing of that information and keeping of
records for the purposes of this section. (3) Each report shall state in respect of the year to which the
report relates,— (a) the number of requests made to each public authority; (b) the number of
decisions where applicants were not entitled to access to the documents pursuant to the requests,
the provisions of this Act under which these decisions were made and the number of times such
provisions were invoked; (c) the number of appeals referred to the Central Information Commission
or State Information Commission, as the case may be, for review, the nature of the appeals and the
outcome of the appeals; (d) particulars of any disciplinary action taken against any officer in respect
of the administration of this Act; (e) the amount of charges collected by each public authority under
this Act; (J) any facts which indicate an effort by the public authorities to administer and implement
the spirit and intention of this Act; (g) recommendations for reform, including recommendations in
respect of the particular public authorities, for the development, improvement, modernisation,
reform or amendment to this Act or other legislation or common law or any other matter relevant
for operationalising the right to access information. (4) The Central Government or the State
Government, as the case may be, may, as soon as practicable after the end of each year, cause a copy
of the report of the Central Information Commission or the State Information Commission, as the
case may be, referred to in sub- section (1) to be laid before each House of Parliament or, as the case
may be, before each House of the State Legislature, where there are two Houses, and where there is
one House of the State Legislature before that House. (5) If it appears to the Central Information
Commission or State Information Commission, as the case may be, that the practice of a public
authority in relation to the exercise of its functions under this Act does not conform with the
provisions or spirit of this Act, it may give to the authority a recommendation specifying the steps
which ought in its opinion to be taken for promoting such conformity.”

9

Kishan Chand Jain vs Union Of India on 17 August, 2023

21. Section 25 gloriously integrates ‘the right to information’ of a citizen with the collective
responsibility of the Government to the Legislature under Article 75(3) or 164(2) of the Constitution.
At the beginning of the chain is the citizen exercising her right to information. The Public Authority
obligated to provide the information is accountable to the Department. The Department, shall, in
relation to the public authorities within their jurisdiction, collect and provide such information to
the CIC or SIC (see Section 25(2)). The CIC or SIC shall then prepare a ‘Report’ on the
implementation of the provisions of the Act during the year and forward a copy to the appropriate
Government (see Section 25(1)). The ‘Report’ prepared by the CIC or SIC is mandated to comprise
all details specified in Clauses (a) to (g) of Section 25(3). The Central or the State Government shall
cause a copy of the Report of the CIC/SIC be laid before Parliament/Legislative Assembly (Section
25(4)). It is then for the House, representing the will of the people, to ensure that the confidence
reposed by it in the Council of Ministers (Government) is affirmed. Thus, the circle of representative
democracy connects supremacy of the Parliament with the right of the citizen by ensuring that the
State performs its obligations. This is the primary principle of accountability.

22. Power and accountability go hand in hand. While declaring that all citizens shall have the ‘right
to information’ under Section 3 of the Act, the co-relative ‘duty’ in the form of obligation of public
authorities is recognized in Section 4. The core of the right created under Section 3 in reality rests on
the duty to perform statutory obligations. Public accountability is a crucial feature that governs the
relationship between ‘duty bearers’ and ‘right holders’. Recognizing the importance of accountability
as a measure of administrative law, this Court in Vijay Rajmohan v. CBI,3 held as follows:

“34. Accountability in itself is an essential principle of administrative law. Judicial
review of administrative action will be effective and meaningful by ensuring
accountability of the officer or authority in charge.

35. The principle of accountability is considered as a cornerstone of the human rights
framework. It is a crucial feature that must govern the relationship between “duty
bearers” in authority and “right holders” affected by their actions. Accountability of
institutions is also one of the development goals adopted by the United Nations in
2015 and is also recognized as one of the six principles of the Citizens Charter
Movement.

36. Accountability has three essential constituent dimensions :

(i) responsibility, (ii) answerability, and (iii) enforceability.

Responsibility requires the identification of duties and performance obligations of individuals in
authority and with 3 (2023) 1 SCC 329 authorities. Answerability requires reasoned
decision-making so that those affected by their decisions, including the public, are aware of the
same. Enforceability requires appropriate corrective and remedial action against lack of
responsibility and accountability to be taken. Accountability has a corrective function, making it
possible to address individual or collective grievances. It enables action against officials or
institutions for dereliction of duty. It also has a preventive function that helps to identify the

10

procedure or policy which has become non-functional and to improve upon it.”

Kishan Chand Jain vs Union Of India on 17 August, 2023

23. In Government (NCT of Delhi) v. Union of India4 referring to the direct relationship between
principles of collective responsibility and Government accountability, this Court held:-

“325. There is a direct relationship between the principle of collective responsibility
and Government accountability. This relationship is conceptualised in The Oxford
Companion to Politics in India:

Accountability can be defined in terms of outcomes rather than processes of
Government….. It also includes the criterion of responsiveness to changes in
circumstances that alter citizen needs and abilities… In other words, accountability
refers to the extent to which actual policies and their implementation coincide with a
normative ideal in terms of what they ought to be… In this broad sense,
accountability amounts to evaluating the nature of governance itself, in
outcome-oriented terms.”

24. Apart from the obligation of monitoring and reporting, the Central and State Information
Commissioners are also given the power to recommend steps which the public authority ought to
take in implementing the Act. Sub-Section (5) of Section 25 is in the following terms:

“(5) If it appears to the Central Information Commission or State Information
Commission, as the case may be, that the practice of a public authority in relation to
the exercise of its functions under this Act does not conform with the provisions or
spirit of this Act, it may give to the authority a recommendation specifying 4 (2018) 8
SCC 501 the steps which ought in its opinion to be taken for promoting such
conformity.”

25. Having examined the Right to Information established by the statute under Section 3 in the
context of the obligations of public authorities under Section 4, we are of the opinion that the
purpose and object of the statute will be accomplished only if the principle of accountability governs
the relationship between ‘right holders’ and ‘duty bearers’. The Central and State Information
Commissions have a prominent place, having a statutory recognition under Chapters III and IV of
the Act and their powers and functions all enumerated in detail in Section 18 of the Act. We have
also noted the special power of ‘Monitoring and Reporting’ conferred on the Central and State
Information Commissioners which must be exercised keeping in mind the purpose and object of the
Act, i.e., ‘to promote transparency and accountability in working of every public authority’.

26. For the reasons stated above, we direct that the Central Information Commission and the State
Information Commissions shall continuously monitor the implementation of the mandate of Section
4 of the Act as also prescribed by the Department of Personnel and Training in its Guidelines and
Memorandums issued from time to time. The directions will also include instructions under O.M.
dated 07.11.2019 issued by the Department. For this purpose, the Commissioners will also be
entitled to issue recommendations under sub- Section (5) of Section 25 to public authorities for

11

taking necessary steps for complying with the provisions of the Act.

Kishan Chand Jain vs Union Of India on 17 August, 2023

27. The Writ Petition (C) No. 990 of 2021 is disposed of with the direction to the Central
Information Commission and the State Information Commissions to ensure proper implementation
of the mandate of Section 4 of the Act, by following the directions as indicated above.

28. There shall be no order on costs.

……..……………………………….CJI.

[Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud] ……………….………………………….J. [Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha]
……………….………………………….J. [J.B. Pardiwala] New Delhi;

August 17, 2023

12