Kishor Balkrishna Nand vs The State Of Maharashtra on 2 August, 2023

Kishor Balkrishna Nand vs The State Of Maharashtra on 2
August, 2023

REPORTABLE
2023 INSC 675                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.2291 OF 2011

KISHORE BALKRISHNA NAND                                                        ...Appellant(s)

VERSUS

STATE OF MAHARASHTRA & ANR.                                                    ...Respondent(s)

O R D E R

The respondent No.2 (original complainant) although served with the notice issued by this Court,
yet has chosen not to remain present before this Court, either in-person or through an advocate, and
oppose this appeal.

This is an appeal at the instance of the original accused summoned for the offence of defamation
punishable under Section 500 of the Indian Penal Code (for short, “the IPC”) and is directed against
the order passed by the High Court of Judicature at Bombay, Nagpur Bench, dated 03.02.2010 in
Criminal Writ Petition No.676 of 2009, by which the High Court rejected the writ petition filed by
the appellant – Kishore Balkrishna Nand and thereby declined to quash the order of issue of process
by the Magistrate for the offence of defamation.

It appears from the materials on record that the appellant SWETA BALODI Date: 2023.08.05
10:57:16 IST herein Reason:

lodged a complaint in writing addressed to the Sub- Divisional Magistrate (for short,
“the SDM”) stating that the respondent no.2 herein (original complainant) had put
up a shop by encroaching upon some land. In the complaint. the appellant is said to
have further stated that such shop put up by the complainant was creating nuisance,
as many anti-social elements and road romeos had started visiting the said shop and
were creating all sorts of problems.

The SDM upon receipt of the complaint dated 25.01.2002 filed by the appellant
issued notice to the complainant. While the proceedings before the SDM were
pending, the complainant thought fit to lodge a private complaint in the Court of the
Judicial Magistrate, Worora, Chandrapur, State of Maharashtra for the offence of
defamation. The learned Magistrate took cognizance on the said complaint and

1

Kishor Balkrishna Nand vs The State Of Maharashtra on 2 August, 2023

issued process. The cognizance for the offence of defamation was taken by the
Magistrate on the basis of the averments said to have been made by the appellant in
his written complaint addressed to the SDM, referred to above.

As the record reveals, the appellant thereafter moved an application before the Court
of the Judicial Magistrate with a prayer that the order of issue of process be recalled.
The Magistrate concerned recalled the order. The complainant being aggrieved by
such order of recall passed by the Magistrate, challenged the same before the
Sessions Court by filing a revision application. The revision application was allowed
and the order recalling the order of issue of process was quashed. In such
circumstances, the appellant went before the High Court. In the High Court, the
appellant thought fit not to press his petition and withdrew the same.

Eight years thereafter the appellant thought fit to challenge the original order of issue
of process before the High Court. The High Court without entering into the merits of
the matter, declined to entertain such petition only on the ground of delay. In such
circumstances referred to above, the appellant is here before this Court with the
present appeal.

Mr. Anshuman Ashok, the learned counsel appearing for the appellant vehemently
submitted that the learned Magistrate committed a serious error in taking cognizance
on a complaint, which fails to disclose commission of any offence. According to him
even if the entire case, as put up by the complainant, is accepted or believed to be
true, none of the ingredients to constitute the offence of defamation as defined under
Section 499 of the IPC and made punishable under Section 500 of the IPC are
disclosed. He pointed out that his client (appellant), in good faith, brought to the
notice of the SDM that the complainant had encroached upon some portion of the
land and had put up a shop which was creating nuisance. This, according to the
learned counsel, would not constitute any offence of defamation. He submitted that
even otherwise since the alleged defamatory words or statements are said to have
been made in a complaint made in writing addressed to a public authority like SDM
and not made public, the same would not attract the rigours of Section 499 of the
IPC.

In such circumstances as above, the learned counsel prayed that there being merit in
his appeal, the same be allowed and the criminal proceedings be quashed.

We also heard Mr. Aaditya Aniruddha Pande, the learned counsel appearing for the
State. However, this is a case of a private complaint. The State has hardly any role to
play. Still learned the counsel assisted us on the question of law. ANALYSIS:

Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having gone through
the materials on record, the only question that falls for our consideration is whether
the allegations made in the complaint addressed to the SDM make out the offence

2

Kishor Balkrishna Nand vs The State Of Maharashtra on 2 August, 2023

under Section 500 IPC or not?

Section 499 of the IPC reads, thus:

“499. Defamation.—Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by
signs or by visible repre- sentations, makes or publishes any imputation con- cerning
any person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such
imputation will harm, the reputation of such person, is said, except in the cases
hereinafter excepted, to defame that person.” Eighth Exception to Section 499, to
which reliance has been placed by the learned counsel, reads as under:

“Eighth Exception.—Accusation preferred in good faith to authorised person.—It is
not defamation to prefer in good faith an accusation against any person to any of
those who have lawful authority over that person with respect to the subject-matter
of accusation.” The word “good faith” has been defined in Section 52 of the IPC to
mean:

“52. ‘Good faith’.—Nothing is said to be done or be- lieved in ‘good faith’ which is
done or believed without due care and attention.” We are of the view that no case is
made out to put the appellant to trial for the alleged offence. There is no defamation
as such.

Exception 8 to Section 499 clearly indicates that it is not a defamation to prefer in
good faith an accusation against any person to any of those who have lawful authority
over that person with regard to the subject-matter of accusation. Even otherwise by
perusing the allegations made in the complaint, we are satisfied that no case for
defamation has been made out. In the overall view of the matter, we are convinced
that the appeal deserves to be allowed and is hereby allowed. The impugned order
passed by the High Court is hereby set aside. As a consequence of the same, the
original order passed by the Magistrate issuing summons, is also hereby quashed and
set aside. The criminal proceedings in the form of Criminal Case No.247 of 2002
pending in the Court of Judicial Magistrate First Class, Worora, Chandrapur,
Maharashtra stand terminated.

Pending application(s), if any, stands disposed of.

.................J. (J.B. PARDIWALA) ..................J. (MANOJ MISRA) NEW DELHI;

AUGUST 02, 2023.

3