Kotak Mahindra Bank Limited vs Commissioner Of Income Tax Bangalore on 25 September, 2023

Kotak Mahindra Bank Limited vs Commissioner Of Income Tax
Bangalore on 25 September, 2023

Author: B.V. Nagarathna

Bench: B.V. Nagarathna

2023INSC855                                                                    REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NO.9720 OF 2014

KOTAK MAHINDRA BANK LIMITED                                   … APPELLANT(S)

VS.

COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX
BANGALORE AND ANR.                                          ... RESPONDENT(S)

JUDGMENT

NAGARATHNA, J.

This appeal has been filed assailing the judgment dated 06.07.2012, passed by the High Court of
Karnataka at Bangalore, in Writ Appeal No. 2458 of 2010 whereby the judgment of the learned
Single Judge dated 20.05.2010 passed in Writ Petition No. 12239 of 2008, remanding the matter to
the Settlement Commission to determine afresh, the question as to immunity from levy of penalty
and prosecution, was affirmed and the aforesaid Writ Appeal filed by the appellant herein, was
dismissed.

2. The facts giving rise to the present appeal, in a nutshell are that the appellant-assessee, Kotak
Mahindra Bank Limited (formerly, “M/s ING Vysya Bank Limited”) is a Public Limited Company
carrying on the 17:43:20 IST Reason:

business of banking and is assessed to tax in Bangalore where its registered office is
located. Apart from the business of banking, the appellant also carries out leasing
business on receiving approval from the Reserve Bank of India (hereinafter “RBI” for
short) vide Circular dated 19.02.1994. Thus, the appellant derives its income, inter
alia, from banking activities as well as from leasing transactions. 2.1. The appellant
filed its income tax returns for the assessment years 1994-1995 to 1999-2000 and
assessment orders were passed up to assessment year 1997-1998 and the assessment
for the subsequent years was pending. During the assessment proceedings for the

1

Kotak Mahindra Bank Limited vs Commissioner Of Income Tax Bangalore on 25 September, 2023

assessment year 1997-1998, the Assessing Officer made certain additions and
disallowances based on which the assessment already concluded for the assessment
years 1994-1995 to 1996-1997 were proposed to be reopened. The Assessing Officer
then passed an Assessment Order dated 30.03.2000 for the Assessment Year 1997-

1998. The main issue pertained to the income in respect of the activity of leasing. As per the
Assessment Order, the appellant had been accounting for lease rental received, by treating the same
as a financial transaction. As a result, the lease rental was bifurcated into capital repayment portion
and interest component. Only the interest component was offered to tax. In other words, the
appellant treated such leases as loans granted to the "purported" lessees to purchase assets. In such
cases, the ownership of the assets is vested with the lessees. However, the appellant claimed
depreciation on those assets under Section 32 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as
“the Act” for the sake of convenience) though the appellant was not the owner of the assets for the
purpose of the said transactions. 2.2. On 09.06.2000 the Assessing Officer issued a notice under
Section 148 of the Act for the reassessment of income for the aforesaid assessment years. The
Assessing Officer also passed a penalty order dated 14.06.2000 levying a penalty under Section 271
(1)(c) of the Act after being satisfied that the appellant had concealed its income as regards lease
rental.

2.3. While various proceedings, such as an appeal before the CIT (A) for the assessment year
1997-1998, re-assessment proceedings for the assessment years 1994-1995 to 1996-1997 and regular
assessment proceedings for the assessment years 1998-1999 and 1999-2000 were pending before
various income tax authorities, the appellant, on 10.07.2000, approached the Settlement
Commission at Chennai to settle its income tax liabilities under Section 245C (1) of the Act, by way
of an application in Form No. 34B bearing No. 563/KNK-III/15/2000- IT. The appellant sought for
determination of its taxable income for the assessment years 1994-1995 to 1999-2000, after
considering the issues pertaining to the income assessable in respect of its leasing transaction;
eligibility to avail depreciation in respect of leased assets; the quantum of allowable deduction under
Section 80M and exemption under Section 10(15) and 10(23G); and depreciation on the
investments portfolio of the bank classified as permanent investments.

2.4. When matters stood thus, the concluded assessments for earlier assessment years were
reopened by issuance of notices under Section 148 of the Act. The appellant filed returns under
protest with respect to the said assessment years.

2.5. Before the Settlement Commission, the Respondents-Revenue raised a preliminary objection
contending that the appellant did not fulfil the qualifying criteria as contemplated under Section
245C(1) and hence, the application filed by the appellant was not maintainable, as, under the said
provision, the appellant was required to make an application in the prescribed manner containing
full and true disclosure of its income which had not been disclosed before the Assessing Officer and
also the manner in which such income had been derived. That unless there is a true and full
disclosure there would be no valid application and the Settlement Commission will not be able to
assume jurisdiction to proceed with the admission of the application. It was thus contended that the
purported application made before the Settlement Commission was not an application as

2

Kotak Mahindra Bank Limited vs Commissioner Of Income Tax Bangalore on 25 September, 2023

contemplated under section 245C (1) of the Act for the reason that the appellant had not made a full
and true disclosure of its income which had not been disclosed before the Assessing Officer.

2.6. After considering the contentions of both parties, the Settlement Commission passed an Order
dated 11.12.2000 entertaining the application filed by the appellant under Section 245C and
rejecting the preliminary objections raised by the Revenue. The Settlement Commission allowed the
application filed by the appellant by way of a speaking order and permitted the appellant to pursue
its claim under Section 245D. Thus, the application was proceeded further under Section 245D (1) of
the Act.

2.7. The Revenue challenged the Order dated 11.12.2000 passed by the Settlement Commission
before the High Court of Karnataka at Bangalore by way of Writ Petition No. 13111 of 2001. The
Revenue questioned the jurisdiction of the Settlement Commission in entertaining the application
filed by the appellant under Section 245C(1) of the Act.

2.8. The learned Single Judge of the High Court of Karnataka, after going through the legislative
history of the provisions of Chapter-XIXA, accepted the argument advanced by the appellant that
the proviso to Section 245C as it stood earlier, which enabled the Commissioner to raise an
objection even at the threshold to entertain an application of this nature had been later shifted to
sub-section (l)(A) of Section 245D and from the year 1991, it had been totally omitted and in the
light of such legislative history, it was not open to the Revenue to raise any such preliminary
objection regarding maintainability of the application itself. It was further held that the application
can be proceeded with by the Settlement Commission for determination of the same on merits and it
was not necessary that the Revenue should be permitted to raise a preliminary objection as to the
maintainability of the application.

The learned Single Judge disposed of the above Writ Petition by way of an Order dated 18.08.2005
in favour of the appellant herein by holding that notwithstanding any preliminary finding, it was
still open to the Commissioner to agitate or to apprise the Commission of all the aspects of the
matter that he may find fit to be placed before the Commission. The Single Judge was of the view
that it was not necessary to examine the legal position that may require an interpretation of
provisions of Section 245C at that stage when the matter itself was still at large before the
Settlement Commission as the very object of Chapter- XIXA was to settle cases and to reduce the
disputes and not to prolong litigation. Thus, the High Court disposed of the Writ Petition holding
that it was open to the parties to raise all their contentions before the Commission at the stage of
disposal of the application and the Commission may, independent of the findings which it has given
under the Order dated 11.12.2000, examine all the contentions and proceed to pass orders on merits
in accordance with the provisions of the Act. 2.9. As a result of the Order dated 18.08.2005 passed
by the High Court of Karnataka, the Settlement Commission heard both parties on merits as well as
on the issue of maintainability. The Settlement Commission upheld the maintainability of the
application filed by the appellant and passed an Order dated 04.3.2008 under Sections 245D(1) and
245D(4), determining the additional income at Rs.196,36,06,201/-. As regards the issue of
immunity from penalty and prosecution, the Commission, having regard to the fact that the
appellant had co-operated in the proceedings before the Settlement Commission and true and full

3

Kotak Mahindra Bank Limited vs Commissioner Of Income Tax Bangalore on 25 September, 2023

disclosure was made by the appellant before the Commission in paragraph 18.2 of its Order granted
immunity under Section 245H(1) from the imposition of penalty and prosecution under the Act and
the relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code. Further, the Settlement Commission annulled the
penalty levied by the Assessing Officer under Section 271(1)(c) for the assessment year 1997- 1998 in
respect of non-disclosure of lease rental income. The same was annulled considering that the
non-disclosure was on account of RBI guidelines and subsequent disclosure on the part of the
appellant, of additional income of the lease income before the Settlement Commission when the
appellant realised the omission to disclose the same as per income tax law. The other pertinent
finding of the Settlement Commission are as under:

i. As regards the disclosure of income by the appellant, the Settlement Commission
noted that the application had to be considered within the framework of law as on the
date the application was filed i.e., 10.07.2000. On a reading of Section 245C (1), the
Commission observed that many amendments have been made to Section 245C after
its introduction in 1976 and what is clear from “the income disclosed before the
Assessing Officer” is that it is the income disclosed in the return of income furnished
and not income that could be computed on the basis of a scrutiny or interpretation of
the documents accompanying the return. That one has to read the entire conspectus
of the provisions of Sec 245C to interpret the true meaning of “income not disclosed
before the Assessing Officer.” That the statute is clear that the said phrase simply
means income not disclosed in the return and not something additionally by way of
income discovered in scrutiny.

ii. The Commission further noted that the appellant had realized while adhering to the RBI
guidelines of accounting of lease income that there was an error in not disclosing the full lease rental
receipts as per income tax law. Thus, the appellant offered additional income for tax under various
heads, which were not considered by the Assessing Officer. Considering the nature and
circumstances and the complexities of the investigation involved, the Commission was of the view
that the application was to be proceeded with under Section 245D (1) of the Act and that
prima-facie, a full and true disclosure of income not disclosed before the Assessing Officer had been
made by the appellant.

2.10. Being aggrieved by the Order dated 04.03.2008 passed by the Settlement Commission, the
Respondent-Revenue preferred Writ Petition bearing No. 12239 of 2008 (T-IT) before the High
Court of Karnataka assailing the said Order. The learned Single Judge of the High Court vide Order
dated 20.05.2010 upheld the Order of the Settlement Commission as regards the jurisdiction to
entertain the application and also as regards the correctness of the Order passed by the Settlement
Commission in determining the tax liability, but found fault with the Commission in so far as
granting immunity to the appellant from the levy of penalty and initiation of prosecution was
concerned. The Single Judge was of the view that the reasoning of the Settlement Commission was
vague, unsound and contrary to established principles and that the burden was on the appellant
herein to prove that there was no concealment or wilful neglect on its part and in the absence of
such evidence before the Settlement Commission, the Order granting immunity from penalty and
prosecution was an illegal order. The learned Single Judge, thus, remanded the matter to the

4

Kotak Mahindra Bank Limited vs Commissioner Of Income Tax Bangalore on 25 September, 2023

Settlement Commission for the limited purpose of reconsidering the question of immunity from levy
of penalty and prosecution and the Order of the Assessing Officer levying penalty, after providing an
opportunity to both parties.

2.11. Being aggrieved by the remand order passed by the learned Single Judge, the appellant
preferred Writ Appeal No. 2458 of 2018 before a Division Bench of the High Court, contending as
under:

i. That the reasoning given by the learned Single Judge to remand the matter for
fresh consideration was erroneous and against the provisions of the Act. That the
learned Single Judge failed to appreciate that the orders passed by the Settlement
Commission are conclusive except as otherwise provided in Chapter XIX-A of the
Act. The orders passed by the Settlement Commission are final as to the matters
stated therein, subject to constitutional remedies. However, such constitutional
remedies could be availed only when the orders passed by the Settlement
Commission are contrary to the provisions of the Act or have prejudiced the
Revenue/assessee or that they are vitiated by bias, fraud or malice. Thus, the learned
Single Judge erred in finding fault with the validity of the order after having
approved the jurisdiction and procedure followed by the Settlement Commission.

ii. That the learned Single Judge ought to have appreciated that Section 245C
contemplates full and true disclosure of income to be made before the Settlement
Commission alone and to that extent the provisions of Section 245C are
unambiguous and certain. The application to the Settlement Commission to be filed
under Section 245C ought to contain full and true disclosure of income that was not
disclosed in the returns/revised returns filed before the Assessing Officer. That the
learned Single Judge misdirected himself in holding that there is a statutory
requirement that concealment of particulars before the Assessing Officer would have
a bearing while the Settlement Commission exercises its powers under Section 245H
of the Act for grant of immunity from prosecution and penalty. That Section 245H
bestows exclusively upon the Settlement Commission, the discretion to grant
immunity to an applicant from prosecution for any offence under the Act or grant of
immunity wholly or in part from the imposition of penalty under the Act. The only
precondition for granting immunity to the applicant is that the applicant must have
co-operated in the proceedings before the Settlement Commission and made full and
true disclosure of his income and the manner in which such income has been derived
before the Settlement Commission. Thus, the learned Single Judge erred in drawing
reference to the possibility of concealment of income before the Assessing Officer. iii.
That the learned Single Judge failed to appreciate the difference between the
provisions of Section 245H and Section 27l(l)(c) of the Act. Section 245H does not
contemplate offering of any explanation or evidence by an applicant to the
satisfaction of the Settlement Commission. If the Settlement Commission is satisfied
that an applicant has complied with the precondition specified therein, the
Settlement Commission could exercise its discretion to grant immunity from

5

Kotak Mahindra Bank Limited vs Commissioner Of Income Tax Bangalore on 25 September, 2023

prosecution and penalty. Therefore, there was no error committed by the Settlement
Commission in granting immunity from prosecution and penalty.

2.12. In the meanwhile, Revenue preferred Special Leave Petition (C) CC No. 19663 of
2010 before this Court against the Order dated 20.05.2010 passed by the learned
Single Judge in Writ Petition No. 12239 of 2008.

On 06.01.2012, this Court directed the Special Leave Petition to stand over for eight weeks and
directed the Settlement Commission to dispose of the matter remanded to it by the High Court. In
pursuance of the Order dated 06.01.2012 passed by this Court, the Settlement Commission,
Chennai, issued a notice in the remanded matter on 30.01.2012.

On 10.02.2012 the appellant moved an application before this Court seeking modification of its
Order dated 06.01.2012 by issuing a direction to the High Court to dispose of Writ Appeal No. 2458
of 2010. It was contended that the filing of a Special Leave Petition against the order of the learned
Single Judge was not proper as a writ appeal should have been filed. That admittedly, Writ Appeal
No. 2458 of 2010 was pending before the High Court and the Revenue suppressed this vital
information while filing the Special Leave Petition. This Court by way of an Order dated 21.02.2012
recalled its earlier Order dated 06.01.2012 passed in SLP (C) CC No. 19663 of 2010 and directed the
High Court to dispose of Writ Appeal No. 2458 of 2010 within a period of two months. 2.13.
Following the same, a Division Bench of the High of Karnataka vide Order dated 06.07.2012
dismissed the Writ Appeal preferred by the appellant and upheld the Order passed by the learned
Single Judge. It was observed that the Order of the learned Single Judge remanding the matter to
the Settlement Commission for adjudication did not suffer from any material irregularity or
illegality. The pertinent observations of the Division Bench of the High of Karnataka are as under:

i. On the question as to whether the Order dated 20.05.2010 passed by the learned
Single Judge of the High Court in Writ Petition No. 12239 of 2008 would call for
interference, on a reading of Section 245C (1) of the Act which governs the filing of an
application by an assessee seeking settlement it was observed that the application
made by an assessee, must contain full and true disclosure of his income which has
not been disclosed before the Assessing Officer. Further, on perusal of Section 245H
of the Act which discusses the Commission’s power to grant immunity from
prosecution and penalty, it was observed that necessary ingredients for granting
immunity from prosecution would be: (a) the assessee should have co-operated with
the Settlement Commission in the proceedings before it; and (b) the assessee should
have made a full and true disclosure of its income and the manner in which such
income has been derived.

ii. Under Section 245H (1), the Settlement Commission, if satisfied that any assessee
who makes the application for settlement under Section 245C, has co-operated with
the Commission in the proceedings before it and has made a full and true disclosure
of its income and the manner in which such income has been derived, may grant
immunity from prosecution and also from the imposition of penalty, either wholly or

6

Kotak Mahindra Bank Limited vs Commissioner Of Income Tax Bangalore on 25 September, 2023

in part with respect to the case covered by the settlement. Thus, Section 245H (1)
cannot be read in isolation as Section 245C is embedded in 245H (1), and hence, both
the Sections must be read harmoniously. Further, if in a given case such immunity is
not granted, the Revenue would proceed to prosecute the assessee in a jurisdictional
court. Once prosecution is lodged, the presumption is that there was mens rea on the
part of the assessee to conceal the income by a smoke screen and thereby to evade
tax. The Settlement Commission will have to examine the application by lifting the
veil to see as to whether there has been an intention to evade tax and then arrive at a
conclusion and in the absence of such an exercise being undertaken by the
Commission, the intention behind Section 245H (1) would become otiose.

iii. The Division Bench noted that as per the provision of Section 245D then
prevalent, the Settlement Commission on receipt of an application filed under
Section 245C had to call for a report from the Commissioner and on the basis of the
material contained in such report and having regard to the nature and circumstances
of the case or the complexity of the investigation involved therein, the Settlement
Commission was empowered to reject or allow the application to be proceeded with,
within the prescribed period and it is in this background that the granting of
immunity from prosecution ought to have been scrutinised by the Settlement
Commission and the Single Judge in the instant case found that the same was not
done, hence, the matter was rightly remanded. 2.14. Aggrieved by the Judgment
dated 06.07.2012 in Writ Appeal No. 2458 of 2010, the appellant has preferred the
instant Civil Appeal.

Submissions:

3. We have heard learned senior counsel Sri Shyam Divan, appearing on behalf of the
appellant-assessee and learned Additional Solicitor General, Sri Balbir Singh, appearing on behalf of
the respondents-Revenue and perused the materials placed on record. 3.1. Sri Shyam Divan at the
outset submitted that the judgment of the learned Single Judge of the High Court, as affirmed by the
Division Bench by the impugned order, proceeds on a misdirection in law, in light of the facts of the
case and therefore, the same is liable to be set aside by this Court. It was further submitted as
follows:

i. That when, in the present case, the Settlement Commission rendered a positive
finding that the appellant had extended cooperation and had made a true and full
disclosure and thereafter, in exercise of power under Section 245H, the Commission
granted immunity from prosecution and penalty to the appellant, the High Court
ought not to have interfered with the decision of the Settlement Commission. That
the Settlement Commission is the sole judge of the adequacy of and the nature of
evidence placed before it and so long as there was cogent material and explanation
which was furnished by the appellant-assessee, the High Court ought not to have
interfered.

7

Kotak Mahindra Bank Limited vs Commissioner Of Income Tax Bangalore on 25 September, 2023

ii. That the High Court ought to have appreciated that the Assessing Officer may
make all kinds of additions and make claims of evasion of tax by an assessee.
However, the Order of the Assessing Officer is by no means the last word. There are
appellate remedies which provide remedies for an aggrieved assessee and until the
assessment reaches finality, the conclusion of the Assessing Officer in the assessment
Order is nothing but his own assertion. Such a stage had not been reached in the case
of the appellant herein. iii. Concealment of particulars before the Assessing Officer
would not have a bearing while the Settlement Commission exercises its powers
under Section 245H of the Act for grant of immunity from prosecution and penalty.
That if an assessee has disclosed in the return of income his true income and the
disclosure of income is full and complete, there is no reason for him to go before the
Settlement Commission. Section 245C contemplates full and true disclosure of
income to be made before the Settlement Commission only.

iv. That Section 245C does not contemplate any explanation or evidence that requires
to be offered by an applicant to the satisfaction of the Settlement Commission and as
such the Division Bench’s judgment was liable to be quashed. Section 245C
contemplates full and true disclosure of income to be made before the Settlement
Commission and the same was made by the assessee. That the learned Single Judge
of the High Court committed an error in holding that there is a statutory requirement
that concealment of particulars before the Assessing Officer would have a bearing on
the application filed before the Settlement Commission, which is required to exercise
its power under section 245H of the Act for granting immunity from prosecution and
penalty.

3.2. With the aforesaid submissions, it was prayed that the present appeal be allowed
and the judgment of the learned Single Judge of the High Court, as affirmed by the
Division Bench in the impugned judgment dated 06.07.2013, be set aside, thereby
restoring the Order of the Settlement Commission dated 04.03.2008.

3.3. Per contra, Sri Balbir Singh, learned Additional Solicitor General appearing on
behalf of the respondents-Revenue submitted that the impugned judgment of the
High Court is based on a correct appreciation of the law in the light of the facts of the
present case and therefore, the same does not call for interference by this Court. It
was further submitted as under:

i. That it is only when the completed assessments were re-opened by the Revenue and
when penalty proceedings were initiated that the application was filed by the
appellant under Section 245C (1) before the Settlement Commission. That there is a
marked difference between the terms "discovered" and "disclosed" in as much as
what was "discovered" by the Assessing Officer during the course of assessment
proceedings could not form part of what was "disclosed" by the assessee in the
application filed before the Settlement Commission. However, in the present case,
what has been "disclosed" in the application is the same as what was "discovered" by

8

Kotak Mahindra Bank Limited vs Commissioner Of Income Tax Bangalore on 25 September, 2023

the Assessing Officer. The provisions of Section 245C being made applicable to an
application filed by an assessee, the prime ingredient would be disclosure of such
income which had not been disclosed in the return of income.

ii. That the Settlement Commission on receipt of an application filed under Section
245C had to call for a report from the Commissioner and on the basis of the material
contained in such report, the Commission ought to have proceeded to consider the
application filed by the assessee, as also the question of granting of immunity from
penalty and prosecution. Since this procedure was not adhered to and the Settlement
Commission, de hors any material to demonstrate that there was any wilful
concealment on the part of the assessee to evade tax, went on to pass an order
granting immunity under Section 245H (1) to the appellant-assessee from imposition
of penalty and prosecution under the Act, the learned Single Judge rightly set aside
the Order of the Commission to such extent only and remanded the said aspect of the
matter for fresh consideration.

iii. That concealment of income before the Assessing Officer would have a bearing on
the result of the application filed before the Settlement Commission. That a perusal
of Section 245H (1) would reveal that the same cannot be read in isolation as Section
245C is embedded in 245H (1). Therefore, the two provisions would have to be read
harmoniously and when so read, it would emerge that in order to qualify for
immunity under Section 245H, the assessee must not only co-operate with the
Settlement Commission, but must also disclose income which was not reflected in the
return of income, vide Ajmera Housing Corporation vs. Commissioner of Income
Tax, (2010) 8 SCC 739. However, in the present case, the assessee has not disclosed
any income which was not reflected in the return of income, but has only brought to
the notice of the commission the income that had escaped assessment, which was
subsequently discovered by the Assessing Officer. iv. Reliance was placed on the
decision of this Court in Commissioner of Income Tax vs. B.N. Bhattacharjee, (1979)
4 SCC 121 to contend that the provisions of Chapter XIX-A of the Act, were to be
construed as having legislative intent behind them. That the policy of law as disclosed
in the said Chapter is not to provide a shelter for tax dodgers, to subsequently obtain
immunity from facing the consequences of tax evasion by simply approaching the
Settlement Commission. That the Commission would have to use its power under
Section 245(C) read with Section 245H of the Act sparingly and only in cases where
there was no intention on the part of the assessee to evade tax. However, in the
present case, the Commission did not apply its mind to the issue as to, whether, the
appellant-assessee had wilfully evaded tax, before proceeding to exercise its power
under Section 245H of the Act. Hence, the matter was rightly remanded to the
Commission to determine the issue as to grant of immunity to the assessee from levy
of penalty and prosecution.

v. Next, Sri Balbir Singh, Ld. ASG, referred to the judgment of this Court in
Commissioner of Income Tax vs. Express Newspapers Ltd., (1994) 2 SCC 374 to

9

Kotak Mahindra Bank Limited vs Commissioner Of Income Tax Bangalore on 25 September, 2023

contend that in a similar factual background, wherein the assessee had neither
disclosed before the Settlement Commission any income which was not disclosed
before the Assessing Officer, nor any details as to the manner in which such income
was derived, this Court held that the conditions specified in Section 245C of the Act,
were not complied with by the assessee and therefore, the Settlement Commission
ought not to have entertained the application before it. In that context, it was
submitted that the application in the present case also ought to have been dismissed
in limine and the Commission ought not to have entertained the same.

3.4. In the light of the aforesaid contentions, learned ASG, Sri Balbir Singh submitted
that the present appeal be dismissed as being devoid of merit and the judgment of the
learned Single Judge of the High Court, as affirmed by the Division Bench in the
impugned judgment dated 06.07.2013, be upheld.

Points for Consideration:

4. Having heard the learned counsel for the respective parties and on perusal of the material on
record, the following points would emerge for our consideration:

i. Whether the Division Bench of the High Court was right in affirming the findings of
the learned Single Judge, to the effect that the Settlement Commission ought not to
have exercised discretion under Section 245H of the Act and granted immunity to the
assessee de hors any material to demonstrate that there was no wilful concealment on
the part of the assessee to evade tax and on that ground, remanding the matter to the
Commission for fresh consideration?

ii.        What order?

Legal Framework:

5. Before proceeding further, it would be useful to refer to the legal framework
relevant to the issues which arise in this appeal.

5.1. Chapter XIX-A of the Act was introduced by the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 1975 w.e.f.
01.04.1976 for quick settlement of cases so that the tax due to the Department is realized at the
earliest, by approaching the Settlement Commission. Chapter XIX-A of the Act incorporates
Sections 245A to 245M. Section 245C which is relevant for the purpose of this case provides the
manner in which an application for settlement of cases is to be made before the Settlement
Commission. An assessee seeking to settle a case with the Department is required under Section
245C to make a full and true disclosure of his income which has not been disclosed before the
Assessing Officer, the manner in which such income has been derived and the additional tax payable
on such income.

10

Kotak Mahindra Bank Limited vs Commissioner Of Income Tax Bangalore on 25 September, 2023

5.2. Section 245D deals with the procedure to be followed by the Commission on receiving an
application for settlement under Section 245C. Sub-section (1) of Section 245C enables the
Commission to call for a report from the Commissioner. On the basis of the Commissioner’s report
and having regard to the nature and circumstances of the case or the complexity of the investigation
involved therein, the Settlement Commission may either allow the application to be proceeded with
or reject the same. Sub-section (4) of Section 245D empowers the Settlement Commission to pass an
order after examination of the records and the report submitted by the Commissioner, after hearing
the applicant and the Commissioner, or their authorized representatives and examining any further
evidence before it. 5.3. Section 245H of the Act bestows upon the Settlement Commission, discretion
to grant immunity to an applicant from prosecution for any offence under the Act or under the
Indian Penal Code, or from the imposition of any penalty under the Act, with respect to the case
covered by the settlement. The grant of such immunity is subject to such conditions which the
Commission may think it fit to impose. The precondition for granting immunity is that the applicant
must have co-operated in the proceedings before the Commission and made a ‘full and true
disclosure’ of his income and the manner in which such income has been derived.

5.4. For ready reference, the relevant provisions of Chapter XIX-A of the Act are extracted as under:

“245H. Power of Settlement Commission to grant immunity from prosecution and
penalty.—(1) The Settlement Commission may, if it is satisfied that any person who
made the application for settlement under section 245C has co-operated with the
Settlement Commission in the proceedings before it and has made a full and true
disclosure of his income and the manner in which such income has been derived,
grant to such person, subject to such conditions as it may think fit to impose for the
reasons to be recorded in writing, immunity from prosecution for any offence under
this Act or under the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) or under any other Central Act
for the time being in force 2 and also (either wholly or in part) from the imposition of
any penalty under this Act, with respect to the case covered by the settlement:

Provided that no such immunity shall be granted by the Settlement Commission in
cases where the proceedings for the prosecution for any such offence have been
instituted before the date of receipt of the application under section 245C: Provided
further that the Settlement Commission shall not grant immunity from prosecution
for any offence under the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) or under any Central Act
other than this Act and the Wealth-tax Act, 1957 (27 of 1957) to a person who makes
an application under section 245C on or after the 1st day of June, 2007.

(1A) An immunity granted to a person under sub-section (1) shall stand withdrawn if
such person fails to pay any sum specified in the order of settlement passed under
sub-section (4) of section 245D within the time specified in such order or within such
further time as may be allowed by the Settlement Commission, or fails to comply with
any other condition subject to which the immunity was granted and thereupon the
provisions of this Act shall apply as if such immunity had not been granted.

11

Kotak Mahindra Bank Limited vs Commissioner Of Income Tax Bangalore on 25 September, 2023

(2) An immunity granted to a person under sub-section (1) may, at any time, be
withdrawn by the Settlement Commission, if it is satisfied that such person had, in
the course of the settlement proceedings, concealed any particular material to the
settlement or had given false evidence, and thereupon such person may be tried for
the offence with respect to which the immunity was granted or for any other offence
of which he appears to have been guilty in connection with the settlement and shall
also become liable to the imposition of any penalty under this Act to which such
person would have been liable, had not such immunity been granted.

(3) On and from 1st day of February, 2021, the power of the Settlement Commission
under this section shall be exercised by the Interim Board and the provisions of this
section shall mutatis mutandis apply to the Interim Board as they apply to the
Settlement Commission.” Analysis:

6. On a close reading of the provisions extracted hereinabove, it emerges that under Section 245H(1)
if the Settlement Commission is satisfied that any assessee who makes the application for settlement
under Section 245C, has co-operated with the Settlement Commission in the proceedings before it
and has made a full and true disclosure of its income and the manner in which such income has
been derived, may grant immunity from prosecution or from the imposition of penalty, either wholly
or in part with respect to the case covered by the settlement. The necessary ingredients for granting
immunity from prosecution would be: (a) the assessee should have co-operated with the Settlement
Commission in the proceedings before it; and (b) the assessee should have made a full and true
disclosure of its income and the manner in which such income has been derived, to the satisfaction
of the Commission. Therefore, what is of essence is that the assessee ought to have:

(a) made full and true disclosure before the Commission, and

(b) co-operated with the Commission in the proceedings before it.

6.1. Upon being satisfied as to the said ingredients, the Commission may grant immunity from
prosecution or from the imposition of penalty, either wholly or in part with respect to the case
covered by the settlement.

7. While Section 245C provides that the disclosures as to income “not disclosed before the Assessing
Officer” must accompany the application filed before the Settlement Commission, Section 245H
provides that if the assessee has co-operated with the Settlement Commission and has made “full
and true disclosure of his income”, the Settlement Commission may grant immunity from
prosecution and penalty. It is the case of the Revenue that Section 245H (1) cannot be read in
isolation as Section 245C is embedded in 245H (1), and hence, both the Sections must be read
harmoniously. That when so read, the requirement under Section 245H would be that disclosure of
income “not disclosed before the Assessing Officer” must be made before the Commission.
According to the Revenue, in the present case, what had been "disclosed" in the application was the
same as what was "discovered" by the Assessing Officer and therefore, the application of the
assessee ought not to have been entertained by the Commission, and further, immunity under

12

Kotak Mahindra Bank Limited vs Commissioner Of Income Tax Bangalore on 25 September, 2023

Section 245H ought not to have been granted.

7.1. In this regard, it is observed that even if the pre-conditions prescribed under Section 245C are to
be read into Section 245H, it cannot be said that in every case, the material “disclosed” by the
assessee before the Commission must be something apart from what was discovered by the
Assessing Officer. What is of relevance is that the assessee offered to tax, income, in addition to the
income recorded in the return of income. Section 245C read with Section 245H only contemplates
full and true disclosure of income to be made before the Settlement Commission, regardless of the
disclosures or discoveries made before/by the Assessing Officer. It is to be noted that the Order
passed by Assessing Officer based on any discovery made, is not the final word, for, it is appealable.
However, the assessee may accept the liability, in whole or in part, as determined in the assessment
order. In such a case, the assessee may approach the Settlement Commission making ‘full and true
disclosure’ of his income and the manner in which such income has been derived. Such a disclosure
may also include the income discovered by the Assessing Officer.

7.2. To say that in every case, the material “disclosed” by the assessee before the Commission must
be something apart from what was “discovered” by the Assessing Officer, in our view, seems to be an
artificial requirement. In every case, there may not even be additional income to offer, apart from
what has been discovered by the Assessing Officer. The object of Chapter-XIXA is to settle cases and
to reduce the disputes, and not to prolong litigation. Therefore, instead of preferring an appeal
against the assessment order, the assessee may, by making a ‘full and true disclosure’ of income,
approach the Settlement Commission and offer to tax income other than that disclosed in the return
of income.

7.3. It is further to be noted that the power vested with the Settlement Commission under Section
245H is a discretionary power to be exercised if the Settlement Commission is satisfied that an
applicant has complied with the preconditions specified therein. It is trite that any judicial,
quasi-judicial or administrative authority must while exercising discretion, direct itself properly in
law and consider all the facts and material that it is bound to consider while excluding from
consideration irrelevant aspects of the matter. While exercising power under Section 245H, read
with Section 245C of the Act the relevant facts and material which ought to be considered by the
Commission are:

i. the report which is to be submitted by the Commissioner, under Section 245D(1) of
the Act;

ii. the disclosures made by the applicant before the Commission as to income, and the
source of such income;

iii. any other relevant evidence let in by the assessee or the department.

7.4. We find that in the present case, the Settlement Commission has rightly
considered the relevant facts and material and, accordingly, decided to grant
immunity to the appellant from prosecution and penalty. We arrive at this conclusion

13

Kotak Mahindra Bank Limited vs Commissioner Of Income Tax Bangalore on 25 September, 2023

having regard to the following aspects of the matter, recorded by the Settlement
Commission:

i. The Commission in its order dated 04.03.2008, noted that the appellant had
realized while adhering to the RBI guidelines of accounting of lease income that there
was an error in not disclosing the full lease rental receipts as per income tax law.
Thus, the appellant offered additional income under various heads, which were not
considered by the Assessing Officer. Considering the nature and circumstances and
the complexities of the investigation involved, the Commission was of the view that
the application was to be proceeded with under Section 245D (1) of the Act and that
prima-facie, a full and true disclosure of income not disclosed before the Assessing
Officer had been made by the appellant. The findings of the Commission to this effect
are usefully extracted as under:

“4.3 We have considered the rival submissions. We are of the opinion that there is no
bar for banking companies to approach the Commission. The disclosure of the
material facts in the return of income or the documents accompanying return of
income is not a bar for the applicant to approach the Commission. In view of this, we
hold that the applicant is eligible to approach the Commission. 5.1 Finally we have
carefully gone through the settlement application and the confidential annexures and
are satisfied that the complexities of investigation as brought out in the application
do exist. We have also considered the nature and circumstances of the case as
explained by the applicant's representative.

The applicant is an established scheduled bank with several branches. The applicant has realized
that when adhering to RBI guidelines of accounting of lease income there was an error in not
disclosing the full lease rental receipts as per income tax law. In addition the applicant has offered
additional income under various heads not considered by the Assessing Officer. We are satisfied that
the nature and circumstances and the complexities of investigation involved do warrant the
application to be proceeded with u/s 245D(1) of the Act. We are also reasonably satisfied that, prima
facie, a full and true disclosure of income not disclosed before the Assessing Officer has been made
by the applicant. Additionally, taking a practical view of the case, we are also concerned by the time
taken to dispose of this application, particularly in respect of a scheduled bank. We feel that the
matters need to be given a quietus and brought to close as speedy collection of taxes is also an
important function of the Settlement Commission. We therefore allow the application to be
proceeded with u/s 245D(1) of the Act.” The aforesaid findings of the Settlement Commission,
demonstrate that it had applied its mind to the aspect of whether there was wilful concealment of
income by the assessee. Having noted that non-disclosure was on account of RBI guidelines, which
required a different standard of disclosure, the Commission decided to grant immunity to the
appellant from prosecution and penalty. Accrodingly, the Commission passed the following order:

“TERMS OF SETTLEMENT:

14

Kotak Mahindra Bank Limited vs Commissioner Of Income Tax Bangalore on 25 September, 2023

18.1 The computation of the undisclosed income and the tax payable thereon is
furnished in the annexure 1 to 5 to this Order. Tax payable along with interest as per
law shall be paid within 35 days of receipt of this order.

18.2 Considering the co-operation extended by the applicant in the completion of the
present settlement proceedings and the true and full disclosure made, we grant
immunity u/s 245H(1) from the imposition of penalty and prosecution under the
income-tax Act and relevant sections of IPC, relating to the matters covered in the
present order. Penalty u/s 271(1)(c) was levied by the Assessing Officer for AY
1997-98 in respect of non disclosure of lease rental as income.

The penalty order is annulled considering that the non disclosure was on account of RBI guidelines
and the subsequent disclosure of additional income of lease income before the Settlement
Commission when the applicant realized the omission to disclose the same as per Income tax law.
However, the immunity so granted shall be withdrawn, if it is subsequently found that the
conditions prescribed in subsections 1(A)/(2) of Sec.245H are satisfied.

18.3 The Settlement Order passed in the above case shall be declared void, if it is subsequently found
by the Settlement Commission that it has been obtained by fraud or misrepresentation of facts.” ii.
The Commission’s order further reveals that the appellant offered additional income and disclosed
particulars of the income pertaining to the following transactions/activities:

a) Two aspects of the appellant’s leasing activity, namely, undeclared lease rent liable
to income tax; additional income on account of disallowance of depreciation on 26
assets claimed to be leased.

b) Treatment of bonus payments to employees.

c) Treatment of share issue expenses.

d) Treatment of depreciation on permanent assets and securities.

iii. The Commission’s order dated 11.12.2000, makes multiple references to the Report of the
Commissioner, as required under Section 245D (1). Therefore, we find no substance in the
submission of the Ld. ASG appearing on behalf of the Revenue that the procedure contemplated
under Section 245D was not followed and in the absence of a report, the Commission was not
correct in entertaining the appellant’s application for settlement. 7.5. In the light of the aforesaid
discussion, we are of the view that the learned Single Judge of the High Court was not right in
holding that the reasoning of the Settlement Commission was vague, unsound and contrary to
established principles. Division Bench was also not justified in affirming such view of the learned
Single Judge. The Commission, in our view, adequately applied its mind to the circumstances of the
case, as well as to the relevant law and accordingly exercised its discretion to proceed with the
application for settlement and grant immunity to the assessee from penalty and prosecution. The
Order of the Commission dated 04.03.2008 did not suffer from such infirmity as would warrant

15

Kotak Mahindra Bank Limited vs Commissioner Of Income Tax Bangalore on 25 September, 2023

interference by the High Court, by passing an order of remand.

8. It may be apposite at this juncture, to refer to the decision of this Court in Ashirvad Enterprises
vs. State of Bihar, (2004) 3 SCC 624 wherein it was stated that whether immunity from prosecution
and penalty should be granted in a given case, has to be decided by the Commission by exercising its
discretion, in the light of the facts and circumstances of each case. There is no straight jacket
formula that would universally apply in every case. Where the Commission is satisfied that the
applicant (a) has made full and true disclosure of his income and the manner in which such income
was derived, and (b) has co-operated with the Commission in the proceedings before it, immunity
under Section 245H may be granted.

9. In the present case, as noted above, we find that the appellant placed material and particulars
before the Commission as to the manner in which income pertaining to certain activities was
derived and has sought to offer such additional income to tax. Based on such disclosures and on
noting that the appellant co-operated with the Commission in the process of settlement, the
Commission proceeded to grant immunity from prosecution and penalty as contemplated under
Section 245H of the Act. The High Court ought not to have sat in appeal as to the sufficiency of the
material and particulars placed before the Commission, based on which the Commission proceeded
to grant immunity from prosecution and penalty as contemplated under Section 245H of the Act.

10. We are fortified in our view by the judgment of this Court in Jyotendrasinhji vs. S.I. Tripathi,
1993 Supp (3) SCC 389, wherein it was observed that a Court, while exercising powers under
Articles 32, 226 or 136 of the Constitution of India, as the case may be, may not interfere with an
order of the Commission, passed in exercise of its discretionary powers, except on the ground that
the order contravenes provisions of the Act or has caused prejudice to the opposite party.
Interference may also be open on the grounds of fraud, bias or malice. Therefore, this Court has
carved out a very narrow scope for judicial review of the Commission’s orders, passed in the exercise
of its discretionary powers. Hence, we hold that sufficiency of the material and particulars placed
before the Commission, based on which the Commission proceeded to grant immunity from
prosecution and penalty as contemplated under Section 245H of the Act, are beyond the scope of
judicial review, except under the circumstances set out in Jyotendrasinhji vs. S.I. Tripathi (supra).

11. We find that the judgment of this Court in Express Newspapers Ltd. (supra), sought to be relied
upon by the Respondents, would not come to their aid in the present case. It is to be noted that the
said judgment turns on its own facts. In the said case, the income tax authorities had made extensive
investigation and inquiry, whereby they had collected voluminous material demonstrating large
scale concealment of income on the part of the assessee therein. In that background, this Court
observed that the assessee, having merely offered a part of such concealed income before the
Commission, the application for settlement ought to have been rejected.

12. While we are mindful of the fact that the provisions of Chapter XIX-A of the Act are not to be
employed so as to provide a shelter for tax dodgers to obtain immunity from facing the
consequences of tax evasion by simply approaching the Settlement Commission, vide B.N.
Bhattacharjee (supra), we are however of the view that in the present case, the Commission rightly

16

Kotak Mahindra Bank Limited vs Commissioner Of Income Tax Bangalore on 25 September, 2023

exercised its discretion under Section 245H having regard to the bona fide conduct of the assessee of
offering additional income for tax, apart from the income disclosed in the return of income.

13. Before parting with the record, we may add that having regard to the legislative intent, frequent
interference with the orders or proceedings of the Settlement Commission should be avoided. We
have already indicated the limited grounds on which an order or proceeding of the Settlement
Commission can be judicially reviewed. The High Court should not scrutinize an order or
proceeding of a Settlement Commission as an appellate court. Unsettling reasoned orders of the
Settlement Commission may erode the confidence of the bonafide assessees, thereby leading to
multiplicity of litigation where settlement is possible. This larger picture has to be borne in mind.

14. In light of the aforesaid discussion, we are of the view that the Order of the Settlement
Commission dated 04.03.2008 was based on a correct appreciation of the law, in light of the facts of
the case and the High Court ought not to have interfered with the same. Therefore, the judgment
dated 06.07.2012, passed by the High Court of Karnataka at Bangalore in Writ Appeal No. 2458 of
2010 whereby the judgment of the learned Single Judge dated 20.05.2010, passed in Writ Petition
No. 12239 of 2008, remanding the matter to the Settlement Commission to determine afresh, the
question as to immunity from levy of penalty and prosecution was affirmed, is hereby set aside.
Consequently, the order of the learned Single Judge is also set aside. The Order of the Settlement
Commission dated 04.03.2008 is restored. The appeal is allowed. Pending application (s), if any,
stand disposed of in the aforesaid terms.

No order as to costs.

..………….……………J. (B.V. NAGARATHNA) ..………….……………J. (UJJAL BHUYAN) NEW DELHI;

25th SEPTEMBER, 2023.

17