M/S Asian Avenues Pvt Ltd vs Sri Syed Shoukat Hussain on 28 April, 2023

M/S Asian Avenues Pvt Ltd vs Sri Syed Shoukat Hussain on 28
April, 2023

Author: Abhay S. Oka

Bench: Rajesh Bindal, Abhay S. Oka

NON-REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NO.2927 OF 2023

M/S. ASIAN AVENUES PVT LTD.                   … APPELLANT

versus

SRI SYED SHOUKAT HUSSAIN                    ... RESPONDENT

J U D G M E N T

ABHAY S. OKA, J.

FACTS

1. The present appeal is by the defendant in a suit filed by the respondent. The respondent-plaintiff
claims to be the owner of the suit property, more particularly described in the plaint. There was a
Development Agreement-cum-General Power of Attorney (for short, ‘the Development Agreement’)
executed on 23rd October 2008 by and between the appellant appellant was granted permissive
possession for the purposes of carrying out development work on the property subject matter of the
Development Agreement. There was a dispute between the parties, which led to the respondent
cancelling the Development Agreement. The respondent issued a legal notice to the appellant calling
upon him to execute a deed of cancellation of the Development Agreement. The prayer in the suit is
for a decree directing the appellant to execute a deed of cancellation in respect of the Development
Agreement. There is also a prayer for the delivery of possession of the suit property.

2. After the suit summons was served, the appellant filed an application under Rule 11 of Order VII
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (for short, ‘CPC’). The application was filed on the ground that

1

M/S Asian Avenues Pvt Ltd vs Sri Syed Shoukat Hussain on 28 April, 2023

in view of the arbitration clause in the Development Agreement, the dispute ought to be referred to
arbitration. There was a prayer made for referring the dispute to arbitration. The Trial Court
rejected the plaint. The Trial Court also exercised power under Section 8 of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996 (for short ‘the Arbitration Act’). The Trial Court directed the parties to refer
their dispute to arbitration. In a revision application preferred by the respondent, the High Court
has interfered and has set aside the order of the Trial Court.

SUBMISSIONS

3. The learned counsel appearing for the appellant pointed out that the High Court relied upon a
decision of the Division Bench of the same Court, which holds that the adjudication on the issue
whether there is a cancellation of the Development Agreement will operate in rem and therefore, the
arbitration clause cannot be invoked.

4. The learned counsel appearing for the appellant relied upon a decision of the Bench of three
Hon’ble Judges of this Court in the case of Deccan Paper Mills Company Limited v. Regency
Mahavir Properties and Ors.1. He submitted that this Court has held that action instituted under
Section 31 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 (for short ‘the Specific Relief Act’) is not an action in rem.
He would, therefore, submit that the order of the High Court is erroneous and, therefore, the order
of the Trial Court be restored.

5. The learned counsel appearing for the respondent submitted that the arbitration clause will not
apply as the prayer in the suit is for cancellation of the agreement in accordance with Section 31 of
the Specific Relief Act. Her submission is that the issues arising under Section 31 of the Specific
Relief Act can be adjudicated only by a competent Civil Court.

OUR VIEW

6. We have considered the submissions. Admittedly, there is an arbitration clause in the
Development Agreement, which reads thus:

"All the disputes arising out of or in connection with this agreement shall be initially
resolved by mutual discussions among the developer and landowner or the
nominated representatives of both the (2021) 4 SCC 786 parties. In case of disputes
not resolved by mutual discussions, the same shall be referred to the arbitration in
accordance with the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996. The
disputes shall be referred to the mutually agreed arbitrator within from the cause of
action.

The award of the arbitrator shall be binding and final on both the parties."

(emphasis added)

2

M/S Asian Avenues Pvt Ltd vs Sri Syed Shoukat Hussain on 28 April, 2023

7. The dispute, whether the Development Agreement stands cancelled or whether the agreement can
be lawfully cancelled, is a dispute arising out of or in connection with the Development Agreement.
Therefore, as per the arbitration clause, if the issue concerning cancellation is not mutually resolved,
the same must be referred to arbitration.

8. The only ground on which the High Court has interfered is that the adjudication pursuant to
invocation of Section 31 of the Specific Relief Act is an adjudication in rem. However, in the case of
Deccan Paper Mills Company Limited1, this Court has categorically held that it is impossible to hold
that an action instituted under Section 31 of the Specific Relief for cancellation of an instrument is
an action in rem. In view of the applicability of the arbitration clause to the dispute subject matter of
the suit filed by the respondent, the learned Trial Judge was justified in passing an order under
Section 8 of the Arbitration Act by directing that the dispute be referred to the arbitration.

9. Therefore, the appeal succeeds. We set aside the impugned judgment and order of the High Court
and restore the judgment and order of the Trial Court. Parties shall act in accordance with the
mandate of Section 8 of the Arbitration Act. The appeal is allowed on the above terms with no order
as to costs.

.………………………J. (Abhay S. Oka) ..………..……………J. (Rajesh Bindal) New Delhi;

April 28, 2023.

3