M/S. Saraf Exports vs Commissioner Of Income Tax, Jaipur - Iii on 10 April, 2023

M/S. Saraf Exports vs Commissioner Of Income Tax, Jaipur - Iii
on 10 April, 2023

Author: M.R. Shah

Bench: B.V. Nagarathna, M.R. Shah

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4822 OF 2022
(@SLP (C) NO. 17539 OF 2016)

M/s. Saraf Exports                         …Appellant(s)

Versus

Commissioner of Income Tax,
Jaipur-III                                …Respondent(s)

JUDGMENT

M.R. SHAH, J.

1. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment and order passed by the High
Court of Judicature for Rajasthan at Jaipur dated 04.02.2016 in D.B. Income Tax Appeal No. 7 of
2014 by which the High Court has allowed the said appeal preferred by the Revenue and has held
that the assessee is not entitled to the deduction under Section 80-IB of the Income Tax Act, 1961
(hereinafter referred to as “Act, 1961”) with respect Reason: to the receipts under the Duty
Drawback Scheme (hereinafter referred to as “Duty Drawback”) and on transfer of Duty Entitlement
Pass Book Scheme (hereinafter referred to as “DEPB”), the assessee has preferred the present
appeal.

2. The facts leading to the present appeal in nutshell are as under:-

2.1 The assessee, a partnership firm, was engaged in the business of manufacturing
and exporting wooden handicraft items. For the Assessment Year (A.Y.) 2008-

09, the assessee filed its return on 30.09.2008 declaring its income as nil, claiming deduction of Rs.
70,197/- on account of DEPB and of Rs. 76,27,636/- on account of receipts under the Duty
Drawback.

1

M/S. Saraf Exports vs Commissioner Of Income Tax, Jaipur - Iii on 10 April, 2023

2.2 The assessee credited the receipts of the aforesaid amounts into the Profit & Loss Account and
claimed the same as “Profit / gains of business / profession” under Sections 28(iiic) and 28(iiib) of
the Act, 1961. The assessee was issued a notice under Section 143(2) of the Act, 1961.

2.3 By order dated 24.11.2010, the Deputy Commissioner disallowed the deductions as claimed. The
order of the Deputy Commissioner disallowing the exemption as claimed, came to be upheld by the
Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals). However, the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (ITAT)
allowed the appeal preferred by the assessee vide order dated 17.12.2013 by inter alia observing that
the decision of this Court in the case of Liberty India Vs. Commissioner of Income Tax, (2009) 9
SCC 328 : (2009) 317 ITR 218 (SC) can be said to be per incuriam and allowed the deductions as
claimed on the receipts of amount under DEPB Scheme and Duty Drawback Scheme.

2.4 By the impugned judgment and order and relying upon the decision of this Court in the case of
Liberty India (supra) and the decision of this Court in the case of Commissioner of Income Tax,
Karnataka Vs. Sterling Foods, Mangalore (1999) 4 SCC 98, the High Court has allowed the appeal
preferred by the Revenue and has restored the order passed by the Deputy Commissioner
disallowing the deductions claimed under Section 80-IB of the Act, 1961. The impugned judgment
and order passed by the High Court is the subject matter of the present appeal.

3. Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the assessee has heavily relied upon the decision of this
Court in the case of Commissioner of Income Tax Vs. Meghalaya Steels Limited, (2016) 6 SCC 747 :
(2016) 383 ITR 217 (SC), 3.1 It is submitted that the meaning of “derived from” under Section 80-IB
as laid down in Liberty India (supra) has been widened by this Hon’ble Court in the case of
Meghalaya Steels Limited (supra).

3.2 It is further submitted that the conclusion of Liberty India (supra) is based on the finding that
“derived from” under Section 80-IB requires a “first degree” connection with the business of the
industrial undertaking whereas the source of DEPB / Duty Drawback are incentives given under the
Duty Exemption Remission Scheme / Section 75 of the Customs Act, 1962. That applying the test of
“first degree”, this Court in the case of Liberty India (supra) held that receipts from DEPB / Duty
Drawback cannot be deducted under Section 80-IB.

3.3 It is next submitted that, however, subsequently, in the case of Meghalaya Steels Limited
(supra), the issue before this Court was whether transport, interest and power subsidy granted by
the Government were entitled to be deducted under Section 80-IB and this Hon’ble Court has held
that receipts of amount on the aforesaid subsidies were entitled to be deducted under Section 80-
IB. It is submitted that in the said case, before this Court, the Revenue relied upon Liberty India
(supra) to contend that the source of subsidies was the Government and therefore, it could not be
considered as having a direct nexus / close connection with the business of the assessee. It is
submitted that, however, this Court has rejected the said contention and held that the fact that the
Government is the “immediate source” of the subsidies is not relevant so long as the subsidies
reimbursed, wholly or partially, costs actually incurred by the assessee in manufacturing or selling
of the products, because, the profits or gains referred to in Section 80-IB means net profit, i.e.,
profit derived after deduction of manufacturing cost and selling cost.

2

M/S. Saraf Exports vs Commissioner Of Income Tax, Jaipur - Iii on 10 April, 2023

3.4 It is contended that this Court specifically relied on Section 28(iii)(b) and reiterated that any
cash assistance received from the Government against exports under any Scheme is chargeable to
income tax under the head of “Profit or gains of business or profession”. That this Court approved
the decision of the Delhi High Court in the case of Commissioner of Income Tax Vs. Dharam Pal
Prem Chand Ltd., (2009) 317 ITR 353 (Del) holding that the refund of excise duty should not be
excluded in arriving at the profit derived from business for the purpose of claiming deduction under
Section 80-IB.

3.5 It is further contended that therefore, applying the law laid down by this Court in the case of
Meghalaya Steels Limited (supra), the expression “Profit or gains derived from any business” under
Section 80-IB will include any reimbursement of cost even if the immediate reimbursement of such
source is the Government or its policy.

3.6 It is submitted by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the assessee that in the case of
Topman Exports Vs. Commissioner of Income Tax, Mumbai, (2012) 3 SCC 593, it is observed and
held that the DEPB / Duty Drawback are relatable to cost of manufacture and has a direct nexus
with the cost of imports. That the said view is in consonance with the view taken earlier in the case
of B. Desraj Vs. Commissioner of Income Tax, Salem, (2010) 14 SCC 510, which held that the Duty
Drawback was in the nature of cash assistance under Section 28(iii)(b).

3.7 It is next contended that in the case of Topman Exports (supra), it is held that the DEPB is
assistance given by the Government to an exporter to pay customs duty on its imports and it is
receivable once exports are made and an application under the DEPB Scheme is made. That this
Court has also held that DEPB also has a cost element in so much as the cost of acquiring it is not nil
because it is acquired by paying customs duty on the import content of the export product. It is
submitted that the decision of this Court in the case of Topman Exports (supra) has been
subsequently followed in the cases of ACG Associated Capsules Private Limited Vs. Commissioner of
Income Tax, Central-IV, Mumbai (2012) 3 SCC 321; Vikas Kalra Vs. Commissioner of Income Tax –
VII, New Delhi, (2012) 3 SCC 611 and Nissan Export Vs. Commissioner of Income Tax, (2014) 14
SCC 152.

3.8 It is submitted that, therefore, and in view of the development of law in Meghalaya Steels
Limited (supra) and the Topman Exports (supra) DEPB / Duty Drawback are “profits and gains
derived from any business” within the purview of Section 80-IB.

3.9 It is averred by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the assessee that various High Courts
have taken the view that the “immediate source” of the income is not determinative.

4. Shri Balbir Singh, learned ASG while opposing the present appeal has vehemently submitted that
the issue involved in the present appeal is squarely covered against the assessee in view of the
decision of this Court in the case of Liberty India (supra) and Sterling Foods, Mangalore (supra). It
is submitted that therefore, relying upon and following the decisions of this Hon’ble Court in the
aforesaid two decisions, the High Court has not committed any error in holding that the assessee is
not entitled to the deductions under Section 80-IB on the amount received by way of DEPB and

3

M/S. Saraf Exports vs Commissioner Of Income Tax, Jaipur - Iii on 10 April, 2023

Duty Drawback Schemes.

4.1 Insofar as the reliance placed by the assessee upon the decision of this Court in the case of
Meghalaya Steels Limited (supra) is concerned, it is submitted that in the case of Meghalaya Steels
Limited (supra), this Court has not disagreed with or disapproved the decision in the case of Liberty
India (supra) or Sterling Foods, Mangalore (supra). It is submitted that even otherwise, the said
decisions shall not be applicable in case of receipt of the amount under DEPB and Duty Drawback
Schemes as the same cannot be said to be an income that falls under the head “profits and gains of
business or profession”.

4.2 Shri Balbir Singh, learned ASG has taken us through the scheme of Section 28 and Section 80-IB
of the Act, 1961. It is submitted that insofar as Section 28 is concerned, it speaks about the income
that falls under the head of “profit and gains of business or profession”. That earlier there used to be
a dispute regarding the receipt by way of incentives from the Government being in the nature of
cash assistance, Duty Drawback, profits on transfer of DEPB Scheme, as to whether these receipts
were capital receipts or revenue receipts and would these be taxable. That to put an end to the
uncertainty, the legislature by way of inserting clauses (iiia), (iiib), (iiic), (iiid) and (iiie) in Section
28 has made the said incentives taxable under the head of profits and gains of business and
profession.

4.3 It is further submitted that Section 80-IB provides for deductions in respect of profits and gains
from certain ‘industrial undertakings’ other than infrastructure development undertakings. That
this Section applies to the following “industrial undertakings” which are eligible for deduction under
the said Section:-

a) Small scale industries into manufacturing and production

b) Undertaking in industrially backward state and North-Eastern Region

c) Ship

d) Hotels

e) Cold storage plants and cold chains

f) Mineral oil and natural gas

g) Housing projects

h) Scientific research and development

i) Processing, preservation and packaging of food items

j) Multiplex theatre

4

M/S. Saraf Exports vs Commissioner Of Income Tax, Jaipur - Iii on 10 April, 2023

k) Convention centre

l) Hospitals in rural and specified areas 4.4 It is next submitted that as per the
language used in Section 80-IB with regard to calculating the deduction, the
deduction would be applicable on “any profits and gains ‘derived from’ any business
referred to in…” included in the gross total income of the assessee. That the most
important thing to be considered while interpreting the said section is that the words
used are “derived from” and not “attributable to”. That the words “attributable to” in
the given clause have been given a wider connotation as opposed to the words
“derived from” which have been interpreted to be confined to “first degree sources”.
It is submitted that the words “derived from” have been given a restrictive
interpretation.

4.5 It is contended that the connotation “derived from” used in Section 80-IB has to be read to be
unit specific and cannot be read as “standalone” since the words used in the clauses of Section 80-IB
are “industrial undertaking”. That the core issue therefore, pertains to the interpretation of the
words “derived from” in Section 80-IB of the Act. It is submitted that on a fair reading of Section
80-IB read with Section 28 and on true interpretation of Section 80-IB, the DEPB and Duty
Drawback Schemes cannot be said to be deriving the income from the business undertaking and,
therefore, deduction under Section 80-IB on such receipt of the Duty Drawback shall not be
allowable as a deduction.

4.6 It is submitted that in the case of Sterling Foods, Mangalore (supra), while adjudicating the issue
of whether on earning of import entitlements under an export promotion scheme of the Central
Government, deduction under Section 80HH would be allowable or not, this Court gave the words
“derived from” used in Section 80HH a restricted interpretation and it was observed that since the
words “derived from” have been used, it shall suggest to go to the source of such profits and gains.

4.7 It is submitted that in the case of Liberty India (supra), this Court has considered in detail,
deduction in respect of profits and gains “derived from”. That in the said decision, this Court has
discussed the DEPB and Duty Drawback and thereafter has held that the Duty Drawback and DEPB
benefits cannot be credited against the cost of manufacture of goods debited in the profit and loss
account for the purpose of Section 80-IB as such remissions would constitute independent source of
income, beyond the first degree nexus between profits and the industrial undertaking.

4.8 Insofar as the reliance placed by the assessee upon the decision of this Court in the case of
Meghalaya Steels Limited (supra) is concerned, it is submitted that the question in Meghalaya Steels
Limited (supra) pertained to three subsidies, namely, a) Transport Subsidy, b) Interest Subsidy and
c) Power Subsidy. That this Court held that since these subsidies directly affect the cost of
manufacturing, they have a direct nexus between the profits and gains of the undertaking. Since
these subsidies have a direct nexus, they can be said to be derived from the industrial undertaking.
It is submitted that though in the said decision, this Court has not held the decision in the case of
Liberty India (supra) to be bad in law, in para 20, this Court has also observed that since if there is
no export, there is no DEPB entitlement. Therefore, its relation to manufacture of a product and/or

5

M/S. Saraf Exports vs Commissioner Of Income Tax, Jaipur - Iii on 10 April, 2023

sale within India is not proximate or direct but is one step removed. That it is observed that the
object behind the DEPB entitlement, as has been held by this Court, is to neutralise the incidence of
customs duty payment on the import content of the export product. In such a scenario, it cannot be
said that such duty exemption scheme is derived from profits and gains made by the industrial
undertaking or business itself. It is submitted that, therefore, in light of the above, the decision in
the case of Meghalaya Steels Limited (supra) shall not be applicable to the present matter as it
pertains to the above-mentioned subsidies only. It is next submitted that though binding, the ITAT
did not follow the decisions of this Court in the case of Liberty India (supra) and Sterling Foods,
Mangalore (supra), and, therefore, the High Court has rightly set aside the order passed by the ITAT
following the decisions of this Court in the case of Liberty India (supra) and Sterling Foods,
Mangalore (supra). It is submitted that therefore, the impugned judgment and order passed by the
High Court is not required to be interfered with.

4.9 Making above submissions, it is prayed that the present appeal be dismissed.

5. Heard the learned counsel for the respective parties at length.

6. The short question, which is posed for consideration of this Court is:-

Whether on the income amount received / profit from DEPB and Duty Drawback
Schemes, the assessee is entitled to deduction under Section 80- IB of the Income
Tax Act, 1961 and whether such an income can be said to be an income “derived
from” industrial undertaking?

7. While considering the aforesaid issue/question, relevant portion of Section 28 and Section 80-IB
are required to be referred to, which are as under:-

“28. Profits and gains of business or profession.—The following income shall be
chargeable to income tax under the head “Profits and gains of business or
profession”, — XXXXXXXX (iii-a) profits on sale of a licence granted under the
Imports (Control) Order, 1955, made under the Imports and Exports (Control) Act,
1947 (18 of 1947);

(iii-b) cash assistance (by whatever name called) received or receivable by any person
against exports under any scheme of the Government of India;

(iii-c) any duty of customs or excise repaid or repayable as drawback to any person
against exports under the Customs and Central Excise Duties Drawback Rules, 1971;
(iii-d) any profit on the transfer of the Duty Entitlement Pass Book Scheme, being the
Duty Remission Scheme under the export and import policy formulated and
announced under Section 5 of the Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act,
1992 (22 of 1992);

6

M/S. Saraf Exports vs Commissioner Of Income Tax, Jaipur - Iii on 10 April, 2023

(iii-e) any profit on the transfer of the Duty Free Replenishment Certificate, being the
Duty Remission Scheme under the export and import policy formulated and
announced under Section 5 of the Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act,
1992 (22 of 1992);

XXXXXXXX” “80-IB. Deduction in respect of profits and gains from certain
industrial undertakings other than infrastructure development undertakings.—(1)
Where the gross total income of an assessee includes any profits and gains derived
from any business referred to in sub-sections (3) to (11), (11-A) and (11- B) (such
business being hereinafter referred to as the eligible business), there shall, in
accordance with and subject to the provisions of this section, be allowed, in
computing the total income of the assessee, a deduction from such profits and gains
of an amount equal to such percentage and for such number of assessment years as
specified in this section.

(2) This section applies to any industrial undertaking which fulfils all the following
conditions, namely:—

(i) it is not formed by splitting up, or the reconstruction, of a business already in
existence:

Provided that this condition shall not apply in respect of an industrial undertaking
which is formed as a result of the re-establishment, reconstruction or revival by the
assessee of the business of any such industrial undertaking as is referred to in Section
33-B, in the circumstances and within the period specified in that section;

(ii) it is not formed by the transfer to a new business of machinery or plant previously
used for any purpose;

(iii) it manufactures or produces any article or thing, not being any article or thing
specified in the list in the Eleventh Schedule, or operates one or more cold storage
plant or plants, in any part of India:

Provided that the condition in this clause shall, in relation to a small-scale industrial
undertaking or an industrial undertaking referred to in sub-section (4) shall apply as
if the words ‘not being any article or thing specified in the list in the Eleventh
Schedule’ had been omitted.

Explanation 1.—For the purposes of clause

(ii), any machinery or plant which was used outside India by any person other than
the assessee shall not be regarded as machinery or plant previously used for any
purpose, if the following conditions are fulfilled, namely:—

7

M/S. Saraf Exports vs Commissioner Of Income Tax, Jaipur - Iii on 10 April, 2023

(a) such machinery or plant was not, at any time previous to the date of the
installation by the assessee, used in India;

(b) such machinery or plant is imported into India from any country outside India;
and

(c) no deduction on account of depreciation in respect of such machinery or plant has
been allowed or is allowable under the provisions of this Act in computing the total
income of any person for any period prior to the date of the installation of the
machinery or plant by the assessee.

Explanation 2.—Where in the case of an industrial undertaking, any machinery or plant or any part
thereof previously used for any purpose is transferred to a new business and the total value of the
machinery or plant or part so transferred does not exceed twenty per cent of the total value of the
machinery or plant used in the business, then, for the purposes of clause (ii) of this sub-section, the
condition specified therein shall be deemed to have been complied with;

(iv) in a case where the industrial undertaking manufactures or produces articles or things, the
undertaking employs ten or more workers in a manufacturing process carried on with the aid of
power, or employs twenty or more workers in a manufacturing process carried on without the aid of
power.

(3) The amount of deduction in the case of an industrial undertaking shall be twenty-five per cent
(or thirty per cent where the assessee is a company), of the profits and gains derived from such
industrial undertaking for a period of ten consecutive assessment years (or twelve consecutive
assessment years where the assessee is a cooperative society) beginning with the initial assessment
year subject to the fulfilment of the following conditions, namely:—

(i) it begins to manufacture or produce, articles or things or to operate such plant or plants at any
time during the period beginning from the 1st day of April, 1991 and ending on the 31st day of
March, 1995 or such further period as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, specify with reference to any particular undertaking;

(ii) where it is an industrial undertaking being a small-scale industrial undertaking, it begins to
manufacture or produce articles or things or to operate its cold storage plant not specified in
sub-section (4) or sub-section (5) at any time during the period beginning on the 1st day of April,
1995 and ending on the 31st day of March, 2002.

(4) The amount of deduction in the case of an industrial undertaking in an industrially backward
State specified in the Eighth Schedule shall be hundred per cent of the profits and gains derived
from such industrial undertaking for five assessment years beginning with the initial assessment
year and thereafter twenty-five per cent (or thirty per cent where the assessee is a company) of the
profits and gains derived from such industrial undertaking:

8

M/S. Saraf Exports vs Commissioner Of Income Tax, Jaipur - Iii on 10 April, 2023

Provided that the total period of deduction does not exceed ten consecutive
asssessment years (or twelve consecutive assessment years where the assessee is a
cooperative society) subject to fulfilment of the condition that it begins to
manufacture or produce articles or things or to operate its cold storage plant or
plants during the period beginning on the 1st day of April, 1993 and ending on the
31st day of March, 2004:

Provided further that in the case of such industries in the North-Eastern Region, as
may be notified by the Central Government, the amount of deduction shall be
hundred per cent of profits and gains for a period of ten assessment years, and the
total period of deduction shall in such a case not exceed ten assessment years:

Provided also that no deduction under this sub-section shall be allowed for the
assessment year beginning on the 1st day of April, 2004 or any subsequent year to
any undertaking or enterprise referred to in sub- section (2) of Section 80-IC.

Provided also that in the case of an industrial undertaking in the State of Jammu and
Kashmir, the provisions of the first proviso shall have effect as if for the figures,
letters and words “31st day of March, 2004”, the figures, letters and words “31st day
of March, 2012” had been substituted:

Provided also that no deduction under this sub-section shall be allowed to an
industrial undertaking in the State of Jammu and Kashmir which is engaged in the
manufacture or production of any article or thing specified in Part C of the Thirteenth
Schedule.

(5) The amount of deduction in the case of an industrial undertaking located in such
industrially backward districts as the Central Government may, having regard to the
prescribed guidelines, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf as
industrially backward district of category ‘A’ or an industrially backward district of
category ‘B’ shall be,—

(i) hundred per cent of the profits and gains derived from an industrial undertaking
located in a backward district of category ‘A’ for five assessment years beginning with
the initial assessment year and thereafter, twenty-five per cent (or thirty per cent
where the assessee is a company) of the profits and gains of an industrial
undertaking:

Provided that the total period of deduction shall not exceed ten consecutive
assessment years or where the assessee is a cooperative society, twelve consecutive
assessment years:

Provided further that the industrial undertaking begins to manufacture or produce
articles or things or to operate its cold storage plant or plants at any time during the

9

M/S. Saraf Exports vs Commissioner Of Income Tax, Jaipur - Iii on 10 April, 2023

period beginning on the 1st day of October, 1994 and ending on the 31st day of
March, 2004;

(ii) hundred per cent of the profits and gains derived from an industrial undertaking
located in a backward district of category ‘B’ for three assessment years beginning
with the initial assessment year and thereafter, twenty-five per cent (or thirty per
cent where the assessee is a company) of the profits and gains of an industrial
undertaking:

Provided that the total period of deduction does not exceed eight consecutive
assessment years (or where the assessee is a cooperative society, twelve consecutive
assessment years):

Provided further that the industrial undertaking begins to manufacture or produce
articles or things or to operate its cold storage plant or plants at any time during the
period beginning on the 1st day of October, 1994 and ending on the 31st day of
March, 2004.

XXXXXXXX” 7.1 Thus, as per Sections 28(iiid) and (iiie) any profit on the transfer of
the Duty Drawback and on transfer of DEPB Schemes, etc., shall be chargeable to
income tax under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”. It appears
that earlier, there used to be a dispute regarding the receipt by way of incentives from
the Government being in the nature of cash assistance, duty drawback, profits on
transfer of DEPB Scheme, etc., i.e., as to whether these receipts were capital receipt
or revenue receipt and would thus, be taxable. However, thereafter, and in order to
put an end to the dispute, the legislature by way of inserting clauses 28 (iiia), (iiib),
(iiic), (iiid) and (iiie) has made the said incentives taxable under the head of “profits
and gains of business and profession”.

7.2 Section 80-IB provides for deductions in respect of profits and gains from certain industrial
undertakings. Therefore, as such for claiming deductions under Section 80-IB, it must be on the
“profits and gains derived from industrial undertakings” mentioned in Section 80-IB. An identical
question came to be considered by this Court and, more particularly, with respect to the profit from
DEPB and Duty Drawback Schemes, in the case of Liberty India (supra).

7.3 After taking into consideration the DEPB and Duty Drawback Schemes, ultimately, it is observed
and held in the case of Liberty India (supra) that DEPB / Duty Drawback Schemes are incentives
which flow from the schemes framed by the Central Government or from Section 75 of the Customs
Act, 1962 and, hence, incentive profits are not profits derived from the eligible business under
Section 80-IB. It is observed that they belong to the category of ancillary profits of such
undertakings.

7.4 Similar view was also expressed with respect to the Duty Drawback. Thereafter, in paragraph 43
of the above decision, it is observed and held that duty drawback, DEPB benefits, rebates, etc.

10

M/S. Saraf Exports vs Commissioner Of Income Tax, Jaipur - Iii on 10 April, 2023

cannot be credited against the cost of manufacture of goods debited in the profit and loss account
for purposes of Sections 80-IA/80-IB as such remissions (credits) would constitute an independent
source of income beyond the first degree nexus between profits and the industrial undertaking.
Thus, it is observed and held that duty drawback receipts / DEPB benefits do not form part of the
net profits of eligible industrial undertakings for the purpose of Section 80-IB of the Act, 1961. The
relevant discussions are in paragraphs 24, 28 to 36, 38, 39, 41, 43 and 45, which are as under:-

“24. Before analysing Section 80-IB, as a prefatory note, it needs to be mentioned
that the 1961 Act broadly provides for two types of tax incentives, namely,
investment-linked incentives and profit-linked incentives. Chapter VI-A which
provides for incentives in the form of tax deductions essentially belong to the
category of “profit-linked incentives”. Therefore, when Sections 80-IA/80-IB refers
to profits derived from eligible business, it is not the ownership of that business
which attracts the incentives. What attracts the incentives under Sections
80-IA/80-IB is the generation of profits (operational profits).

XXXXXXXX

28. In the present batch of cases, the controversy which arises for determination is:

whether DEPB credit/duty drawback receipt comes within the first degree sources?

29. According to the assessee(s), DEPB credit/duty drawback receipt reduces the
value of purchases (cost neutralisation), hence, it comes within first degree source as
it increases the net profit proportionately.

30. On the other hand, according to the Department, DEPB credit/duty drawback
receipt do not come within the first degree source as the said incentives flow from the
incentive schemes enacted by the Government of India or from Section 75 of the
Customs Act, 1962. Hence, according to the Department, in the present cases, the
first degree source is the incentive scheme/provisions of the Customs Act. In this
connection, the Department places heavy reliance on the judgment of this Court in
Sterling Foods [(1999) 4 SCC 98 : (1999) 237 ITR 579] .

31. Therefore, in the present cases, in which we are required to examine the eligible
business of an industrial undertaking, we need to trace the source of the profits to
manufacture. (See CIT v. Kirloskar Oil Engines Ltd. [(1986) 157 ITR 762 (Bom)])

32. Continuing our analysis of Sections 80-IA/80-IB it may be mentioned that sub-

section (13) of Section 80-IB provides for applicability of the provisions of sub-section (5) and
sub-sections (7) to (12) of Section 80- IA, so far as may be, applicable to the eligible business under
Section 80-IB. Therefore, at the outset, we stated that one needs to read Sections 80-I, 80-IA and
80-IB as having a common scheme.

11

M/S. Saraf Exports vs Commissioner Of Income Tax, Jaipur - Iii on 10 April, 2023

33. On perusal of sub-section (5) of Section 80-IA, it is noticed that it provides for the manner of
computation of profits of an eligible business. Accordingly, such profits are to be computed as if
such eligible business is the only source of income of the assessee.

Therefore, the devices adopted to reduce or inflate the profits of eligible business has got to be
rejected in view of the overriding provisions of sub-section (5) of Section 80-IA, which are also
required to be read into Section 80-IB. [See Section 80-IB(13)]. We may reiterate that Sections 80-I,
80-IA and 80- IB have a common scheme and if so read it is clear that the said sections provide for
incentives in the form of deduction(s) which are linked to profits and not to investment.

34. On an analysis of Sections 80-IA and 80-IB it becomes clear that any industrial undertaking,
which becomes eligible on satisfying sub-section (2), would be entitled to deduction under
sub-section (1) only to the extent of profits derived from such industrial undertaking after specified
date(s). Hence, apart from eligibility, sub-section (1) purports to restrict the quantum of deduction
to a specified percentage of profits. This is the importance of the words “derived from industrial
undertaking” as against “profits attributable to industrial undertaking”.

35. DEPB is an incentive. It is given under the Duty Exemption Remission Scheme. Essentially, it is
an export incentive. No doubt, the object behind DEPB is to neutralise the incidence of customs duty
payment on the import content of export product. This neutralisation is provided for by credit to
customs duty against export product. Under DEPB, an exporter may apply for credit as percentage
of FOB value of exports made in freely convertible currency. Credit is available only against the
export product and at rates specified by DGFT for import of raw materials, components, etc. DEPB
credit under the Scheme has to be calculated by taking into account the deemed import content of
the export product as per the basic customs duty and special additional duty payable on such
deemed imports.

36. Therefore, in our view, DEPB/duty drawback are incentives which flow from the schemes
framed by the Central Government or from Section 75 of the Customs Act, 1962, hence, incentives
profits are not profits derived from the eligible business under Section 80-IB. They belong to the
category of ancillary profits of such undertakings.

XXXXXXXX

38. Section 75 of the Customs Act, 1962 and Section 37 of the Central Excise Act, 1944 empower the
Government of India to provide for repayment of customs and excise duty paid by an assessee. The
refund is of the average amount of duty paid on materials of any particular class or description of
goods used in the manufacture of export goods of specified class. The Rules do not envisage a refund
of an amount arithmetically equal to customs duty or central excise duty actually paid by an
individual importer-cum-

manufacturer. Sub-section (2) of Section 75 of the Customs Act requires the amount of drawback to
be determined on a consideration of all the circumstances prevalent in a particular trade and also
based on the facts situation relevant in respect of each of various classes of goods imported.

12

M/S. Saraf Exports vs Commissioner Of Income Tax, Jaipur - Iii on 10 April, 2023

Basically, the source of duty drawback receipt lies in Section 75 of the Customs Act and Section 37 of
the Central Excise Act.

39. Analysing the concept of remission of duty drawback and DEPB, we are satisfied that the
remission of duty is on account of the statutory/policy provisions in the Customs Act/Scheme(s)
framed by the Government of India. In the circumstances, we hold that profits derived by way of
such incentives do not fall within the expression “profits derived from industrial undertaking” in
Section 80-IB.

XXXXXXXX

41. The cost of purchase includes duties and taxes (other than those subsequently recoverable by the
enterprise from taxing authorities), freight inwards and other expenditure directly attributable to
the acquisition. Hence trade discounts, rebate, duty drawback, and such similar items are deducted
in determining the costs of purchase. Therefore, duty drawback, rebate, etc. should not be treated as
adjustment (credited) to cost of purchase or manufacture of goods. They should be treated as
separate items of revenue or income and accounted for accordingly (see p. 44 of Indian Accounting
Standards & GAAP by Dolphy D'Souza).

XXXXXXXX

43. Therefore, we are of the view that duty drawback, DEPB benefits, rebates, etc. cannot be credited
against the cost of manufacture of goods debited in the profit and loss account for purposes of
Sections 80- IA/80-IB as such remissions (credits) would constitute independent source of income
beyond the first degree nexus between profits and the industrial undertaking.

XXXXXXXX

45. In the circumstances, we hold that duty drawback receipt/DEPB benefits do not form part of the
net profits of eligible industrial undertaking for the purposes of Sections 80- I/80-IA/80-IB of the
1961 Act. The appeals are, accordingly, dismissed with no order as to costs.” 7.5 Prior thereto, the
treatment of “profits and gains derived from industrial undertakings” for the purpose of
determining tax liability came up for consideration before this Court in the case of Sterling Foods,
Mangalore (supra), which was followed by this Court in the case of Liberty India (supra). In the case
of Sterling Foods, Mangalore (supra), in paragraph 7 and 13, it is observed and held as under:-

“7. The question, therefore, was whether the income derived by the assessee by the sale of the import
entitlements was profit and gain derived from its industrial undertaking of processing seafood. The
Division Bench of the High Court came to the conclusion that the income which the assessee had
made by selling the import entitlements was not a profit and gain which it had derived from its
industrial undertaking. For that purpose, it relied upon the decision of this Court in Cambay Electric
Supply Industrial Co. Ltd. v. CIT [(1978) 2 SCC 644 :

13

M/S. Saraf Exports vs Commissioner Of Income Tax, Jaipur - Iii on 10 April, 2023

1978 SCC (Tax) 119 : (1978) 113 ITR 84]. It was there held that the expression
“attributable to” was wider in import than the expression “derived from”. The
expression of wider import, namely, “attributable to”, was used when the legislature
intended to cover receipts from sources other than the actual conduct of the business.
The Division Bench of the High Court observed that to obtain the benefit of Section
80-HH the assessee had to establish that the profits and gains were derived from its
industrial undertaking and it was just not sufficient that a commercial connection
was established between the profits earned and the industrial undertaking. The
industrial undertaking itself had to be the source of the profit. The business of the
industrial undertaking had directly to yield that profit. The industrial undertaking
had to be the direct source of that profit and not the means to earn any other profit.
Reference was also made to the meaning of the word “source”, and it was held that
the import entitlements that the assessee had earned were awarded by the Central
Government under the scheme to encourage exports. The source referable to the
profits and gains arising out of the sale proceeds of the import entitlement was,
therefore, the scheme of the Central Government and not the industrial undertaking
of the assessee.

XXXXXXXX

13. We do not think that the source of the import entitlements can be said to be the
industrial undertaking of the assessee. The source of the import entitlements can, in
the circumstances, only be said to be the Export Promotion Scheme of the Central
Government whereunder the export entitlements become available. There must be,
for the application of the words “derived from”, a direct nexus between the profits
and gains and the industrial undertaking. In the instant case the nexus is not direct
but only incidental. The industrial undertaking exports processed seafood. By reason
of such export, the Export Promotion Scheme applies. Thereunder, the assessee is
entitled to import entitlements, which it can sell. The sale consideration therefrom
cannot, in our view, be held to constitute a profit and gain derived from the assessee's
industrial undertaking.” 7.6 Therefore, following the law laid down by this Court in
the case of Sterling Foods, Mangalore (supra) and Liberty India (supra) as such, no
error has been committed by the High Court in holding that on the profit from DEPB
and Duty Drawback claims, the assessee shall not be entitled to the deductions under
Section 80-IB as such income cannot be said to be an income “derived from”
industrial undertaking and even otherwise as per Section 28(iiid) and (iiie), such an
income is chargeable to tax.

7.7 Insofar as reliance placed by the learned counsel for the assessee upon the
subsequent decision of this Court in the case of Meghalaya Steels Limited (supra) is
concerned, at the outset, it is required to be noted that in the case of Meghalaya
Steels Limited (supra), it was a case of three subsidies, namely a) Transport Subsidy,
b) Interest Subsidy, and c) Power Subsidy and in that context this Court observed and
held that since these subsidies directly affect the cost of manufacturing, they have a

14

M/S. Saraf Exports vs Commissioner Of Income Tax, Jaipur - Iii on 10 April, 2023

direct nexus with the profits and gains of the undertaking and since these subsidies
have a direct nexus, they can be said to be derived from the industrial undertaking. It
is to be noted that in the case of Meghalaya Steels Limited (supra), this Court did take
note of the decision in the case of Liberty India (supra), however, this Court
specifically observed that the case of Liberty India (supra) was concerned with an
export incentive, which is very far removed from reimbursement of an element of
cost. While dealing with the decision in the case of Liberty India (supra), this Court
distinguished Duty Entitlement Pass Book and Duty Drawback Schemes and
specifically observed that the DPEB / Duty Drawback Scheme is not related to the
business of an industrial undertaking for manufacturing or selling its products and
the DEPB entitlement arises only when the undertaking goes on to export the said
product, that is, after it manufactures or produces the same. In paragraph 20, in the
case of Meghalaya Steels Limited (supra), while distinguishing the profit derived
from DEPB / Duty Drawback, it is observed and held as under:-

“20. Liberty India [Liberty India v. CIT, (2009) 9 SCC 328] being the fourth
judgment in this line also does not help the Revenue.

What this Court was concerned with was an export incentive, which is very far removed from
reimbursement of an element of cost. A DEPB drawback scheme is not related to the business of an
industrial undertaking for manufacturing or selling its products. DEPB entitlement arises only when
the undertaking goes on to export the said product, that is, after it manufactures or produces the
same. Pithily put, if there is no export, there is no DEPB entitlement, and therefore its relation to
manufacture of a product and/or sale within India is not proximate or direct but is one step
removed. Also, the object behind DEPB entitlement, as has been held by this Court, is to neutralise
the incidence of customs duty payment on the import content of the export product which is
provided for by credit to customs duty against the export product. In such a scenario, it cannot be
said that such duty exemption scheme is derived from profits and gains made by the industrial
undertaking or business itself.” Thus, from paragraph 20 of the said decision, it can be seen that this
Court did not disapprove of the decision of this Court in the case of Liberty India (supra). Even in
the case of Meghalaya Steels Limited (supra), this Court did not consider the earlier decision in the
case of Sterling Foods, Mangalore (supra). Thus, the decision of this Court in the cases of Liberty
India (supra) and Sterling Foods, Mangalore (supra), which as such are on DEPB / Duty Drawback
Schemes clinch the issue at hand. It cannot be said that the decision taken in the case of Meghalaya
Steels Limited (supra) is contrary to the decisions in the case of Sterling Foods, Mangalore (supra)
and Liberty India (supra). On the contrary, the observations made in paragraph 20 can be said to be
in favour of the Revenue and against the assessee.

8. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the High Court has rightly held that the
respondent – assessee is not entitled to the deductions under Section 80-IB on the amount of DEPB
as well as Duty Drawback Schemes. We hold that on the profit earned from DEPB / Duty Drawback
Schemes, the assessee is not entitled to deduction under Section 80-IB of the Act, 1961. Any
contrary decision of any High Court is held to be not good law.

15

M/S. Saraf Exports vs Commissioner Of Income Tax, Jaipur - Iii on 10 April, 2023

Present appeal deserves to be dismissed and is accordingly dismissed. However, in the facts and
circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.

………………………………….J. [M.R. SHAH] ………………………………….J. [B.V. NAGARATHNA] NEW
DELHI;

APRIL 10, 2023.

16