M/S. South Indian Bank Ltd. vs Naveen Mathew Philip on 17 April, 2023

M/S. South Indian Bank Ltd. vs Naveen Mathew Philip on 17
April, 2023

Author: M.M. Sundresh

Bench: M. M. Sundresh

REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NOS.                         OF 2023
[Arising out of SLP (Civil) Nos. 22021-22022 of 2022]

M/S. SOUTH INDIAN BANK LTD. & ORS.                                       ..APPELLANTS

VERSUS

NAVEEN MATHEW PHILIP & ANR. ETC. ETC.                                      ..RESPONDENTS

JUDGMENT

M.M. SUNDRESH, J.

1. Leave granted.

2. Seeking enforcement of a unilateral offer concerning private financial transactions, while
questioning the steps taken to recover the dues on the failure to comply with the one-time
settlements, extraordinary jurisdiction of the High Court was sought to be invoked. Acceding to the
request made by duly interfering with the action taken by the Appellants, orders were passed, in
exercise of the powers conferred under Article 226 of the Constitution of India by the High Court of
Kerala, which are impugned in the present appeals.

3. Heard Mr. K.V. Vishwanathan, learned Senior Counsel for the Appellants and Mr. Shyam Divan,
learned Senior Counsel for the Respondents.

4. Two loans were obtained by the Respondents, being a housing / KCC overdraft loan and a
business loan. The accounts of the Respondents were declared as non-

performing assets (“NPA”) on 27.05.2021. Notices under Section 13(2) of the Securitization and
Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 (hereinafter
referred to as “SARFAESI Act”) were issued on 07.08.2021 and 12.08.2021, respectively, which were
duly replied to by the Respondents on 28.10.2021, seeking twelve months’ time to repay the loan.

1

M/S. South Indian Bank Ltd. vs Naveen Mathew Philip on 17 April, 2023

5. Strangely enough, within 3 days of the reply dated 28.10.2021, prior to the expiry of the statutory
period prescribed, a challenge was laid to the demand notice issued under Section 13(2) of the
SARFAESI Act, by filing Writ Petition No. 23940 of 2021. Entertaining the said lis, a direction was
issued to the Appellants to consider the proposal placed. In due compliance of the aforesaid order,
the Respondents were allowed to remit the dues accrued in five installments instead of twelve. The
extended benefit conferred was not utilized by the Respondents, and therefore, a reminder was also
sent. Receiving no response, two notices under Section 13(4) of the SARFAESI Act, were issued on
02.12.2021 and 20.12.2021.

6. Impugning the aforesaid notices, two writ petitions were filed by the Respondents, being Writ
Petition No. 30238 of 2021 and 30450 of 2021 questioning the action taken, through a writ of
certiorari while praying for a positive direction to accept the unilateral offers made. It is to be noted
that the Debt Recovery Tribunal, though was not functional at the time of filing the aforesaid Writ
Petitions, became so from the month of March, 2022.

7. Taking note of the then prevailing situation resulting in the post of Presiding Officer lying vacant
for proper adjudication in various Tribunals, an order was passed by this Court in Special Leave
Petition No. 10911 dated 16.12.2021, “Learned Senior Counsel appearing for the petitioner has
brought to our notice the difficulty being faced by parties on account of non-appointment of
members in DRTs and DRATs.

He requested that the matters before DRT and DRAT can be directed to be considered by other
Tribunals like Central Administrative Tribunal, Armed Forces Tribunal and Industrial Tribunal
within the State.

With a view to resolve the problem being faced by the parties, for the time being and purely as a
stop-gap arrangement, we request the concerned High Court(s) to entertain the matters falling
within the jurisdiction of DRTs and DRATs under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, till
further orders.

We make it clear that once the Tribunal(s) is/are constituted, the matters can be relegated to the
Tribunals by the High Court(s).

List the matter on 21-1-2022.”

8. As could be seen, the order is self-explanatory, making it clear that it is only an interim
arrangement, and therefore, the pending matters ought to be transferred to the concerned Tribunals
when they start functioning with their respective Presiding Officers duly in-charge. The aforesaid
matter was disposed of by the order dated 12.09.2022, “1. Counsel appearing on behalf of the
petitioner states that since the post in the Debt Recovery Tribunal has been filled up, the cause does
not survive.

2. The Special Leave Petition is accordingly disposed of without this Court expressing any opinion
on the question of law raised.

2

3. Pending applications, if any, stands disposed of.”

M/S. South Indian Bank Ltd. vs Naveen Mathew Philip on 17 April, 2023

9. Notwithstanding the orders passed above by this Court, the High Court took upon itself to decide
the issues raised, on merit, by allowing the Respondents to make deferred payment in 20
installments, a relief which was more than the one prayed for. The installments were modified by
the learned Division Bench in Writ Appeal No. 1492 of 2022 and 1497 of 2022, to 12 months as
originally prayed for by the Respondents while declining to interfere with the decision of the learned
Single Judge on merit. Impugning the aforesaid orders, the lender bank has filed the present
appeals.

10. The learned Senior Counsel appearing for the Appellants fairly submitted that the relief granted
by the High Court may not be disturbed while pressing for the reiteration of law which might guide
the High Court in not entertaining such writ petitions in the future. It is further submitted that the
High Court has exercised writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, even after
the Debt Recovery Tribunal became functional, in about 185 cases pertaining to the Appellants
alone. After the filing of the Special Leave Petitions, 35 Writ Petitions have been filed. Resultantly,
the Appellants are not in a position to proceed further to recover the amounts due from the
defaulting borrowers/guarantors, defeating the object of the SARFAESI Act itself.

11. Learned Senior Counsel brought to the notice of this Court that a writ petition involving private
individuals over a financial transaction is not maintainable.

Despite the position being settled, the interference by various High Courts continues. The very
objective of the Act 54 of 2002 is being frustrated by such interference. The alternative remedy
being effective and efficacious, the extraordinary jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226 of
the Constitution of India, either be a writ of certiorari or mandamus, ought not to have been
invoked. One has to see the impact on the Appellants of the repeated interference by the High Court.
The learned Senior Counsel took us through the following decisions:

(cid:131) Phoenix Arc Private Limited vs. Vishwa Bharati Vidya Mandir & Ors., (2022) 5 SCC
345.

(cid:131) Federal Bank Ltd. vs. Sagar Thomas & Ors., (2003) 10 SCC 733.

(cid:131) State Bank of India vs. Arvindra Electronics (P) Ltd., 2022 SCCOnline SC 1522.

(cid:131) United Bank of India vs. Satywati Tondon & Others, (2010) 8 SCC 110 (cid:131) Authorized Officer, State
Bank of Travancore & Another vs. Mathew K.C., (2018) 3 SCC 85 (cid:131) Varimadugu OBI Reddy vs. B.
Sreenivasulu & Others, (2023) 2 SCC 168.

12. The learned Senior Counsel appearing for the Respondents submitted that at the time of filing
the Writ Petitions, the Tribunal was not functioning. The power available under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India cannot be taken away, notwithstanding the existence of the Tribunal. While
appreciating the stand taken by the Appellants, it is submitted that when extreme steps are taken, a

3

litigant may not have any other option except to approach the writ court.

M/S. South Indian Bank Ltd. vs Naveen Mathew Philip on 17 April, 2023

13. In view of the fair stand taken by the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the Appellants, we do
not wish to interfere with the impugned orders passed. We may, however, reiterate the settled
position of law on the interference of the High Court invoking Article 226 of the Constitution of
India in commercial matters, where an effective and efficacious alternative forum has been
constituted through a statute. We are also constrained to take judicial notice of the fact that certain
High Courts continue to interfere in such matters, leading to a regular supply of cases before this
Court. One such High Court is that of Punjab & Haryana.

14. A writ of certiorari is to be issued over a decision when the Court finds that the process does not
conform to the law or statute. In other words, courts are not expected to substitute themselves with
the decision-making authority while finding fault with the process along with the reasons assigned.
Such a writ is not expected to be issued to remedy all violations. When a Tribunal is constituted, it is
expected to go into the issues of fact and law, including a statutory violation.

A question as to whether such a violation would be over a mandatory prescription as against a
discretionary one is primarily within the domain of the Tribunal. So also, the issue governing
waiver, acquiescence, and estoppel. We wish to place reliance on the decision of this Court in Hari
Vishnu Kamath v.

Syed Ahmad Ishaque, (1955) 1 SCR 1104, “Then the question is whether there are proper grounds for
the issue of certiorari in the present case. There was considerable argument before us as to the
character and scope of the writ of certiorari and the conditions under which it could be issued. The
question has been considered by this Court in Parry & Co. v. Commercial Employees' Association,
Madras [(1952) SCR 519], Veerappa Pillai v. Raman and Raman Ltd. & Others [(1952) SCR 583],
Ibrahim Aboobaker v. Custodian General [(1952) SCR 696] and quite recently in T.C. Basappa v. T.
Nagappa [(1955) SCR 250]. On these authorities, the following propositions may be taken as
established: (1) Certiorari will be issued for correcting errors of jurisdiction, as when an inferior
Court or Tribunal acts without jurisdiction or in excess of it, or fails to exercise it. (2) Certiorari will
also be issued when the Court or Tribunal acts illegally in the exercise of its undoubted jurisdiction,
as when it decides without giving an opportunity to the parties to be heard, or violates the principles
of natural justice. (3) The Court issuing a writ of certiorari acts in exercise of a supervisory and not
appellate jurisdiction. One consequence of this is that the Court will not review findings of fact
reached by the inferior Court or Tribunal, even if they be erroneous. This is on the principle that a
Court which has jurisdiction over a subject-matter has jurisdiction to decide wrong as well as right,
and when the Legislature does not choose to confer a right of appeal against that decision, it would
be defeating its purpose and policy, if a superior Court were to re- hear the case on the evidence, and
substitute its own findings in certiorari. These propositions are well-settled and are not in dispute.

(4) The further question on which there has been some controversy is whether a writ can be issued,
when the decision of the inferior Court or Tribunal is erroneous in law. This question came up for
consideration in Rex v. Northumberland Compensation Appeal Tribunal; Ex parte Shaw [(1951) 1
K.B. 711], and it was held that when a Tribunal made a “speaking order” and the reasons given in

4

M/S. South Indian Bank Ltd. vs Naveen Mathew Philip on 17 April, 2023

that order in support of the decision were bad in law, certiorari could be granted. It was pointed out
by Lord Goddard, C.J. that that had always been understood to be the true scope of the power.
Walsall Overseers v. London and North Western Ry. Co. [(1879) 4 A.C. 30] and Rex v. Nat Bell
Liquors Ld. [(1922) 2 A.C. 28] were quoted in support of this view. In Walsall Overseers v. London
and North Western Ry. Co. [(1879) 4 A.C. 30] Lord Cairns, L.C. observed as follows:

“If there was upon the face of the order of the court of quarter sessions anything
which showed that order was erroneous, the Court of Queen's Bench might be asked
to have the order brought into it, and to look at the order, and view it upon the face of
it, and if the court found error upon the face of it, to put an end to its existence by
quashing it.” In Rex v. Nat Bell Liquors Ld. [(1922) 2 A.C. 128] Lord Sumner said:

“That supervision goes to two points; one is the area of the inferior jurisdiction and
the qualifications and conditions of its exercise; the other is the observance of the law
in the course of its exercise.” The decision in Rex v. Northumberland Compensation
Appeal Tribunal; Ex parte Shaw [(1951) 1 K.B. 711] was taken in appeal, and was
affirmed by the Court of Appeal in Rex v. Northumberland Compensation Appeal
Tribunal; Ex parte Shaw [(1952) 1 K.B. 338]. In laying down that an error of law was
a ground for granting certiorari, the learned Judges emphasised that it must be
apparent on the face of the record. Denning, L.J. who stated the power in broad and
general terms observed:

“It will have been seen that throughout all the cases there is one governing rule:
certiorari is only available to quash a decision for error of law if the error appears on
the face of the record.” The position was thus summed up by Morris, L.J. “It is plain
that certiorari will not issue as the cloak of an appeal in disguise. It does not lie in
order to bring an order or decision for rehearing of the issue raised in the
proceedings. It exists to correct error of law where revealed on the face of an order or
decision, or irregularity, or absence of, or excess of, jurisdiction where shown”. In
Veerappa Pillai v. Raman & Raman Ltd. [(1952) SCR 583], it was observed by this
Court that under article 226 the writ should be issued “in grave cases where the
subordinate tribunals or bodies or officers act wholly without jurisdiction, or in
excess of it, or in violation of the principles of natural justice, or refuse to exercise a
jurisdiction vested in them, or there is an error apparent on the face of the record”. In
T.C. Basappa v. T. Nagappa [(1955) SCR 250] the law was thus stated:

“An error in the decision or determination itself may also be amenable to a writ of
‘certiorari’ but it must be a manifest error apparent on the face of the proceedings,
e.g., when it is based on clear ignorance or disregard of the provisions of law. In other
words, it is a patent error which can be corrected by ‘certiorari’ but not a mere wrong
decision.”

15. The object and reasons behind the Act 54 of 2002 are very clear as observed by this Court in
Mardia Chemicals Ltd. v. Union of India, (2004) 4 SCC 311. While it facilitates a faster and

5

M/S. South Indian Bank Ltd. vs Naveen Mathew Philip on 17 April, 2023

smoother mode of recovery sans any interference from the Court, it does provide a fair mechanism
in the form of the Tribunal being manned by a legally trained mind. The Tribunal is clothed with a
wide range of powers to set aside an illegal order, and thereafter, grant consequential reliefs,
including re-possession and payment of compensation and costs. Section 17(1) of the SARFAESI Act
gives an expansive meaning to the expression “any person”, who could approach the Tribunal.

16. Approaching the High Court for the consideration of an offer by the borrower is also frowned
upon by this Court. A writ of mandamus is a prerogative writ. In the absence of any legal right, the
Court cannot exercise the said power. More circumspection is required in a financial transaction,
particularly when one of the parties would not come within the purview of Article 12 of the
Constitution of India. When a statute prescribes a particular mode, an attempt to circumvent shall
not be encouraged by a writ court. A litigant cannot avoid the non-

compliance of approaching the Tribunal which requires the prescription of fees and use the
constitutional remedy as an alternative. We wish to quote with profit a recent decision of this Court
in Radha Krishan Industries v. State of H.P., (2021) 6 SCC 771, “25. In this background, it becomes
necessary for this Court, to dwell on the “rule of alternate remedy” and its judicial exposition. In
Whirlpool Corpn. v. Registrar of Trade Marks (1998) 8 SCC 1, a two-Judge Bench of this Court after
reviewing the case law on this point, noted: (SCC pp. 9-10, paras 14-15) “14. The power to issue
prerogative writs under Article 226 of the Constitution is plenary in nature and is not limited by any
other provision of the Constitution. This power can be exercised by the High Court not only for
issuing writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari
for the enforcement of any of the Fundamental Rights contained in Part III of the Constitution but
also for “any other purpose”.

15. Under Article 226 of the Constitution, the High Court, having regard to the facts of the case, has
a discretion to entertain or not to entertain a writ petition. But the High Court has imposed upon
itself certain restrictions one of which is that if an effective and efficacious remedy is available, the
High Court would not normally exercise its jurisdiction. But the alternative remedy has been
consistently held by this Court not to operate as a bar in at least three contingencies, namely, where
the writ petition has been filed for the enforcement of any of the Fundamental Rights or where there
has been a violation of the principle of natural justice or where the order or proceedings are wholly
without jurisdiction or the vires of an Act is challenged. There is a plethora of case-law on this point
but to cut down this circle of forensic whirlpool, we would rely on some old decisions of the
evolutionary era of the constitutional law as they still hold the field”.

(emphasis supplied)

26. Following the dictum of this Court in Whirlpool Corpn. v. Registrar of Trade Marks [(1998) 8
SCC 1], in Harbanslal Sahnia v. Indian Oil Corpn. Ltd. [(2003) 2 SCC 107], this Court noted that:
(Harbanslal Sahnia case, SCC p. 110, para 7) “7. So far as the view taken by the High Court that the
remedy by way of recourse to arbitration clause was available to the appellants and therefore the
writ petition filed by the appellants was liable to be dismissed is concerned, suffice it to observe that
the rule of exclusion of writ jurisdiction by availability of an alternative remedy is a rule of discretion

6

M/S. South Indian Bank Ltd. vs Naveen Mathew Philip on 17 April, 2023

and not one of compulsion. In an appropriate case, in spite of availability of the alternative remedy,
the High Court may still exercise its writ jurisdiction in at least three contingencies: (i) where the
writ petition seeks enforcement of any of the fundamental rights; (ii) where there is failure of
principles of natural justice; or (iii) where the orders or proceedings are wholly without jurisdiction
or the vires of an Act is challenged. (See Whirlpool Corpn. v. Registrar of Trade Marks [(1998) 8 SCC
1].) The present case attracts applicability of the first two contingencies. Moreover, as noted, the
appellants' dealership, which is their bread and butter, came to be terminated for an irrelevant and
non-existent cause. In such circumstances, we feel that the appellants should have been allowed
relief by the High Court itself instead of driving them to the need of initiating arbitration
proceedings.” (emphasis supplied)

27. The principles of law which emerge are that:

27.1. The power under Article 226 of the Constitution to issue writs can be exercised
not only for the enforcement of fundamental rights, but for any other purpose as well.
27.2. The High Court has the discretion not to entertain a writ petition. One of the
restrictions placed on the power of the High Court is where an effective alternate
remedy is available to the aggrieved person.

27.3. Exceptions to the rule of alternate remedy arise where: (a) the writ petition has
been filed for the enforcement of a fundamental right protected by Part III of the
Constitution; (b) there has been a violation of the principles of natural justice; (c) the
order or proceedings are wholly without jurisdiction; or (d) the vires of a legislation is
challenged.

27.4. An alternate remedy by itself does not divest the High Court of its powers under
Article 226 of the Constitution in an appropriate case though ordinarily, a writ
petition should not be entertained when an efficacious alternate remedy is provided
by law.

27.5. When a right is created by a statute, which itself prescribes the remedy or
procedure for enforcing the right or liability, resort must be had to that particular
statutory remedy before invoking the discretionary remedy under Article 226 of the
Constitution. This rule of exhaustion of statutory remedies is a rule of policy,
convenience and discretion.

27.6. In cases where there are disputed questions of fact, the High Court may decide
to decline jurisdiction in a writ petition. However, if the High Court is objectively of
the view that the nature of the controversy requires the exercise of its writ
jurisdiction, such a view would not readily be interfered with.”

17. We shall reiterate the position of law regarding the interference of the High
Courts in matters pertaining to the SARFAESI Act by quoting a few of the earlier
decisions of this Court wherein the said practice has been deprecated while

7

M/S. South Indian Bank Ltd. vs Naveen Mathew Philip on 17 April, 2023

requesting the High Courts not to entertain such cases.

(cid:131) Federal Bank Ltd. v. Sagar Thomas, (2003) 10 SCC 733, “18. From the decisions referred to above,
the position that emerges is that a writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India may be
maintainable against (i) the State (Government); (ii) an authority; (iii) a statutory body; (iv) an
instrumentality or agency of the State; (v) a company which is financed and owned by the State; (vi)
a private body run substantially on State funding; (vii) a private body discharging public duty or
positive obligation of public nature; and (viii) a person or a body under liability to discharge any
function under any statute, to compel it to perform such a statutory function.

xxx xxx xxx

26. A company registered under the Companies Act for the purposes of carrying on any trade or
business is a private enterprise to earn livelihood and to make profits out of such activities. Banking
is also a kind of profession and a commercial activity, the primary motive behind it can well be said
to earn returns and profits. Since time immemorial, such activities have been carried on by
individuals generally. It is a private affair of the company though the case of nationalized banks
stands on a different footing. There may well be companies, in which majority of the share capital
may be contributed out of the State funds and in that view of the matter there may be more
participation or dominant participation of the State in managing the affairs of the company. But in
the present case we are concerned with a banking company which has its own resources to raise its
funds without any contribution or shareholding by the State. It has its own Board of Directors
elected by its shareholders. It works like any other private company in the banking business having
no monopoly status at all. Any company carrying on banking business with a capital of five lakhs
will become a scheduled bank. All the same, banking activity as a whole carried on by various banks
undoubtedly has an impact and effect on the economy of the country in general. Money of the
shareholders and the depositors is with such companies, carrying on banking activity. The banks
finance the borrowers on any given rate of interest at a particular time. They advance loans as
against securities. Therefore, it is obviously necessary to have regulatory check over such activities
in the interest of the company itself, the shareholders, the depositors as well as to maintain the
proper financial equilibrium of the national economy. The banking companies have not been set up
for the purposes of building the economy of the State; on the other hand such private companies
have been voluntarily established for their own purposes and interest but their activities are kept
under check so that their activities may not go wayward and harm the economy in general. A private
banking company with all freedom that it has, has to act in a manner that it may not be in conflict
with or against the fiscal policies of the State and for such purposes, guidelines are provided by
Reserve Bank so that a proper fiscal discipline, to conduct its affairs in carrying on its business, is
maintained. So as to ensure adherence to such fiscal discipline, if need be, at times even the
management of the company can be taken over. Nonetheless, as observed earlier, these are all
regulatory measures to keep a check and provide guidelines and not a participatory dominance or
control over the affairs of the company. For other companies in general carrying on other business
activities, maybe manufacturing, other industries or any business, such checks are provided under
the provisions of the Companies Act, as indicated earlier. There also, the main consideration is that
the company itself may not sink because of its own mismanagement or the interest of the

8

M/S. South Indian Bank Ltd. vs Naveen Mathew Philip on 17 April, 2023

shareholders or people generally may not be jeopardized for that reason. Besides taking care of such
interest as indicated above, there is no other interest of the State, to control the affairs and
management of the private companies. Care is taken in regard to the industries covered under the
Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 that their production, which is important for the
economy, may not go down, yet the business activity is carried on by such companies or
corporations which only remains a private activity of the entrepreneurs/companies.

27. Such private companies would normally not be amenable to the writ jurisdiction under Article
226 of the Constitution. But in certain circumstances a writ may issue to such private bodies or
persons as there may be statutes which need to be complied with by all concerned including the
private companies. For example, there are certain legislations like the Industrial Disputes Act, the
Minimum Wages Act, the Factories Act or for maintaining proper environment, say the Air
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 or the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution)
Act, 1974 etc. or statutes of the like nature which fasten certain duties and responsibilities statutorily
upon such private bodies which they are bound to comply with. If they violate such a statutory
provision a writ would certainly be issued for compliance with those provisions. For instance, if a
private employer dispenses with the service of its employee in violation of the provisions contained
under the Industrial Disputes Act, in innumerable cases the High Court interfered and has issued
the writ to the private bodies and the companies in that regard. But the difficulty in issuing a writ
may arise where there may not be any non-compliance with or violation of any statutory provision
by the private body. In that event a writ may not be issued at all. Other remedies, as may be
available, may have to be resorted to.” (cid:131) United Bank of India v. Satyawati Tondon, (2010) 8 SCC
110, “42. There is another reason why the impugned order should be set aside. If Respondent 1 had
any tangible grievance against the notice issued under Section 13(4) or action taken under Section
14, then she could have availed remedy by filing an application under Section 17(1). The expression
“any person” used in Section 17(1) is of wide import. It takes within its fold, not only the borrower
but also the guarantor or any other person who may be affected by the action taken under Section
13(4) or Section 14. Both, the Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunal are empowered to pass interim
orders under Sections 17 and 18 and are required to decide the matters within a fixed time schedule.
It is thus evident that the remedies available to an aggrieved person under the SARFAESI Act are
both expeditious and effective.

43. Unfortunately, the High Court overlooked the settled law that the High Court will ordinarily not
entertain a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution if an effective remedy is available to the
aggrieved person and that this rule applies with greater rigour in matters involving recovery of
taxes, cess, fees, other types of public money and the dues of banks and other financial institutions.
In our view, while dealing with the petitions involving challenge to the action taken for recovery of
the public dues, etc. the High Court must keep in mind that the legislations enacted by Parliament
and State Legislatures for recovery of such dues are a code unto themselves inasmuch as they not
only contain comprehensive procedure for recovery of the dues but also envisage constitution of
quasi- judicial bodies for redressal of the grievance of any aggrieved person. Therefore, in all such
cases, the High Court must insist that before availing remedy under Article 226 of the Constitution,
a person must exhaust the remedies available under the relevant statute.

9

M/S. South Indian Bank Ltd. vs Naveen Mathew Philip on 17 April, 2023

44. While expressing the aforesaid view, we are conscious that the powers conferred upon the High
Court under Article 226 of the Constitution to issue to any person or authority, including in
appropriate cases, any Government, directions, orders or writs including the five prerogative writs
for the enforcement of any of the rights conferred by Part III or for any other purpose are very wide
and there is no express limitation on exercise of that power but, at the same time, we cannot be
oblivious of the rules of self-imposed restraint evolved by this Court, which every High Court is
bound to keep in view while exercising power under Article 226 of the Constitution.

45. It is true that the rule of exhaustion of alternative remedy is a rule of discretion and not one of
compulsion, but it is difficult to fathom any reason why the High Court should entertain a petition
filed under Article 226 of the Constitution and pass interim order ignoring the fact that the
petitioner can avail effective alternative remedy by filing application, appeal, revision, etc. and the
particular legislation contains a detailed mechanism for redressal of his grievance.

xxx xxx xxx

55. It is a matter of serious concern that despite repeated pronouncement of this Court, the High
Courts continue to ignore the availability of statutory remedies under the DRT Act and the
SARFAESI Act and exercise jurisdiction under Article 226 for passing orders which have serious
adverse impact on the right of banks and other financial institutions to recover their dues. We hope
and trust that in future the High Courts will exercise their discretion in such matters with greater
caution, care and circumspection.” (cid:131) State Bank of Travancore v. Mathew K.C., (2018) 3 SCC 85, “5.
We have considered the submissions on behalf of the parties. Normally this Court in exercise of
jurisdiction under Article 136 of the Constitution is loath to interfere with an interim order passed in
a pending proceeding before the High Court, except in special circumstances, to prevent manifest
injustice or abuse of the process of the court. In the present case, the facts are not in dispute. The
discretionary jurisdiction under Article 226 is not absolute but has to be exercised judiciously in the
given facts of a case and in accordance with law. The normal rule is that a writ petition under Article
226 of the Constitution ought not to be entertained if alternate statutory remedies are available,
except in cases falling within the well-defined exceptions as observed in CIT v. Chhabil Dass
Agarwal [(2014) 1 SCC 603], as follows: (SCC p. 611, para 15) “15. Thus, while it can be said that this
Court has recognised some exceptions to the rule of alternative remedy i.e. where the statutory
authority has not acted in accordance with the provisions of the enactment in question, or in
defiance of the fundamental principles of judicial procedure, or has resorted to invoke the
provisions which are repealed, or when an order has been passed in total violation of the principles
of natural justice, the proposition laid down in Thansingh Nathmal v. Supt. of Taxes [AIR 1964 SC
1419], Titaghur Paper Mills Co. Ltd. v. State of Orissa [(1983) 2 SCC 433: 1983 SCC (Tax) 131] and
other similar judgments that the High Court will not entertain a petition under Article 226 of the
Constitution if an effective alternative remedy is available to the aggrieved person or the statute
under which the action complained of has been taken itself contains a mechanism for redressal of
grievance still holds the field. Therefore, when a statutory forum is created by law for redressal of
grievances, a writ petition should not be entertained ignoring the statutory dispensation.” xxx xxx
xxx

10

M/S. South Indian Bank Ltd. vs Naveen Mathew Philip on 17 April, 2023

8. The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the SARFAESI Act states that the banking and financial
sector in the country was felt not to have a level playing field in comparison to other participants in
the financial markets in the world. The financial institutions in India did not have the power to take
possession of securities and sell them. The existing legal framework relating to commercial
transactions had not kept pace with changing commercial practices and financial sector reforms
resulting in tardy recovery of defaulting loans and mounting non-performing assets of banks and
financial institutions. Narasimhan Committee I and II as also the Andhyarujina Committee
constituted by the Central Government Act had suggested enactment of new legislation for
securitisation and empowering banks and financial institutions to take possession of securities and
sell them without court intervention which would enable them to realise long-term assets, manage
problems of liquidity, asset liability mismatches and improve recovery. The proceedings under the
Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993 (hereinafter referred to as “the
DRT Act”) with passage of time, had become synonymous with those before regular courts affecting
expeditious adjudication. All these aspects have not been kept in mind and considered before
passing the impugned order.

9. Even prior to the SARFAESI Act, considering the alternate remedy available under the DRT Act it
was held in Punjab National Bank v. O.C. Krishnan [(2001) 6 SCC 569] that: (SCC p. 570, para 6) “6.
The Act has been enacted with a view to provide a special procedure for recovery of debts due to the
banks and the financial institutions. There is a hierarchy of appeal provided in the Act, namely,
filing of an appeal under Section 20 and this fast-track procedure cannot be allowed to be derailed
either by taking recourse to proceedings under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution or by filing a
civil suit, which is expressly barred. Even though a provision under an Act cannot expressly oust the
jurisdiction of the court under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution, nevertheless, when there is
an alternative remedy available, judicial prudence demands that the Court refrains from exercising
its jurisdiction under the said constitutional provisions. This was a case where the High Court
should not have entertained the petition under Article 227 of the Constitution and should have
directed the respondent to take recourse to the appeal mechanism provided by the Act.” xxx xxx xxx

15. It is the solemn duty of the court to apply the correct law without waiting for an objection to be
raised by a party, especially when the law stands well settled. Any departure, if permissible, has to
be for reasons discussed, of the case falling under a defined exception, duly discussed after noticing
the relevant law. In financial matters grant of ex parte interim orders can have a deleterious effect
and it is not sufficient to say that the aggrieved has the remedy to move for vacating the interim
order. Loans by financial institutions are granted from public money generated at the taxpayer's
expense. Such loan does not become the property of the person taking the loan, but retains its
character of public money given in a fiduciary capacity as entrustment by the public. Timely
repayment also ensures liquidity to facilitate loan to another in need, by circulation of the money
and cannot be permitted to be blocked by frivolous litigation by those who can afford the luxury of
the same. The caution required, as expressed in United Bank of India v. Satyawati Tondon [(2010) 8
SCC 110: (2010) 3 SCC (Civ) 260], has also not been kept in mind before passing the impugned
interim order: (SCC pp. 123-24, para 46) “46. It must be remembered that stay of an action initiated
by the State and/or its agencies/instrumentalities for recovery of taxes, cess, fees, etc. seriously
impedes execution of projects of public importance and disables them from discharging their

11

M/S. South Indian Bank Ltd. vs Naveen Mathew Philip on 17 April, 2023

constitutional and legal obligations towards the citizens. In cases relating to recovery of the dues of
banks, financial institutions and secured creditors, stay granted by the High Court would have
serious adverse impact on the financial health of such bodies/institutions, which (sic will) ultimately
prove detrimental to the economy of the nation. Therefore, the High Court should be extremely
careful and circumspect in exercising its discretion to grant stay in such matters. Of course, if the
petitioner is able to show that its case falls within any of the exceptions carved out in Baburam
Prakash Chandra Maheshwari v. Antarim Zila Parishad [AIR 1969 SC 556], Whirlpool Corpn. v.
Registrar of Trade Marks [(1998) 8 SCC 1] and Harbanslal Sahnia v. Indian Oil Corpn. Ltd. [(2003)
2 SCC 107] and some other judgments, then the High Court may, after considering all the relevant
parameters and public interest, pass an appropriate interim order.” (cid:131) Phoenix ARC (P) Ltd. v.
Vishwa Bharati Vidya Mandir, (2022) 5 SCC 345, “18. Even otherwise, it is required to be noted that
a writ petition against the private financial institution — ARC — the appellant herein under Article
226 of the Constitution of India against the proposed action/actions under Section 13(4) of the
SARFAESI Act can be said to be not maintainable. In the present case, the ARC proposed to take
action/actions under the SARFAESI Act to recover the borrowed amount as a secured creditor. The
ARC as such cannot be said to be performing public functions which are normally expected to be
performed by the State authorities. During the course of a commercial transaction and under the
contract, the bank/ARC lent the money to the borrowers herein and therefore the said activity of the
bank/ARC cannot be said to be as performing a public function which is normally expected to be
performed by the State authorities. If proceedings are initiated under the SARFAESI Act and/or any
proposed action is to be taken and the borrower is aggrieved by any of the actions of the private
bank/bank/ARC, borrower has to avail the remedy under the SARFAESI Act and no writ petition
would lie and/or is maintainable and/or entertainable. Therefore, decisions of this Court in Praga
Tools Corpn. v. C.A. Imanual, [(1969) 1 SCC 585] and Ramesh Ahluwalia v. State of Punjab, [(2012)
12 SCC 331: (2013) 3 SCC (L&S) 45: 4 SCEC 715] relied upon by the learned counsel appearing on
behalf of the borrowers are not of any assistance to the borrowers.

xxx xxx xxx

21. Applying the law laid down by this Court in State Bank of Travancore v. Mathew K.C., [(2018) 3
SCC 85: (2018) 2 SCC (Civ) 41] to the facts on hand, we are of the opinion that filing of the writ
petitions by the borrowers before the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India is an
abuse of process of the court. The writ petitions have been filed against the proposed action to be
taken under Section 13(4). As observed hereinabove, even assuming that the communication dated
13-8-2015 was a notice under Section 13(4), in that case also, in view of the statutory, efficacious
remedy available by way of appeal under Section 17 of the SARFAESI Act, the High Court ought not
to have entertained the writ petitions. Even the impugned orders passed by the High Court directing
to maintain the status quo with respect to the possession of the secured properties on payment of Rs
1 crore only (in all Rs 3 crores) is absolutely unjustifiable. The dues are to the extent of
approximately Rs 117 crores. The ad interim relief has been continued since 2015 and the secured
creditor is deprived of proceeding further with the action under the SARFAESI Act. Filing of the writ
petition by the borrowers before the High Court is nothing but an abuse of process of court. It
appears that the High Court has initially granted an ex parte ad interim order mechanically and
without assigning any reasons. The High Court ought to have appreciated that by passing such an

12

M/S. South Indian Bank Ltd. vs Naveen Mathew Philip on 17 April, 2023

interim order, the rights of the secured creditor to recover the amount due and payable have been
seriously prejudiced. The secured creditor and/or its assignor have a right to recover the amount
due and payable to it from the borrowers. The stay granted by the High Court would have serious
adverse impact on the financial health of the secured creditor/assignor. Therefore, the High Court
should have been extremely careful and circumspect in exercising its discretion while granting stay
in such matters. In these circumstances, the proceedings before the High Court deserve to be
dismissed.” (cid:131) Varimadugu Obi Reddy v. B. Sreenivasulu, (2023) 2 SCC 168, “36. In the instant case,
although the respondent borrowers initially approached the Debts Recovery Tribunal by filing an
application under Section 17 of the SARFAESI Act, 2002, but the order of the Tribunal indeed was
appealable under Section 18 of the Act subject to the compliance of condition of pre-deposit and
without exhausting the statutory remedy of appeal, the respondent borrowers approached the High
Court by filing the writ application under Article 226 of the Constitution. We deprecate such
practice of entertaining the writ application by the High Court in exercise of jurisdiction under
Article 226 of the Constitution without exhausting the alternative statutory remedy available under
the law. This circuitous route appears to have been adopted to avoid the condition of pre- deposit
contemplated under 2nd proviso to Section 18 of the 2002 Act.”

18. While doing so, we are conscious of the fact that the powers conferred under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India are rather wide but are required to be exercised only in extraordinary
circumstances in matters pertaining to proceedings and adjudicatory scheme qua a statute, more so
in commercial matters involving a lender and a borrower, when the legislature has provided for a
specific mechanism for appropriate redressal.

19. Reiterating the concern expressed, the present appeals are disposed of. The Registry is directed
to mark a copy of this order to the High Court of Kerala and the High Court of Punjab & Haryana.
No costs.

……………………….J. (SANJIV KHANNA) ……………………….J. (M. M. SUNDRESH) New Delhi, April
17, 2023

13