I.K. Merchants Pvt. Ltd vs The State Of Rajasthan on 1 April, 2025

I.K. Merchants Pvt. Ltd vs The State Of Rajasthan on 1 April,
2025

                                                                                                    1

2025 INSC 418                                                                       REPORTABLE

                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                      CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 4560-4563 OF 2025
                                  (Arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 11779 – 11782 of 2022)

             I.K. MERCHANTS PVT. LTD. & ORS.                                  ... APPELLANT(S)

                                                           VERSUS

             THE STATE OF RAJASTHAN & ORS.                                    ... RESPONDENT(S)

                                                      JUDGMENT

R. MAHADEVAN, J.

Leave granted.

2. These appeals are filed against the judgments and orders dated 26.04.2022 and 02.05.2022 both
passed by the Division Bench of Calcutta High Court 1 in G.A.No.6 of 2020 and A.P.D.No.63 of 2013
in C.S.No.467 of 1978. Vide order dated 26.04.2022, the High Court, while upholding and
reaffirming the valuation of shares done by M/s. Ray & Ray at Rs.640/- per share, granted simple
interest at 6% per annum on the enhanced valuation of shares, however, rejected the Hereinafter
referred to as “the High Court” prayer of the appellants for enhancement of interest rates, costs and
damages, and accordingly, disposed of the said cases. Subsequently, vide order dated 02.05.2022,
the High Court corrected the rate of interest from 6% to 5% per annum. Both the orders are assailed
in these appeals, at the instance of the appellants herein.

3. On 25.07.2022, when the appeals were taken up for consideration by this Court, the learned
counsel for the appellants confined the prayer made herein to the grant of an appropriate rate of
interest, which was also recorded in the proceedings. In view of the same, we proceed to deal with
these appeals only to the limited extent of grant of rate of interest for the difference in valuation of
shares of Respondent No.2 viz., Rajasthan State Mines and Mineral Ltd., formerly known as Bikaner
Gypsums Ltd.2, which shares were sold by the appellants to Respondent No.1 viz., State of
Rajasthan, in 1973.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18308457/

1

4. The relevant facts giving rise to the controversy involved herein are as follows:

I.K. Merchants Pvt. Ltd vs The State Of Rajasthan on 1 April, 2025

4.1. Originally, the appellants preferred a suit being C.S.No.467 of 1978 before the
High Court of Calcutta, and the same was subsequently amended, praying for a
decree for Rs.4,34,21,553.00 against the Respondent No.1; in the alternative a decree
for reasonable price of the shares of the appellants, after determination of For short,
“the Company” such price by the High Court; in the further alternative, cancellation
of the transfer of shares belonging to the appellants to the Respondent No.1 and
restitution of the original status and retransfer of those shares to the appellants on
such terms to be determined by the High Court, and also interest and costs. On
14.08.2012, the learned Single Judge of the High Court, while rejecting the valuation
reports produced by the parties, passed a preliminary decree, the operative portion of
which reads as follows:

“There shall be a preliminary decree directing the defendants in particular the first
defendant to appoint anyone of the following firms of Chartered Accountants, namely
Price Water House, Ray & Ray, Lodha and Company of its choice as the valuer for the
purpose of conducting an enquiry for ascertaining the fair and proper value of the
said shares of the plaintiffs at the time when such shares were transferred to the first
defendant by the plaintiffs and upon conclusion of such enquiry the plaintiffs shall be
entitled to apply in this suit for obtaining a final decree for the amount, if found, due
upon such enquiry.

However, the remuneration of the valuer shall be borne entirely by the defendants or
rather the first defendant herein and the first defendant shall pay the remuneration
of the valuer as and when such remuneration is payable or rather is agreed to be paid
by the first defendant and accepted by the valuer. The plaintiffs shall be entitled to all
the costs, charges and expenses of the enquiry proceedings before the valuer, certified
for two counsel. Let the report of the valuer be made and published within a period of
four months from the date of commencement of the enquiry.

There will also be a decree for costs of the suit assessed at Rs.1,50,000/- and the
plaintiffs will be entitled to the costs over and above the court fees that the plaintiffs
had to pay at the time of institution of the suit.

Needless to mention that the plaintiffs will also be entitled to interests on the final
decree to be passed on the valuation to be made by the valuer appointed by the
preliminary decree, if such valuation, however, goes in favour of the plaintiffs.” 4.2.
Aggrieved by the aforesaid preliminary decree, the respondents herein preferred
A.P.D.No.63 of 2013, in which, the appellants filed their Cross Objection. During the
pendency of the appeal, the High Court, vide order dated 20.08.2019, noted that the
dispute essentially was with regard to the valuation of shares, and in order to arrive
at a settlement, appointed M/s. Ray & Ray Co. as valuer for the purpose of
conducting an enquiry and ascertaining the proper value of the shares of the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18308457/

2

I.K. Merchants Pvt. Ltd vs The State Of Rajasthan on 1 April, 2025

appellants as on the date, when such shares were transferred to the State
Government. It was further directed that such valuation would be uninfluenced by
previous valuation reports. Accordingly, the valuer M/s. Ray & Ray valued the shares
at Rs.640/- per share and filed its report. However, the respondents refused to accept
the said valuation. As a result of the same, the High Court proceeded to hear the
matter on merits and passed a final judgment and order on 28.04.2021. The
operative portion of the same reads as under:

“In those circumstances, this appeal and cross-objection are disposed of by declaring
that the respondents/plaintiffs are entitled to Rs.640/- per share sold by them to the
appellant and directing that each of the respondents/plaintiffs be paid by the
appellant no.1 Rs.640/- per share of Bikaner Gypsums Ltd. (subsequently Rajasthan
State Mines and Minerals Ltd.) sold by him to the appellant no.1 as valued by M/s.
Ray and Ray less Rs.11.50/- per share already received by him/her within eight weeks
of communication of this order. Considering the appellant is the government of
Rajasthan, the respondents/plaintiffs shall only be entitled to interest at the rate of
5% simple interest per annum without yearly rests on the said amount from 8th July,
1975 till the date of payment.

The impugned preliminary judgment and decree dated 14th August, 2012 is modified
to the above extent. In the facts and circumstances, the modified preliminary
judgment and decree shall be treated as the final decree. The suit is decreed
accordingly.

The application (GA 6 of 2020) is also disposed of by this order.” 4.3. Being
dissatisfied with the aforesaid judgment and order dated 28.04.2021, both
Respondent Nos.1 & 2 filed two separate appeals viz., CA.Nos.6145 and 6144 of 2021
[SLP (Civil) Nos.13905/2021 and 13606/2021] respectively, and the appellants filed
C.A.No.6146 of 2021 [SLP (Civil) No.14330/2021]. By a common order dated
01.10.2021, this Court allowed all the appeals by setting aside the order dated
28.04.2021 and remanding the matter to the High Court to deal with the objections
and cross objections on the issue of valuation alone, as per the report of M/s. Ray &
Ray and to take a view on the same. Pursuant to the clarification application viz.,
M.A.No.1840 of 2021 in C.A. No.6146 of 2021 filed by the appellants, this Court vide
order dated 26.11.2021 inter alia observed as follows:

“.... On hearing learned counsel for parties, we are not inclined to open a pandora’s
box once again and are clear that we have remitted on the issue of the valuation
report. However, the consequences of the same would be that the applicant(s) before
us would naturally have a right to agitate the issue of interest and costs which is a
sequitur arising from the delay in the finalization of the amount payable to the
respondent(s). ...” 4.4. In light of the aforesaid orders, the matter was reheard by the
High Court and the impugned judgment and order came to be passed on 26.04.2022,
the operative portion of which, reads as under:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18308457/

3

I.K. Merchants Pvt. Ltd vs The State Of Rajasthan on 1 April, 2025

“I am of the view that the valuer has given a very reasonable opinion. I uphold and
reaffirm the valuation.

With regard to the claim of the respondents for interest, because of the long
pendency on the matter, the interest burden on the Government of Rajasthan is for a
period of about 50 years on the above valuation. Taking this length of time and the
total interest burden on the appellant No.1, in my view, 6% per annum simple
interest on the enhanced valuation of the shares will more than adequately
compensate the respondents. We reject the prayer for enhancement of the interest
rate.

The appeal is disposed of accordingly.

The judgment and decree of this Court dated 28th April 2021 is reaffirmed.”
Subsequently, the interest portion was corrected from 6% to 5% per annum, by order
dated 02.05.2022.

4.5. With the above background, the appellants have come up with these appeals
before us.

5. According to the learned counsel for the appellants, payment of interest owing to
the delay in remittance of the fair value of the shares to the appellants is a right
recognized in law. Further, the principle underlying the award of interest on the
monies entitled to be recovered by a party is simply compensation for the time value
of money i.e., compensation for interdicting the investment of that sum at the time
when it was due to be paid. In support of the same, the learned counsel relied on the
following decisions of this court:

(i) Union of India v. Tata Chemicals Ltd3, wherein it was held that the obligation to
refund money received and retained without right implies and carried with it the
right to interest.

(ii)Fertilizer Corporation of India Ltd and others v. Coromandal Sacks Private Ltd4,
in which, it was held that ‘neither a penalty nor a punishment but the normal (2014)
6 SCC 335 (2024) 8 SCC 172 accretion on capital, due to the wilful withholding of the
payment towards the claim, resulting in continuous injury until such payment is
made or in other words, until the claim is realized’; and

(iii)Civil Appeal No.17 of 2025 in SLP(C) No.10338 of 2023 titled as ‘Bernard Francis
Joseph Vaz and others v. Government of Karnataka and others’, it was observed as
follows:

“…it cannot be gainsaid that the appellants have been deprived of their legitimate
dues for almost 22 years ago. It can also not be controverted that money is what

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18308457/

4

I.K. Merchants Pvt. Ltd vs The State Of Rajasthan on 1 April, 2025

money buys. The value of money is based on the idea that money can be invested to
earn a return, and that the purchasing power of money decreases over time due to
inflation. What the appellants herein could have bought with the compensation in
2003 cannot do in 2025. It is, therefore, of utmost importance that the determination
of the award and disbursal of compensation in case of acquisition of land should be
made with promptitude”.

5.1. It is further submitted that the appellants were deprived of the fair value of their shares, which
were compulsorily acquired by the State Government for a period of more than 50 years due to the
faulty valuation commissioned by it. Therefore, payment of interest on the valuation which has been
upheld till this Court, follows as a matter of course.

5.2. The learned counsel also submitted that Section 34(1) of the Civil Procedure Code explicitly
provides that a rate higher than 6% can be granted in case of a money decree arising out of
commercial transactions. Explanation I to section 34(1) defines a “commercial transaction” as one
connected with industry, trade or business of the party incurring the liability. In the present case,
the liability has arisen on account of compulsory acquisition by the state Government of the shares
of the appellants in Bikaner Gypsums, which was renamed as Respondent No.2 and has consistently
earned revenues for the State Government being a profit-making company between 1974 till 2020.
However, without any justification, the High Court awarded only simple interest at the rate of 5%
per annum, which will not compensate the appellants for the time value of the cost of shares, and is
hence, whimsical and arbitrary.

5.3. It is further submitted that despite giving assurance to the appellants that they will be allowed
to make a representation before the valuer by letters dated 27.04.1973 and 06.08.1973, the
Respondent No.1 rescinded on this assurance vide letter dated 03.07.1974 and that, a copy of the
valuation report dated 28.08.1974 was not supplied to the appellants and their objections thereto
were not invited. Though appellant no.1 requested to return the shares if a fair valuation was not
possible vide letter dated 10.04.1975, the respondents neither conducted a fair valuation nor
returned the shares. Further, the respondents failed to comply with the order dated 20.08.2019 of
this Court, as a result of which, the time granted by this court for submission of the report had to be
extended on two occasions. Even after dismissal of the appeals of the respondents by this Court, the
appellants have not been paid the principal sum, till date. Thus, the respondents have not only
breached the contract, but also caused delay at every stage of proceedings in making payment of
sums legally due to the appellants. 5.4. It is also submitted that had the money payable by the
Respondent No. 1 been invested in any other shares, gold, fixed deposit or land in the year 1973, the
said money would have been enhanced manifold. Since 1973-74 till 2020, the Respondent No. 2,
which is a profit-making company, earned several thousand rupees as gross profit and hence, they
are not entitled to any sympathy on the ground of being State. Thus, according to the learned
counsel, there is no justification for award of a rate of interest lower than commercial rates for the
fair value of the share of the appellants.

5.5. Referring to the decision of this court in Alok Shanker Pandey v. Union of India5, it is submitted
that during the relevant point of time, the rate of interest was 15% and hence, the appellants are

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18308457/

5

I.K. Merchants Pvt. Ltd vs The State Of Rajasthan on 1 April, 2025

entitled to receive interest at least @ 15%. 5.6. Thus, the learned counsel submitted that the
appellants are entitled to receive the principal of Rs.3,46,79,373/- with interest @ 15% on monthly
rest basis; and interest @ 15% on monthly rest basis on the aforesaid amount till the date of
realization of the claim. In case, the respondents fail to pay the principal amount and interest @ 15%
on monthly rest basis, the Respondent No.1 may be directed to pay a further interest at the rate of
15% as penal interest over and above the amounts to be paid in terms of the above till the payment is
made. (2007) 3 SCC 545

6. On the other hand, the learned counsel for the Respondent No. 1 / State of Rajasthan, submitted
that the facts would clearly indicate that the amount was neither in debt nor for any damages, which
normally entails interest. Due to gross mismanagement, the Respondent No. 2 (company) was going
down, and it ultimately got merged with the State Government. The shareholders, who were
responsible for the mismanagement of the Company, are now going to get a very handsome amount
in terms of the valuation on 31.03.1973 at a huge sum of Rs.640/- per share for a subscribed share
price of Rs.10/- per share against the original claim of Rs.70.50 per share.

6.1. Adding further, it is submitted that in the suit, the appellants initially claimed only for Rs.70.50
per share, in 1978. Subsequently, they sought amendment with regard to enhancement of valuation
of share, which was ordered in 2001, i.e., 23 years later. Thus, the exorbitant interest sought in 2001
cannot be said to be computed from the year 1973. It is also submitted that the appellants /
shareholders, who did not subscribe at Rs.10/- per share for fresh infusion of capital, have now got
the valuation of Rs.640/- per share, on the same date and therefore, they have not been prejudiced
in any manner.

6.2. Denying the allegation that the shares of the appellants had been compulsorily acquired by the
State Government, the learned counsel submitted that the events as unfolded during 1969 to 1973
would amply demonstrate that it is owing to mismanagement of the Company that the State had to
intervene and infuse further capital in the Company. The State had infused sufficient funds, but still
the company could not be revived or sustained by the then management. It is in this context that the
shares were acquired by the State. Therefore, it is not a case of compulsory acquisition of shares, but
a case of infusion of capital, and getting equity in return just to keep the company afloat; and the
rate of interest has to be determined in the said background only.

6.3. It is submitted that the second part of Section 34 states that the interest from the date of decree
till the date of payment cannot exceed 6%. The Explanation states that the rate of interest may
exceed 6% p.a. if it is a ‘Commercial transaction’. According to the learned counsel, the State was not
engaged in any industry, trade or business and there was complete absence of motive of profit in the
action taken by them. In fact, it was incurring losses, and the investment made to keep the
loss-making Company unit afloat cannot be termed as a 'Commercial transaction'. Therefore, the
interest rate should not exceed @ 5% as determined by the High Court.

6.4. Referring to the decision of this Court in Manalal Prabhudayal v. Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd.6,
it is submitted that Appellate Courts should not interfere with the discretion exercised by the lower
Courts to award interest unless the same is arbitrary and capricious. Hence, the High Court correctly

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18308457/

6

I.K. Merchants Pvt. Ltd vs The State Of Rajasthan on 1 April, 2025

exercised its (2009) 17 SCC 296 jurisdiction to award simple interest at 5% per annum, which does
not suffer from any infirmity.

6.5. It is also submitted that the High Court has reaffirmed the judgment and decree dated
28.04.2021 which was set aside by this court by order dated 01.10.2021, without any modification
and the same does not have any legal sanctity. Thus, the High Court has not passed any specific
order with regard to the interest from the date of the institution of the suit till the date of decree,
and from the date of decree till the date of the payment. It has merely stated that 5% p.a. shall be
calculated. Therefore, the order of the High Court relating to rate of interest is reasonable and the
same need not be interfered with by this court.

7. In addition to the above submissions made on the side of the Respondent No.1, the learned
counsel for the Respondent No.2 / Rajasthan State Mines and Minerals Ltd., submitted that the
transfer of shares to the State by the company in the year 1973 was for the reason as the company
was facing financial difficulties to run its business and further, the shareholders were not possessing
faith in the company and therefore, the company decided to bring the public issue at Rs.10/- per
equity share, but the appellants were not ready to purchase the shares even at such rate. Thereafter,
the litigation to decide the fair price of the share was initiated by the appellants in 1978 by
demanding a sum of Rs.70.50 per equity share, but later, on the basis of valuation by a private
valuer M/s. Naresh Lakhotia & Company, amended their plaint and claimed Rs.874/- per share. It is
worth mentioning that the valuer M/s.Naresh Lakhotia & company and M/s.Ray and Ray are not
the valuer appointed by the ICAI. Thus, the appellants are only entitled to the fair price of the share
as on April 1973 and not the interest thereon. 7.1. It is further submitted that there was no contract
in respect of payment of interest between the parties. In such circumstances, section 34 of the Civil
Procedure Code would govern the field, which does not provide for any compound interest of any
kind. That apart, Section 34 clearly mandates interest @6% per annum for the principal sum
adjudged (both during pendency and till date of payment). Therefore, the question of compound
interest does not arise. 7.2. It is ultimately submitted that the appellants have already got the price
of their share at Rs.11.50 per equity share and they are only entitled for the difference of amount as
upheld by this Court and therefore, the appellants are not entitled to higher rate of interest than 5%
awarded by the High Court.

8. As a riposte, the learned counsel for the appellants submitted that the Respondent No. 1 has
attempted to make out a new case for the first time through their reply, alleging that there was
mismanagement by the shareholders of the Respondent No. 2; that, the appellants after a period of
23 years, claimed an exorbitant sum towards value of shares, Respondent No. 2 was a loss-making
company, etc. 8.1. The learned counsel further submitted that the respondents never challenged the
order dated 15.09.2001 granting leave to the appellants to amend their plaint in CS No.467 of 1978,
but sought to urge that the proceedings were delayed due to amendment. That apart, the contention
that the Respondent No. 2 was a loss making one, is utterly false and contrary to the record; and the
appellants have placed on record the profit made by Respondent No.2 between 1974 till 2000, which
comes to Rs.40,165,790,819. It is also an incorrect statement that the Government infused lots of
fund during management of the company by the shareholders including the appellants. According to
the appellants, other than giving one or two bank guarantees, the Respondent No.1 had never

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18308457/

7

I.K. Merchants Pvt. Ltd vs The State Of Rajasthan on 1 April, 2025

funded the company. Thus, according to the learned counsel, such new allegations are not
maintainable. All the issues between the parties had attained finality except the issue of interest
payable to the appellants, which has been raised in the present appeals.

8.2. It is also submitted that the High Court vide order dated 28.04.2021 specifically directed that
interest will be paid from 08.07.1975 till the date of payment. Therefore, the learned counsel prayed
this court to allow these appeals and grant appropriate rate of interest to the appellants.

9. We have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel appearing for the parties and
perused the records carefully and meticulously.

10. The genesis of the case arises from a five-decade long litigation concerning the valuation of
shares of Respondent No. 2 which were sold by the appellants to Respondent No.1. The issue
relating to valuation of shares has become final in view of dismissal of SLP (C) Diary Nos.
27115/2022 and 24887/2022 filed by Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 respectively, vide orders dated
05.12.2022 and 12.12.2022 passed by this court.

11. As already stated, the only issue remains to be considered by us in the present round of litigation
is the rate of interest on the enhanced valuation of shares as determined by the High Court and
affirmed by this court.

12. Taking note of the interest burden on the State for 50 years on the valuation of shares, the High
Court had granted simple interest @ 5% per annum, by judgments and orders dated 26.04.2022 and
02.05.2022 which are impugned herein. According to the appellants, the transactions viz., transfer
of shares were commercial in nature. Whereas, the respondents stated that they were not engaged in
any industry, trade or business for profit purposes and the investment made was only to keep the
loss-making Company unit afloat, and hence, the transactions cannot be treated as commercial
transactions. Here, it cannot be disputed that there has been a transaction of trade, viz. sale and
purchase of goods, which clearly implies a commercial transaction between the parties. The term
“Public Interest” denotes a wider concept with its genus rooted to the welfare of the public at large,
with different species attributable to individual and specific impact, depending upon the concept
and the subject under consideration. It deals with the impact of a policy decision on the society.
Generally, public interest is anathema to commercial transactions. However, by exception, when the
terms are oppressive or one-sided, they are to be termed as unconscionable, arbitrary and by
application of externalities, public interest will have to lean towards the individual who has been
wronged, as such contracts are deemed to take away the fairness, affecting the free consent required
to culminate into a valid contract. The constitutional courts, under such circumstances will be
armed with Article 14 to strike down such contracts or to pass appropriate decrees or orders. It will
be useful to refer to the judgment of this court in Central Inland Water Transport Corporation
Limited and another v. Brojo Nath Ganguly and another 7, wherein, it was held as follows:

“82. The position under the American Law is stated in "Reinstatement of the Law-
Second" as adopted and promulgated by the American Law Institute, Volume II xx
which deals with the law of contracts, in Section 208 at page 107, as follows:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18308457/

8

I.K. Merchants Pvt. Ltd vs The State Of Rajasthan on 1 April, 2025

“Section 208. Unconscionable Contract or Term If a contract or term thereof is
unconscionable at the time the contract is made a court may refuse to enforce the
contract, or may enforce the remainder of the contract without the unconscionable
term, or may so limit the application of any unconscionable term as to avoid any
unconscionable result.” In the Comments given under that section it is stated at page
107: “Like the obligation of good faith and fair dealing (S 205), the policy against
unconscionable contracts or terms applies to a wide variety of types of conduct. The
determination that a contract or term is or is not unconscionable is made in the light
of its setting, purpose and effect. Relevant factors include weaknesses in the
contracting process like those involved in more specific rules as to contractual
capacity, fraud and other invalidating causes; the policy also overlaps with rules
which render particular bargains or terms unenforceable on (1986) 3 SCC 156:
MANU/SC/0439/1986 grounds of public policy. Policing against unconscionable
contracts or terms has sometimes been accomplished by adverse construction of
language, by manipulation of the rules of offer and acceptance or by determinations
that the clause is contrary to public policy or to the dominant purpose of the
contract'.

Uniform Commercial Code $ 2-302 Comment 1.... A bargain is not unconscionable merely because
the parties to it are unequal in bargaining position, nor even because the inequality results in an
allocation of risks to the weaker party. But gross inequality of bargaining power, together with terms
unreasonably favourable to the stronger party, may confirm indications that the transaction
involved elements of deception or compulsion, or may show that the weaker party had no
meaningful choice, no real alternative, or did not in fact assent or appear to assent to the unfair
terms.” There is a statute in the United States called the Universal Commercial Code which is
applicable to contracts relating to sales of goods. Though this statute is inapplicable to contracts not
involving sales of goods, it has proved very influential in, what are called in the United States,
"non-sales" cases. It has many times been used either by analogy or because it was felt to embody a
general accepted social attitude of fairness going beyond its statutory application to sales of goods.
In the Reporter's Note to the said Section 208, it is stated at page 112:

“It is to be emphasized that a contract of adhesion is not unconscionable per se, and
that all unconscionable contracts are not contracts of adhesion. Nonetheless, the
more standardized the agreement and the less a party may bargain meaningfully, the
more susceptible the contract or a term will be to a claim of unconscionability.” The
position has been thus summed up by John R. Pedan in "The Law of Unjust
Contracts" published by Butterworths in 1982, at pages 28-29:

“...Unconscionability represents the end of a cycle commencing with the Aristotelian
concept of justice and the Roman law iaesio enormis, which in turn formed the basis
for the medieval church's concept of a just price and condemnation of usury. These
philosophies permeated the exercise, during the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries, of the Chancery court's discretionary powers under which it upset all kinds
of unfair transactions. Subsequently the movement towards economic individualism

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18308457/

9

I.K. Merchants Pvt. Ltd vs The State Of Rajasthan on 1 April, 2025

in the nineteenth century hardened the exercise of these powers by emphasizing the
freedom of the parties to make their own contract. While the principle of pacta sunt
servanda held dominance, the consensual theory still recognized exceptions where
one party was overborne by a fiduciary, or entered a contract under duress or as the
result of fraud. However, these exceptions were limited and had to be strictly proved.
It is suggested that the judicial and legislative trend during the last 30 years in both
civil and common law jurisdictions has almost brought the wheel full circle. Both
courts and parliaments have provided greater protection for weaker parties from
harsh contracts. In several jurisdictions this included a general power to grant relief
from unconscionable contracts, thereby providing a launching point from which the
courts have the opportunity to develop a modern doctrine of unconscionability.
American decisions on Article 2. 302 of the UCC have already gone some distance
into this new arena. The expression "laesio enormous used in the above passage
refers to "laesio ultra dimidium vel enormous which in Roman law meant the injury
sustained by one of the parties to an onerous contract when he had been overreached
by the other to the extent of more than one-half of the value of the subject-matter, as
for example, when a vendor had not received half the value of property sold, or the
purchaser had paid more then double value. The maxim "pacta sunt servanda"
referred to in the above passage means "contracts are to be kept".

83. It would appear from certain recent English cases that the courts in that country
have also begun to recognize the possibility of an unconscionable bargain which
could be brought about by economic duress even between parties who may not in
economic terms be situate differently (see, for instance, Occidental Worldwide
Investment Corpn. v. Skibs A/S Avanti 1976 (1) L Rep. 293, North Ocean Shipping
Co. Ltd. v. Hyundai Construction Co. Ltd. 1979 Q.B. 705, Pao On v. Lau Yin Long
1980 A.C. 614 and Universe Tankships of Monrovia v.

International Transport Workers Federation 1981 (1) C.R. 129, reversed in 1981 (2) W.L.R. 803and
the commentary on these cases in Chitty on Contracts, Twenty- fifth Edition, Volume I, paragraph
486).

84. Another jurisprudential concept of comparatively modern origin which has affected the law of
contracts is the theory of "distributive justice". According to this doctrine, distributive fairness and
justice in the possession of wealth and property can be achieved not only by taxation but also by
regulatory control of private and contractual transactions even though this might involve some
sacrifice of individual liberty. In Lingappa Pochanna Appelwar v. State of Maharashtra and Anr.
MANU/SC/0236/1984 : [1985]2 SCR 224 this Court, while upholding the constitutionality of the
Maharashtra Restoration of Lands to Scheduled Tribes Act, 1974, said (at page 493):

“The present legislation is a typical illustration of the concept of distributive justice,
as modern jurisprudence know it. Legislators, Judges and administrators are now
familiar with the concept of distributive justice. Our Constitution permits and even
directs the State to administer what may be termed 'distributive justice'. The concept

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18308457/

10

I.K. Merchants Pvt. Ltd vs The State Of Rajasthan on 1 April, 2025

of distributive justice in the sphere of law-making connotes, inter alia, the removal of
economic inequalities and rectifying the injustice resulting from dealings or
transactions between unequals in society. Law should be used as an instrument of
distributive justice to achieve a fair division of wealth among the members of society
based upon the principle: 'From each according to his capacity, to each according to
his needs'. Distributive justice comprehends more than achieving lessening of
inequalities by differential taxation, giving debt relief or distribution of property
owned by one to many who have none by imposing ceiling on holdings, both
agricultural and urban, or by direct regulation of contractual transactions by
forbidding certain transactions and, perhaps, by requiring others. It also means that
those who have been deprived of their properties by unconscionable bargains should
be restored their property. All such laws may take the form of forced redistribution of
wealth as a means of achieving a fair division of material resources among the
members of society or there may be legislative control of unfair agreements.”

85. When our Constitution states that it is being enacted in order to give to all the citizens of India
"JUSTICE, social, economic and political", when Clause (1) of Article 38 of the Constitution directs
the State to strive to promote the welfare of the people by securing and protecting as effectively as it
may a social order in which social, economic and political justice shall inform all the institutions of
the national life, when Clause (2) of Article 38 directs the State, in particular, to minimize the
inequalities in income, not only amongst individuals but also amongst groups of people residing in
different areas or engaged in different vocations, and when Article 39 directs the State that it shall,
in particular, direct its policy towards securing that the citizens, men and women equally, have the
right to an adequate means of livelihood and that the operation of the economic system does not
result in the concentration of wealth and means of production to the common detriment and that
there should be equal pay for equal work for both men and women, it is the doctrine of distributive
justice which is speaking through these words of the Constitution.

86. Yet another theory which has made its emergence in recent years in the sphere of the law of
contracts is the test of reasonableness or fairness of a clause in a contract where there is inequality
of bargaining power. Lord Denning, M.R., appears to have been the propounder, and perhaps the
originator - at least in England, of this theory. In Gillespie Brothers & Co. Ltd. v. Roy Bowles
Transport Ltd. 1973 (1) Q.B. 400 where the question was whether an indemnity clause in a contract,
on its true construction, relieved the indemnifier from liability arising to the indemnified from his
own negligence, Lord Denning said (at pages 415-6):

“The time may come when this process of 'construing' the contract can be pursued no
further. The words are too clear to permit of it. Are the courts then powerless? Are
they to permit the party to enforce his unreasonable clause, even when it is so
unreasonable, or applied so unreasonably, as to be unconscionable? When it gets to
this point, I would say, as I said many years ago:

there is the vigilance of the common law which, while allowing freedom of contract,
watches to see that it is not abused': John lee & Son (Grantham) Ltd. v. Railway

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18308457/

11

I.K. Merchants Pvt. Ltd vs The State Of Rajasthan on 1 April, 2025

Executive 1949 (2) All. E.R. 581, 584. It will not allow a party to exempt himself from
his liability at common law when it would be quite unconscionable for him to do so.”
In the above case the Court of Appeal negatived the defence of the indemnifier that
the indemnity clause did not cover the negligence of the indemnified. It was in Lloyds
Bank Ltd. v. Bundy 1974 (3) All E.R. 757 that Lord Denning first clearly enunciated
his theory of "inequality of bargaining power". He began his discussion on this part of
the case by stating (at page 763):

“There are cases in our books in which the courts will set aside a contract, or a
transfer of property, when the parties have not met on equal terms, when the one is
so strong in bargaining power and the other so weak that, as a matter of common
fairness, it is not right that the strong should be allowed to push the weak to the wall.
Hitherto those exceptional cases have been treated each as a separate category in
itself. But I think the time has come when we should seek to find a principle to unite
them. I put on one side contracts or transactions which are voidable for fraud or
misrepresentation or mistake. All those are governed by settled principles. I go only
to those where there has been inequality of bargaining power, such as to merit and
intervention of the court.” He then referred to various categories of cases and
ultimately deduced therefrom a general principle in these words (at page 765):

“Gathering all together, I would suggest that through all these instances there runs a
single thread. They rest on 'inequality of bargaining power'. By virtue of it, the
English law gives relief to one who, without independent advice, enters into a
contract on terms which are very unfair or transfers property for a consideration
which is grossly inadequate, when his bargaining power is grievously impaired by
reason of his own needs or desires, or by his own ignorance or infirmity, coupled with
undue influences or pressures brought- to bear on him by or for the benefit of the
other. When 1 use the word 'undue' 1 do not mean to suggest that the principle
depends on proof of any wrongdoing. The one who stipulates for an unfair advantage
may be moved solely by his own self- interest, unconscious of the distress he is
bringing to the other. I have also avoided any reference to the will of the one being
'dominated' or 'overcome' by the other. One who is in extreme need may knowingly
consent to a most improvident bargain, solely to relieve the straits in which he finds
himself. Again, I do not mean to suggest that every transaction is saved by
independent advice. But the absence of it may be fatal. With these explanations, 1
hope this principle will be found to reconcile the cases.”

87. Though the House of Lords does not yet appear to have unanimously accepted this theory, the
observations of Lord Dip lock in A. Schroeder Music Publishing Co. Ltd. v. Macaulay (Formerly
Instone) 1974 (1) W.L.R. 1308 are a clear pointer towards this direction. In that case a song writer
had entered into an agreement with a music publisher in the standard form whereby the publishers
engaged the song writer's exclusive services during the term of the agreement, which was five years.
Under the said agreement, the song writer assigned to the publisher the full copyright for the whole
world in his musical compositions during the said term. By another term of the said agreement, if

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18308457/

12

I.K. Merchants Pvt. Ltd vs The State Of Rajasthan on 1 April, 2025

the total royalties during the term of the agreement exceeded 5,000 the agreement was to stand
automatically extended by a further period of five years. Under the said agreement, the publisher
could determine the agreement at any time by one month's written notice but no corresponding
right was given to the song writer. Further, while the publisher had the right to assign the
agreement, the song writer agreed not to assign his rights without the publisher's prior written
consent. The song writer brought an action claiming, inter alia, a declaration that the agreement was
contrary to public policy and void. Plowman, J., who heard the action granted the declaration which
was sought and the Court of Appeal affirmed his judgment. An appeal filed by the publishers against
the judgment of the Court of Appeal was dismissed by the House of Lords. The Law Lords held that
the said agreement was void as it was in restraint of trade and thus contrary to public policy. In his
speech Lord Diplock however, outlined the theory of reasonableness or fairness of a bargain. The
following observations of his on this part of the case require to be reproduced in extenso (at pages
1315-16):

“My Lords, the contract under consideration in this appeal is one whereby the
respondent accepted restrictions upon the way in which he would exploit his earning
power as a song writer for the next ten years. Because this can be classified as a
contract in restraint of trade the restrictions that the respondent accepted fell within
one of those limited categories of contractual promises in respect of which the courts
still retain the power to relieve the promisor of his legal duty to fulfil them. In order
to determine whether this case is one in which that power ought to be exercised, what
your Lordships have in fact been doing has been to assess the relative bargaining
power of the publisher and the song writer at the time the contract was made and to
decide whether the publisher had used his superior bargaining power to exact from
the song writer promises that were unfairly onerous to him. Your Lordships have not
been concerned to inquire whether the public have in fact been deprived of the fruit
of the song writer's talents by reason of the restrictions, nor to assess the likelihood
that they would be so deprived in the future if the contract were permitted to run its
full course.

It is, in my view, salutary to acknowledge that in refusing to enforce provisions of a
contract whereby one party agrees for the benefit of the other party to exploit or to
refrain from exploiting his own earning power, the public policy which the court is
implementing is not some 19th-century economic theory about the benefit to the
general public of freedom of trade, but the protection of those whose bargaining
power is weak against being forced by those whose bargaining power is stronger to
enter into bargains that are unconscionable. Under the influence of Bentham and of
laissez-faire the courts in the 19th century abandoned the practice of applying the
public policy against unconscionable bargains to contracts generally, as they had
Formerly done to any contract considered to be usurious; but the policy survived in
its application to penalty clauses and to relief against forfeiture and also to the special
category of contracts in restraint of trade. If one looks at the reasoning of
19th-century judges in cases about contracts in restraint of trade one finds lip service
paid to current economic theories, but if one looks at what they said in the light of

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18308457/

13

I.K. Merchants Pvt. Ltd vs The State Of Rajasthan on 1 April, 2025

what they did, one finds that they struck down a bargain if they thought it was
unconscionable as between the parties to it and upheld it if they thought that it was
not.

So I would hold that the question to be answered as respects a contract in restraint of
trade of the kind with which this appeal is concerned is: "Was the bargain fair?" The
test of fairness is, no doubt, whether the restrictions are both reasonably necessary
for the protection of the legitimate interests of the promisee and commensurate with
the benefits secured to the promisor under the contract. For the purpose of this test
all the provisions of the contract must be taken into consideration.” Lord Diplock
then proceeded to point out that there are two kinds of standard forms of contracts.
The first is of contracts which contain standard clauses which "have been settled over
the years by negotiation by representatives of the commercial interests involved and
have been widely adopted because experience has shown that they facilitate the
conduct of trade". He then proceeded to state, "If fairness or reasonableness were
relevant to their enforceability the fact that they are widely used by parties whose
bargaining power is fairly matched would raise a strong presumption that their terms
are fair and reasonable." Referring to the other kind of standard form of contract
Lord Diplock said (at page 1316):

“The same presumption, however, does not apply to the other kind of standard form
of contract. This is of comparatively modern origin. It is the result of the
concentration of particular kinds of business in relatively few hands. The ticket cases
in the 19th century provide what are probably the first examples. The terms of this
kind of standard form of contract have not been the subject of negotiation between
the parties to it, or approved by any organisation representing the interests of the
weaker party. They have been dictated by that party whose bargaining power, either
exercised alone or in conjunction with others providing similar goods or services,
enables him to say: 'If you want these goods or services at all, these are the only terms
on which they are obtainable. Take it or leave it'.

To be in a position to adopt this attitude towards a party desirous of entering into a
contract to obtain goods of services provides a classic instance of superior bargaining
power.”

88. The observations of Lord Denning, M.R., in Levison and Anr. v. Patent Steam Carpet Co. Ltd.
1978 (1) Q.B. 69 are also useful and require to be quoted. These observations are as follows (at page
79):

“In such circumstances as here the Law Commission in 1975 recommended that a
term which exempts the stronger party from his ordinary common law liability
should not be given effect except when it is reasonable: see The Law Commission and
the Scottish Law Commission Report, Exemption Clauses, Second Report (1975)
(August 5, 1975), Law Com. No. 69 (H.C. 605), pp. 62, 174; and there is a bill now

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18308457/

14

I.K. Merchants Pvt. Ltd vs The State Of Rajasthan on 1 April, 2025

before Parliament which gives effect to the test of reasonableness. This is a gratifying
piece of law reform: but 1 do not think we need wait for that bill to be passed into law.
You never know what may happen to a bill. Meanwhile the common law has its own
principles ready to hand. In Gillespie Bros. & Co. Ltd.

v. Roy Bowles Transport Ltd. 1973 Q.B. 400, I suggested that an exemption or limitation clause
should not be given effect if it was unreasonable, or if it would be unreasonable to apply it in the
circumstances of the case. I see no reason why this should not be applied today, at any rate in
contracts in standard forms where there is inequality of bargaining power.”

89. The Bill referred to by Lord Denning in the above passage, when enacted, became the Unfair
Contract Terms Act, 1977. This statute does not apply to all contracts but only to certain classes of
them. It also does not apply to contracts entered into before the date on which it came into force,
namely, February 1, 1978; but subject to this it applies to liability for any loss or damage which is
suffered on or after that date. It strikes at clauses excluding or restricting liability in certain classes
of contracts and torts and introduces in respect of clauses of this type the test of reasonableness and
prescribes the guidelines for determining their reasonableness. The detailed provisions of this
statute do not concern us but they are worth a study.

90. In Photo Production Ltd. v. Securicor Transport Ltd. 1980 A.C. 827 a case before the Unfair
Contract Terms Act, 1977, was enacted, the House of Lords upheld an exemption clause in a contract
on the defendants' printed form containing standard conditions. The decision appears to proceed on
the ground that the parties were businessmen and did not possess unequal bargaining power. The
House of Lords did not in that case reject the test of reasonableness or fairness of a clause in a
contract where the parties are not equal in bargaining position. On the contrary, the speeches of
Lord Wilberforce, Lord Diplock and Lord Scarman would seem to show that the House of Lords in a
fit case would accept that test. Lord Wilberforce in his speech, after referring to the Unfair Contract
Terms Act, 1977, said (at page 843):

“This Act applies to consumer contracts and those based on standard terms and
enables exception clauses to be applied with regard to what is just and reasonable. It
is significant that Parliament refrained from legislating over the whole field of
contract. After this Act, in commercial matters generally, when the parties are not of
unequal bargaining power, and when risks are normally borne by insurance, not only
is the case for judicial intervention undemonstrated, but there is everything to be
said, and this seems to have been Parliament's intention, for leaving the parties free
to apportion the risks as they think fit and for respecting their decisions.” Lord
Diplock said (at page 850-51):

“Since the obligations implied by law in a commercial contract are those which, by
judicial consensus over the years or by Parliament in passing a statute, have been
regarded as obligations which a reasonable businessman would realise that he was
accepting when he entered into a contract of a particular kind, the court's view of the
reasonableness of any departure from the implied obligations which would be

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18308457/

15

I.K. Merchants Pvt. Ltd vs The State Of Rajasthan on 1 April, 2025

involved in construing the express words of an exclusion clause in one sense that they
are capable of bearing rather than another, is a relevant consideration in deciding
what meaning the words were intended by the parties to bear.” Lord Scarman, while
agreeing with Lord Wilberforce, described (at page 853) the action out of which the
appeal before the House had arisen as "a commercial dispute between parties well
able to look after themselves" and then added, "In such a situation what the parties
agreed (expressly or impliedly) is what matters; and the duty of the courts is to
construe their contract according to its tenor.

91. As seen above, apart from judicial decisions, the United States and the United Kingdom have
statutorily recognized, at least in certain areas of the law of contracts, that there can be
unreasonableness (or lack of fairness, if one prefers that phrase) in a contract or a clause in a
contract where there is inequality of bargaining power between the parties although arising out of
circumstances not within their control or as a result of situations not of their creation. Other legal
systems also permit judicial review of a contractual transaction entered into in similar
circumstances. For example, Section 138(2) of the German Civil Code provides that a transaction is
void "when a person" exploits "the distressed situation, inexperience, lack of judgmental ability, or
grave weakness of will of another to obtain the grant or promise of pecuniary advantages . . . which
are obviously disproportionate to the performance given in return." The position according to the
French law is very much the same.

92. Should then our courts not advance with the times? Should they still continue to cling to
outmoded concepts and outworn ideologies? Should we not adjust our thinking caps to match the
fashion of the day? Should all jurisprudential development pass us by, leaving us floundering in the
sloughs of nineteenth- century theories? Should the strong be permitted to push the weak to the
wall? Should they be allowed to ride roughshod over the weak? Should the courts sit back and watch
supinely while the strong trample under foot the rights of the weak? We have a Constitution for our
country. Our judges are bound by their oath to "uphold the Constitution and the laws". The
Constitution was enacted to secure to all the citizens of this country social and economic justice.
Article 14 of the Constitution guarantees to all persons equality before the law and the equal
protection of the laws. The principle deducible from the above discussions on this part of the case is
in consonance with right and reason, intended to secure social and economic justice and conforms
to the mandate of the great equality clause in Article 14. This principle is that the courts will not
enforce and will, when called upon to do so, strike down an unfair and unreasonable contract, or an
unfair and unreasonable clause in a contract, entered into between parties who are not equal in
bargaining power. It is difficult to give an exhaustive list of all bargains of this type. No court can
visualize the different situations which can arise in the affairs of men. One can only attempt to give
some illustrations. For instance, the above principle will apply where the inequality of bargaining
power is the result of the great disparity in the economic strength of the contracting parties. It will
apply where the inequality is the result of circumstances, whether of the creation of the parties or
not. It will apply to situations in which the weaker party is in a position in which he can obtain goods
or services or means of livelihood only upon the terms imposed by the stronger party or go without
them. It will also apply where a man has no choice, or rather no meaningful choice, but to give his
assent to a contract or to sign on the dotted line in a prescribed or standard form or to accept a set of

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18308457/

16

I.K. Merchants Pvt. Ltd vs The State Of Rajasthan on 1 April, 2025

rules as part of the contract, however unfair, unreasonable and unconscionable a clause in that
contract or form or rules may be. This principle, however, will not apply where the bargaining power
of the contracting parties is equal or almost equal. This principle may not apply where both parties
are businessmen and the contract is a commercial transaction. In today's complex world of giant
corporations with their vast infra-structural organizations and with the State through its
instrumentalities and agencies entering into almost every branch of industry and commerce, there
can be myriad situations which result in unfair and unreasonable bargains between parties
possessing wholly disproportionate and unequal bargaining power. These cases can neither be
enumerated nor fully illustrated. The court must judge each case on its own facts and
circumstances.” In the present case, the transaction, though commercial, is not between two
businessmen or entities; the State and its instrumentality are parties to the contract with better
bargaining or imposing authority; and from the records, we find that there was no public interest in
offering a lesser sum. Further, with the price fixed found to be unconscionable, this Court affirmed
the enhanced price fixed by the High Court.

13. Pertinently, it is to be pointed out at this juncture that there was no agreement between the
parties relating to grant of interest for the delayed payment. Even the exchange of communications
between the parties remains silent on this aspect. In the absence of any agreement or contract, the
provisions of Section 34 of the Code of Civil Procedure dealing with ‘interest’ would come into play,
and the same is extracted below, for ready reference:

“34. Interest.—(1) Where and insofar as a decree is for the payment of money, the
court may, in the decree, order interest at such rate as the court deems reasonable to
be paid on the principal sum adjudged, from the date of the suit to the date of the
decree, in addition to any interest adjudged on such principal sum for any period
prior to the institution of the suit, with further interest at such rate not exceeding six
per cent per annum as the court deems reasonable on such principal sum, from the
date of the decree to the date of payment, or to such earlier date as the court thinks
fit.

Provided that where the liability in relation to the sum so adjudged had arisen out of
a commercial transaction, the rate of such further interest may exceed six per cent
per annum, but shall not exceed the contractual rate of interest or where there is no
contractual rate, the rate at which moneys are lent or advanced by nationalised banks
in relation to commercial transactions.

(2) Where such a decree is silent with respect to the payment of further interest on
such principal sum from the date of the decree to the date of payment or other earlier
date, the court shall be deemed to have refused such interest, and a separate suit
therefor shall not lie.” 13.1. The above provision empowers the court to grant interest
at three different stages of a money decree viz., (i) the court may award interest on
the principal sum claimed at a rate it deems reasonable, for the period before the suit
was filed.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18308457/

17

I.K. Merchants Pvt. Ltd vs The State Of Rajasthan on 1 April, 2025

Such interest is generally governed by agreements between the parties; (ii) The court may award
interest on the principal amount from the date of filing the suit until the date of the decree, at a
reasonable rate. Here, the court has full discretion to determine the interest rate based on fairness,
commercial usage and equity; and

(iii)the court may grant interest on the total decretal amount (principal + interest before decree)
from the date of the decree until payment, at a rate not exceeding 6% per annum unless otherwise
specified in contractual agreements or statutory provisions. However, if the claim arises from a
commercial transaction, courts may allow interest at a higher rate based on agreements between the
parties.

14. Furthermore, it is noteworthy to refer to the following case laws and the observations made
therein concerning the issue involved herein:

(i) Clariant International Limited and another v. Securities & Exchange Board of
India8 “Interest can be awarded in terms of an agreement or statutory provisions. It
can also be awarded by reason of usage or trade having the force of law or on
equitable considerations. Interest cannot be awarded by way of damages except in
cases where money due is wrongfully withheld and there are equitable grounds
therefor, for which a written demand is mandatory. In absence of any agreement or
statutory provision or a merchantile usage, interest payable can be only at the market
rate.

Such interest is payable upon establishment of totality of circumstances justifying exercise of such
equitable jurisdiction.” 2004 (8) SCC 524

(ii) Alok Shanker Pandey (supra) “We are of the opinion that there is no hard-and-fast rule about
how much interest should be granted and it all depends on the facts and circumstances of each case.
We are of the opinion that the grant of interest of 12% per annum is appropriate in the facts of this
particular case. However, we are also of the opinion that since interest was not granted to the
appellant along with the principal amount, the respondent should then in addition to the interest at
the rate of 12% per annum also pay to the appellant interest at the same rate on the aforesaid
interest from the date of payment of instalments by the appellant to the respondent till the date of
refund of this amount, and the entire amount mentioned above must be paid to the appellant within
two months from the date of this judgment.’

(iii) Thazhathe Thazhathe Purayil Sarabi v. Union of India9 “25. It is, therefore, clear that the court,
while making a decree for payment of money is entitled to grant interest at the current rate of
interest or contractual rate as it deems reasonable to be paid on the principal sum adjudged to be
payable and/or awarded, from the date of claim or from the date of the order or decree for recovery
of the outstanding dues. There is also hardly any room for doubt that interest may be claimed on any
amount decreed or awarded for the period during which the money was due and yet remained
unpaid to the claimants.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18308457/

18

I.K. Merchants Pvt. Ltd vs The State Of Rajasthan on 1 April, 2025

26. The courts are consistent in their view that normally when a money decree is passed, it is most
essential that interest be granted for the period during which the money was due, but could not be
utilised by the person in whose favour an order of recovery of money was passed.

…

30. As we have indicated hereinbefore, when there is no specific provision for grant of interest on
any amount due, the court and even tribunals have been held to be entitled to award interest in their
discretion, under the provisions of Section 3 of the Interest Act and Section 34 of the Civil Procedure
Code.”

(iv) Rampur Fertiliser Limited v. Vigyan Chemicals Industries10 “19. It was further held in Clariant
International case [(2004) 8 SCC 524] that in the absence of any agreement or statutory provision
or a mercantile usage, interest payable can be only at the market rate and such interest is payable
upon establishment of totality of circumstances justifying exercise of such equitable (2009) 7 SCC
372 (2009) 12 SCC 324 jurisdiction. It was also held that in ascertaining the rate of interest the
courts of law can take judicial notice of both inflation as also fall in bank rate of interest. The bank
rate of interest both for commercial purposes and other purposes has been the subject-matter of
statutory provisions as also the judge-made laws. In the said case reference was made to the
decisions in Kaushnuma Begum v. New India Assurance Co. Ltd. [(2001) 2 SCC 9 : 2001 SCC (Cri)
268] , H.S. Ahammed Hussain v. Irfan Ahammed [(2002) 6 SCC 52 : 2002 SCC (Cri) 1263] and
United India Insurance Co. Ltd. v. PatriciaJean Mahajan [(2002) 6 SCC 281 : 2002 SCC (Cri) 1294]
and it was observed that: (Clariant International case [(2004) 8 SCC 524] , SCC p. 541, para 36) “36.
… Even in cases of victims of motor vehicle accidents, the courts have upon taking note of the fall in
the rate of interest held 9% interest to be reasonable.”

20. In Assam Small Scale Industries Development Corpn. Ltd. [(2005) 13 SCC 19] also in terms of
Section 34 of the Code, in relation to the transactions made prior to coming into force of the Act,
simple interest at the rate of 9% per annum was granted taking the same to be bank rate at the
relevant time.

21. Therefore, in view of the foregoing legal proposition, we hold that the High Court was not
justified in granting interest at the rate of 18% per annum with monthly rests. Considering the facts
and circumstances of the present case we direct that pendente lite and future interest at the rate of
9% shall be paid.”

(v) M/s. Tomorrowland Limited v. Housing and Urban Development Corporation Limited and
another11 “48. “The Appellant, of course, can seek award of interest under Section 34 of the CPC,
which inter alia provides that “the court may, in the decree, order interest at such rate as the Court
deems reasonable to be paid on the principal sum adjudged from the date of the suit to the date of
the decree.”

49. “It is trite law that under Section 34 of the CPC, the award of interest is a discretionary exercise
steeped in equitable considerations. The law in this regard has been succinctly discussed in the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18308457/

19

I.K. Merchants Pvt. Ltd vs The State Of Rajasthan on 1 April, 2025

Constitution Bench judgment of this Court in Central Bank of India v. Ravindra & Ors.; (2002) 1
SCC 367, which states:

“Award of interest pendente lite or post-decree is discretionary with the Court as it is
essentially governed by Section 34 of the CPC de hors the contract between the
parties. In a given case if the Court finds that in the principal sum adjudged on the
date of the suit, the component of interest is disproportionate with the 2025 LiveLaw
(SC) 205 component of the principal sum actually advanced, the Court may exercise
its discretion in awarding interest pendente lite and post-decree interest at a lower
rate or may even decline to award such interest. The discretion shall be exercised
fairly, judiciously, and for not arbitrary or fanciful reasons.”

58. “We are conscious of the fact that as a general principle, in commercial disputes,
the award of interest pendente lite or post-decree is typically granted as a matter of
course. This is because such interest serves to compensate the aggrieved party for the
time value of money that was due but withheld during the legal process.” Thus, it is
abundantly clear that the Courts have the authority to determine the appropriate
interest rate, considering the totality of the facts and circumstances in accordance
with law. That apart, the Courts have the discretion to decide whether the interest is
payable from the date of institution of the suit, a period prior to that, or from the date
of the decree, depending on the specific facts of each case.

15. Admittedly, the shares belonging to the appellants were transferred to the State
Government in 1973. In 1978, the appellants instituted the suit claiming a valuation
of Rs.70.50 per share. Thereafter, they sought an amendment increasing the
valuation to Rs.874/- per share, based on the report of a private valuer M/s. Naresh
Lakhotia & Co. The amendment sought was allowed on 12.09.2001.

Subsequently, the appellants accepted the valuation of Rs.640/- per share as determined by M/s
Ray & Ray, which was also ordered by the High Court and affirmed by this Court. It is also an
admitted fact that the Respondent No. 1 agreed to pay a fair valuation for the shares to the
appellants, but is yet to make the payment. Such being the scenario, wherein, the appellants having
suffered a delay of five decades in receiving the payment, are entitled to be reasonably compensated
by way of interest. However, their claim of interest at 18% with quarterly rest or 15% with monthly
rest, in the opinion of this court, is unreasonable and cannot be accepted as such quarterly or
monthly rest is beyond the scope of Section 34.

16. Be it noted, while the discretion to award interest, whether pendente lite or post-decree, is well
recognized, its exercise must be guided by equitable considerations. The rate and period of interest
cannot be applied mechanically or at an unreasonably high rate without any rationale. Though it is
not possible to arrive at the actual value of improvement or the inflation on the fair consideration, if
paid at the relevant point of time, it is just and necessary that the rate of interest must be a
reparation for the appellant. The Court must ensure that while the claimant is fairly compensated,
the award does not become punitive or unduly burdensome on the Judgement Debtor. Therefore,

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18308457/

20

I.K. Merchants Pvt. Ltd vs The State Of Rajasthan on 1 April, 2025

the rate of interest should be determined in a manner that balances both fairness and financial
impact, taking into account the “loss of use” principle and economic prudence, in the specific facts of
each case.

17. Considering the prolonged pendency of the dispute regarding the valuation of shares, which has
only been determined recently, and the substantial share amount involved, and also keeping in mind
that this is a commercial transaction, and the entire burden of interest along with principal value
falls upon the Government, it is necessary in the present case to award reasonable interest, in order
to strike a balance between the parties. Thus, in these peculiar facts and circumstances, we deem it
fit, just and appropriate to award simple interest at the rate of 6% per annum from 8th July 1975, on
the enhanced valuation of shares till the date of decree and interest at the rate of 9% per annum
from the date of decree till the date of realisation. The interest shall be paid along with the amount
due towards the enhanced value of the shares, after adjusting the amount already paid, to the
appellants, within a period of two months from today.

18. Accordingly, all the appeals stand disposed of. The impugned judgments and orders passed by
the High Court are modified to the extent indicated above. No costs. Connected Miscellaneous
Application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.

............................. J.

[J.B. Pardiwala] .............................J. [R. Mahadevan] NEW DELHI;

APRIL 01, 2025

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18308457/

21

