M/S Universal Sompo General Insurance ... vs Suresh Chand Jain on 26 July, 2023

M/S Universal Sompo General Insurance ... vs Suresh Chand
Jain on 26 July, 2023

2023 INSC 649                                                        REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 5263 of 2023

M/S UNIVERSAL SOMPO GENERAL                             …PETITIONER(S)
INSURANCE CO. LTD.

VERSUS

SURESH CHAND JAIN & ANR.                              …RESPONDENT(S)

JUDGMENT

J. B. PARDIWALA, J.:

1. This petition seeking leave to appeal under Article 136 of the Constitution is at the
instance of M/s Universal Sompo General Insurance Company Limited, Original
appellant before the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission (for short,
‘the NCDRC’) in the First Appeal No. 376 of 2016 by which the NCDRC dismissed the
appeal filed by the petitioner herein thereby affirming the order passed by the State
Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission (for short, ‘the SCDRC’) of Delhi, holding
that the respondent No. 1 /complainant was entitled to receive the claim amount and
appropriate compensation from the petitioner and its joint venture partner viz.

Allahabad Bank (respondent No. 2) for the goods stolen from the premises in question.

FACTUAL MATRIX

2. It appears from the materials on record that the respondent Bank, acting as an intermediary
issued a Standard Fire and Special Perils Policy dated 05.12.2011 in favour of the complainant
through the petitioner herein. Similarly, a Burglary Insurance Policy was also issued in favour of the
complainant dated 08.12.2011. Both the policies covered a sum of Rs. 50 lakh for the risk of fire and
burglary. The policies were for the period between 25.11.2011 and 24.11.2012.

3. By way of letter dated 28.03.2012, the complainant informed the respondent Bank that the
construction of his new premises at Bawana, Delhi had been completed and he had transferred his
stock to the above premises situated in Bawana from the premises situated in Rajgarh Ext., Gandhi
Nagar, Delhi and Bhagirath Palace, Chandni Chowk, Delhi. In this letter the complainant had also
instructed the Bank to inform the petitioner.

1

M/S Universal Sompo General Insurance ... vs Suresh Chand Jain on 26 July, 2023

4. The respondent Bank acknowledged the aforesaid intimation and claims to have informed the
petitioner by way of letter dated 31.03.2012. The Bank claims to have also forwarded the letter dated
28.03.2012 of the complainant to the petitioner.

5. On 29.06.2012, a theft took place at the Bawana premises and for that FIR No. 213/2012 was
lodged on 30.06.2012 at the PS Bawana. Both, the petitioner and the Bank were also informed about
the theft. A surveyor was appointed by the petitioner to inspect the premises and on 01.07.2012, a
formal complaint was lodged by the complainant with the petitioner.

6. After the theft, the complainant informed that a fire had also broken out in the premises at
Bawana on 18.10.2012, and the status report in that regard was issued by the fire department.
Subsequently, the complainant filed claims for both, theft and fire amounting to Rs. 49 lakh. The
petitioner repudiated the theft claim vide letter dated 22.08.2013 and the fire claim was closed on
account of non- submission of documents by the complainant.

7. On 03.06.2013, the complainant aggrieved by the inaction on the part of the petitioner
approached the SCDRC, Delhi under Section 17 of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 (for short, ‘the
Act 1986’), by way of Complaint No. 357/2013. He prayed for his claim of Rs. 49 lakh to be
processed along with compensation of Rs. 20 lakh and interest at the rate the respondent Bank was
charging from the complainant, with costs of the complaint.

8. By order dated 18.03.2016, the SCDRC partly allowed the complaint holding that the petitioner
and the respondent bank were jointly and severally liable for the deficiencies in providing services to
the complainant and the complainant was entitled to be compensated for the theft of goods worth
Rs. 41,31,180/- @ 12 % interest per annum from the date of the claim. The petitioner and the bank
were also directed to pay Rs. 2 lakh to the complainant towards compensation for mental agony,
harassment and deficiency in providing services. The petitioner was further directed to finalise the
fire claim of Rs. 4 lakh of the complainant.

9. The petitioner herein feeling aggrieved with the order passed by the SCDRC challenged the same
before the NCDRC by filing the First Appeal No. 376 of 2016 under Section 19 of the Act 1986. The
petitioner prayed before the NCDRC to set aside the SCDRC’s order in exercise of its appellate
jurisdiction and grant costs against the complainant in favour of the petitioner.

10. By order dated 16.01.2023, the First Appeal filed by the petitioner herein came to be dismissed.

11. In such circumstances referred to above, the petitioner is here before this Court with the present
petition, seeking special leave to appeal under Article 136 of the Constitution.

DISCUSSION

12. In the course of the hearing of this matter, manyfold contentions were raised on either side.
However, the moot question that falls for our consideration is whether we should entertain this
petition seeking special leave to appeal under Article 136 of the Constitution directly against the

2

M/S Universal Sompo General Insurance ... vs Suresh Chand Jain on 26 July, 2023

order passed by the NCDRC in exercise of its appellate jurisdiction or relegate the petitioner to avail
the remedy of filing a writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution or a petition invoking
supervisory jurisdiction of the jurisdictional High Court under Article 227 of the Constitution?

13. Before, we proceed to answer the aforesaid question, we must look into the few relevant
provisions of the Act 1986.

14. Section 21(a) of the Act 1986 is titled ‘Jurisdiction of the National Commission’. The same reads
thus:

“21. Jurisdiction of the National Commission. - Subject to the other provisions of this
Act, the National Commission shall have jurisdiction —

(a)to entertain —

(i) complaints where the value of the goods or services and compensation, if any,
claimed exceeds rupees one crore; and

(ii) appeals against the orders of any State Commission;

….”

15. Section 23 of the Act 1986 provides for an ‘Appeal’. The same reads thus:

“23. Appeal.- Any person, aggrieved by an order made by the National Commission in
exercise of its powers conferred by sub-clause (i) of clause (a) of section 21, may
prefer an appeal against such order to the Supreme Court within a period of thirty
days from the date of the order:

Provided that the Supreme Court may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said
period of thirty days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it
within that period:

Provided further that no appeal by a person who is required to pay any amount in
terms of an order of the National Commission shall be entertained by the Supreme
Court unless that person has deposited in the prescribed manner fifty per cent. of
that amount or rupees fifty thousand, whichever is less.” (Emphasis Supplied)

16. The Consumer Protection Act, 1986 stood repealed on 20.07.2020 (Section 106, the Act 1986)
and the Consumer Protection Act, 2019 (for short, ‘the Act 2019’) came into force. In the instant
case, the complaints were instituted under the Act 1986. However, we must highlight the relevant
provisions of the Act 2019, which are pari materia to the provisions of the Act 1986.

3

M/S Universal Sompo General Insurance ... vs Suresh Chand Jain on 26 July, 2023

“58. Jurisdiction of National Commission. – (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the
National Commission shall have jurisdiction—

(a) to entertain—

(i) complaints where the value of the goods or services paid as consideration exceeds rupees ten
crore:

Provided that where the Central Government deems it necessary so to do, it may
prescribe such other value, as it deems fit;

(ii) complaints against unfair contracts, where the value of goods or services paid as
consideration exceeds ten crore rupees;

(iii) appeals against the orders of any State Commission;

(iv) appeals against the orders of the Central Authority;……..

Xxx xxx xxx

67. Appeal against order of National Commission. - Any person, aggrieved by an
order made by the National Commission in exercise of its powers conferred by sub-

clause (i) or (ii) of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 58, may prefer an appeal against such order
to the Supreme Court within a period of thirty days from the date of the order:

Provided that the Supreme Court may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said
period of thirty days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it
within that period:

Provided further that no appeal by a person who is required to pay any amount in
terms of an order of the National Commission shall be entertained by the Supreme
Court unless that person has deposited fifty per cent. of that amount in the manner as
may be prescribed.”

17. A plain reading of the aforesaid provisions of the Act 1986 and Act 2019, respectively would
indicate that the remedy of appeal to this Court is available only with respect to the orders passed by
the NCDRC in exercise of its powers conferred by Section 21(a)(i) of the Act 1986 and 58(1)(a)(i) or
58(1)(a)(ii) of the Act 2019. In other words, both the Acts provide for the remedy of appeal to this
Court only with respect to the orders which are passed by the NCDRC in its original jurisdiction or
as the court of first instance (original orders) and no further appeal lies against the orders which are
passed by the NCDRC in exercise of its appellate or revisional jurisdiction.

4

M/S Universal Sompo General Insurance ... vs Suresh Chand Jain on 26 July, 2023

18. Adverting to the case at hand, the appeal before the NCDRC was against the order passed by the
SCDRC under Section 17(1)(a)(i) of the Act 1986. Such appeal to the NCDRC was maintainable, as
provided under Section 21(a)(ii) of the Act 1986. As per Section 23 of the Act 1986, any person,
aggrieved by an order made by the NCDRC in exercise of its powers conferred by Section 21(a)(i),
may prefer an appeal against such order to this Court. Therefore, an appeal against the order passed
by the NCDRC to this Court would be maintainable only in case the order is passed by the NCDRC in
exercise of its powers conferred under Section 21(a)(i) of the Act 1986. No further appeal to this
Court is provided against the order passed by the NCDRC in exercise of its powers conferred under
Section 21(a)(ii) of the Act 1986. There is no provision for filing any further appeal against the order
passed on the appeal filed against the order of the SCDRC. In such circumstances, the petitioner has
come before this Court under Article 136 of the Constitution.

SCOPE AND GRANT OF SPECIAL LEAVE UNDER ARTICLE 136 OF THE CONSTITUTION

19. This Court has held in Pritam Singh v. State reported in 1950 SCC 189 : 1950 SCR 453 at p. 459:
“Generally speaking this Court will not grant special leave, unless it is shown that exceptional and
special circumstances exist, that substantial and grave injustice has been done and that the case in
question presents features of sufficient gravity to warrant a review of the decision appealed against”.
It was also said in that case that the view that once an appeal has been admitted by special leave the
entire case is at large and that the appellant is free to contest all the findings of fact and raise every
point which could be raised in the High Court is wrong. Only those points can be urged at the final
hearing of the appeal which are fit to be urged at the preliminary stage when leave to appeal is asked
for. This principle was stated, it is true, in a criminal case but it is of as much significance in civil
cases as in the trial of criminal appeals. [See: Murtaza and Sons and Another v. Nazir Mohd. Khan
and Others reported (1970) 3 SCC 876].

20. A Constitution Bench of this Court in Dhakeswari Cotton Mills Ltd.

v. Commissioner of Income Tax, West Bengal, reported in (1955) 1 SCR 941 : AIR 1955 SC 65 made
the following observations:

“7. … It is not possible to define with any precision the limitations on the exercise of
the discretionary jurisdiction vested in this Court by the constitutional provision
made in article 136. The limitations, whatever they be, are implicit in the nature and
character of the power itself. It being an exceptional and overriding power, naturally
it has to be exercised sparingly and with caution and only in special and
extraordinary situations. Beyond that it is not possible to fetter the exercise of this
power by any set formula or rule. All that can be said is that the Constitution having
trusted the wisdom and good sense of the Judges of this Court in this matter, that
itself is a sufficient safeguard and guarantee that the power will only be used to
advance the cause of justice, and that its exercise will be governed by well established
principles which govern the exercise of overriding constitutional powers. It is,
however, plain that when the Court reaches the conclusion that a person has been
dealt with arbitrarily or that a court or tribunal within the territory of India has not

5

M/S Universal Sompo General Insurance ... vs Suresh Chand Jain on 26 July, 2023

given a fair deal to a litigant, then no technical hurdles of any kind like the finality of
finding of facts or otherwise can stand in the way of the exercise of this power
because the whole intent and purpose of this article is that it is the duty of this Court
to see that injustice is not perpetuated or perpetrated by decisions of Courts and
tribunals because certain laws have made the decisions of these Courts or tribunals
final and conclusive. …” (Emphasis supplied)

21. In Ujagar Singh and Another v. State (Delhi Administration) reported in (1979) 4 SCC 530, Y. V.
Chandrachud, C.J., speaking for the Bench observed as under:

“1. … There is hardly a case, civil or criminal, which does not raise some question of
law or the other. But no question of law of general public importance is involved in
these petitions. It is time that it was realised that the jurisdiction of this Court to
grant special leave to appeal can be invoked in very exceptional circumstances. A
question of law of general public importance or a decision which shocks the
conscience of the Court are some of the prime requisites for the grant of special leave.
… ” (Emphasis supplied)

22. In the case of S.G. Chemicals and Dyes Trading Employees' Union v. S.G. Chemicals and Dyes
Trading Limited and Another, (1986) 2 SCC 624, this Court observed in para 6 as under:

“6. The Union has directly come to this Court in appeal against the said order of the
Industrial Court without first approaching the High Court under Article 226 or 227 of
the Constitution for the purpose of challenging the said order. The powers of this
Court under Article 136 are very wide but as clause (1) of that article itself states the
grant of special leave to appeal is in the discretion of the court. Article 136 is,
therefore, not designed to permit direct access to this Court where other equally
efficacious remedy is available and where the question is not of public importance….”
(Emphasis supplied)

23. This Court in Jyotendrasinhji v. S.I. Tripathi and Others, reported in 1993 Supp (3) SCC 389
observed in para 16 as under;

“16. It is true that the finality clause contained in Section 245- I does not and cannot bar the
jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226 or the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 32 or
under Article 136, as the case may be. But that does not mean that the jurisdiction of this Court in
the appeal preferred directly in this Court is any different than what it would be if the assessee had
first approached the High Court under Article 226 and then come up in appeal to this Court under
Article 136. A party does not and cannot gain any advantage by approaching this Court directly
under Article 136, instead of approaching the High Court under Article 226. This is not a limitation
inherent in Article 136; it is a limitation which this Court imposes on itself having regard to the
nature of the function performed by the Commission and keeping in view the principles of judicial
review….” (Emphasis supplied)

6

M/S Universal Sompo General Insurance ... vs Suresh Chand Jain on 26 July, 2023

24. Thus, what is discernible from the aforesaid decisions of this Court is that the jurisdiction of the
Supreme Court to grant special leave to appeal can be invoked in very exceptional circumstances.
The question of law of general public importance or a decision which shocks the conscience of the
Court are some of the prime requisites for the grant of special leave. The provisions of Article 136 of
the Constitution as such are not circumscribed by any limitation. But when the party aggrieved has
alternative remedy to go before the High Court, invoking its writ jurisdiction or supervisory
jurisdiction as the case may be, this Court should not entertain petition seeking special leave thereby
short-circuit the legal procedure prescribed. The limitation, whatever, they be are implicit in the
nature and character of the power itself. It being an exceptional and overriding power, naturally it
has to be exercised sparingly and with caution and only in very exceptional situations. The power
will only be used to advance the cause of justice and its exercise will be governed by well- established
principles which govern the exercise of overriding constitutional powers.

25. Almost six decades back, this Court speaking through M. Hidayatullah, J. in the case of the State
of Bombay v. M/s Ratilal Vadilal and Bros., reported in (1961) 2 SCR 367 observed as under:

“3. … We have frequently noticed that all the remedies which are open to an appellant
are not first exhausted before moving this Court. Ordinarily, this Court will not allow
the High Court to be bypassed in this manner, and the proper course for an appellant
is to exhaust all his remedies before invoking the jurisdiction of this Court under
Article 136. …” (Emphasis supplied)

26. We shall now look into a very recent pronouncement of this Court in the case of Ibrat Faizan v.
Omaxe Buildhome Private Limited reported in 2022 INSC 573. In the said case, the appellant had
booked a flat in the project floated by the respondent. The appellant paid the entire amount of
consideration but the respondent did not hand over the flat within the time stipulated in the
agreement. Therefore, the appellant filed a consumer complaint before the SCDRC on 10.08.2013,
alleging deficiency of service on the part of the respondent. The SCDRC allowed the complaint filed
by the appellant vide its order dated 16.10.2020. The SCDRC directed the respondent to hand over
the flat to the possession of the appellant subject to their meeting the requirements. The SCDRC
further directed the respondent to pay compensation for the deficiency of service of the respondent
in the form of nine per cent simple interest till the date of delivery of the flat in possession of the
appellant.

27. The appellant filed an execution and contempt petition against the respondent since he did not
comply with the order of the SCDRC. Vide its order dated 12.03.2021, the SCDRC directed the
respondent to produce the details of bank accounts or properties for the purpose of attaching the
same and to implement the order passed by the SCDRC.

28. The respondent filed an appeal before the NCDRC. On 30.03.2021, the NCDRC stayed the order
of SCDRC subject to the deposit of the cost of entire flat along with nine per cent interest on the
amount paid till date in the Registry of the SCDRC.

7

M/S Universal Sompo General Insurance ... vs Suresh Chand Jain on 26 July, 2023

29. The respondent, being aggrieved against the order of NCDRC filed a writ petition before the
High Court, challenging the order passed by the NCDRC. Before the High Court the respondent
contended that the NCDRC ought not to have directed the respondent, the builder, to deposit the
entire cost of the apartment along with the compensation awarded by the SCDRC. The High Court
stayed the order of National Commission, vide its order dated 25.05.2021. The said stay order was
issued subject to the condition that the respondent is to deposit with the State Commission fifty per
cent of the amount directed to be deposited by way of interest towards compensation, within four
weeks from the date of stay order issued by the High Court.

30. In the meantime, the NCDRC passed the final order, confirming the order passed by the State
Commission, vide its order dated 09.12.2021. The respondent also filed a writ petition before the
High Court, challenging the final order passed by the NCDRC. The High Court, in this petition, also
granted interim stay vide its order dated 22.12.2021. Against this order the appellant filed an SLP
before this Court. This Court vide its order dated 21.03.2022 directed the High Court to decide the
jurisdictional issue under Article 227 of the Constitution against the order passed by the NCDRC on
or before 18.04.2022 and intimate the outcome to this Court. The High Court vide its order dated
31.03.2022 held that the writ petition before the High Court against the order of NCDRC was
maintainable. This order was challenged by the appellant before this Court.

31. The appellant submitted the following before this Court:

(a) Against the order of NCDRC, a petition before the High Court under Article 227 of
the Constitution is not maintainable.

(b) Only appeal is maintainable before this Court against the order of NCDRC as per
the provisions of the Consumer Protection Act.

(c) Without exhausting the appellate remedy, the High Court ought not to have
entertained the petition under Article 227 of the Constitution.

(d) The High Court ought not to have stayed the order passed by the NCDRC in the
limited jurisdiction available under Article 227 of the Constitution.

32. The respondent submitted the following before this Court:

(a) The provisions of the Act 2019 do not have appeal provisions against the order of
NCDRC passed in exercise of appellate/revisional jurisdiction and therefore writ
petition under Article 226 or petition under Article 227, as the case may be, is
maintainable before the High Court against the order of NCDRC.

(b) For the aforesaid purpose the respondent relied on the following judgments:

(cid:135) Associated Cement Companies Ltd. v. P. N. Sharma, AIR 1965 SC 1595; and (cid:135) L.
Chandra Kumar v. Union of India, (1997) 3 SCC

8

M/S Universal Sompo General Insurance ... vs Suresh Chand Jain on 26 July, 2023

33. This Court considered the question for its decision as to whether against the order passed by the
NCDRC in an appeal under Section 58(1)(a)(iii) of the Act 2019, petition before the High Court
under the Article 227 of Constitution of India would be maintainable.

34. After due analysis of the provisions of the Act 2019, which are pari materia to the provisions of
the Act 1986, this Court in Ibrat Faizan (supra) held as under:

“11. ….Therefore, an appeal against the order passed by the National Commission to
this Court would be maintainable only in case the order is passed by the National
Commission in exercise of its powers conferred under Section 58(1)(a)(i) or under
Section 58(1)(a)(ii) of the 2019 Act. No further appeal to this Court is provided
against the order passed by the National Commission in exercise of its powers
conferred under Section 58(1)(a)(iii) or under Section 58(1)(a)(iv) of the 2019 Act. In
that view of the matter, the remedy which may be available to the aggrieved party
against the order passed by the National Commission in an appeal under Section
58(1)(a)

(iii) or Section 58(1)(a)(iv) would be to approach the concerned High Court having
jurisdiction under Article 227 of the Constitution of India.” xxx xxx xxx

14. ….while exercising the powers under Article 227 of the Constitution of India, the
High Court subjects itself to the rigour of Article 227 of the Constitution and the High
Court has to exercise the jurisdiction under Article 227 within the parameters within
which such jurisdiction is required to be exercised.” (Emphasis supplied)

35. In Ibrat Faizan (supra), this Court took notice of its earlier decision in the case of Associated
Cement (supra), wherein, a Constitution Bench held as under:

“9. … Special matters and questions are entrusted to them for their decision and in
that sense, they share with the Courts one common characteristic; both the courts
and the tribunals are “constituted by the State and are invested with judicial as
distinguished from purely administrative or executive functions”, (vide Durga
Shankar Mehta v. Raghuraj Singh, 1955 1 SCR 267 at p. 272: (AIR 1954 SC 520 at p.

522). They are both adjudicating bodies and they deal with and finally determine
disputes between parties which are entrusted to their jurisdiction. The procedure
followed by the Courts is regularly prescribed and in discharging their functions and
exercising their powers, the Courts have to conform to that procedure. The procedure
which the tribunals have to follow may not always be so strictly prescribed, but the
approach adopted by both the Courts and the tribunals is substantially the same, and
there is no essential difference between the functions that they discharge. As in the
case of Courts, so in the case of tribunals, it is the State's inherent judicial power
which has been transferred and by virtue of the said power, it is the State's inherent
judicial function which they discharge. Judicial functions and judicial powers are one

9

M/S Universal Sompo General Insurance ... vs Suresh Chand Jain on 26 July, 2023

of the essential attributes of a sovereign State, and on considerations of policy, the
State transfers its judicial functions and powers mainly to the Courts established by
the Constitution; but that does not affect the competence of the State, by appropriate
measures, to transfer a part of its judicial powers and functions to tribunals by
entrusting to them the task of adjudicating upon special matters and disputes
between parties. It is really not possible or even expedient to attempt to describe
exhaustively the features which are common to the tribunals and the Courts, and
features which are distinct and separate. The basic and the fundamental feature
which is common to both the Courts and the tribunals is that they discharge judicial
functions and exercise judicial powers which inherently vest in a sovereign State.

Xxx xxx xxx

44. An authority other than a Court may be vested by statute with judicial power in
widely different circumstances, which it would be impossible and indeed inadvisable
to attempt to define exhaustively. The proper thing is to examine each case as it
arises, and to ascertain whether the powers vested in the authority can be truly
described as judicial functions or judicial powers of the State. For the purpose of this
case, it is sufficient to say that any outside authority empowered by the State to
determine conclusively the rights of two or more contending parties with regard to
any matter in controversy between them satisfies the test of an authority vested with
the judicial powers of the State and may be regarded as a tribunal within the meaning
of Art. 136. Such a power of adjudication implies that the authority must act judicially
and must determine the dispute by ascertainment of the relevant facts on the
materials before it and by application of the relevant law to those facts. This test of a
tribunal is not meant to be exhaustive, and it may be that other bodies not satisfying
this test are also tribunals. In order to be a tribunal, it is essential that the power of
adjudication must be derived from a statute or a statutory rule. An authority or body
deriving its power of adjudication from an agreement of the parties, such as a private
arbitrator or a tribunal acting under S. 10A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, does
not satisfy the test of a tribunal within Art. 136. It matters little that such a body or
authority is vested with the trappings of a Court. The Arbitration Act, 1940 vests an
arbitrator with some of the trappings of a Court, so also the Industrial Disputes Act,
1947 vests an authority acting under S. 10 A of the Act with many of such trappings,
and yet, such bodies and authorities are not tribunals.

45. The word “tribunal” finds place in Art. 227 of the Constitution also, and I think
that there also the word has the same meaning as in Art. 136.” (Emphasis supplied)

36. Having regard to the aforesaid, this Court in Ibrat Faizan (supra) observed as under:

“12. … Therefore, the National Commission can be said to be a ‘Tribunal’ which is
vested by Statute the powers to determine conclusively the rights of two or more
contending parties with regard to any matter in controversy between them.

10

M/S Universal Sompo General Insurance ... vs Suresh Chand Jain on 26 July, 2023

Therefore, as observed hereinabove in the aforesaid decision, it satisfies the test of an
authority vested with the judicial powers of the State and therefore may be regarded
as a ‘Tribunal’ within the meaning of Article 227 and/or 136 of the Constitution of
India. …” (Emphasis supplied)

37. This Court in Ibrat Faizan (supra), while explaining the importance of approaching the High
Court, more particularly when a remedy is available by way of a writ petition under Article 226 of
the Constitution or by way of a petition under Article 227 of the Constitution (supervisory
jurisdiction) observed as under:

“12. ….Also, in a given case, this Court may not exercise its powers under Article 136
of the Constitution of India, in view of the remedy which may be available to the
aggrieved party before the concerned High Court under Article 227 of the
Constitution of India, as it is appropriate that aggrieved party approaches the
concerned High Court by way of writ petition under Article 227 of the Constitution of
India.

Xxx xxx xxx

13. Now so far as the remedy which may be available under Article 136 of the
Constitution of India is concerned, it cannot be disputed that the remedy by way of
an appeal by special leave under Article 136 of the Constitution of India may be too
expensive and as observed and held by this Court in the case of L. Chandra Kumar
(supra), the said remedy can be said to be inaccessible for it to be real and effective.

Therefore, when the remedy under Article 227 of the Constitution of India before the concerned
High Court is provided, in that case, it would be in furtherance of the right of access to justice of the
aggrieved party, may be a complainant, to approach the concerned High Court at a lower cost, rather
than a Special Leave to Appeal under Article 136 of the Constitution.

Xxx xxx xxx 14.1. The scope and ambit of jurisdiction of Article 227 of the Constitution has been
explained by this Court in the case of Estralla Rubber v. Dass Estate (P) Ltd., (2001) 8 SCC 97,
which has been consistently followed by this Court (see the recent decision of this Court in the case
of Garment Craft v. Prakash Chand Goel, 2022 SCC OnLine SC 29). Therefore, while exercising the
powers under Article 227 of the Constitution, the High Court has to act within the parameters to
exercise the powers under Article 227 of the Constitution. It goes without saying that even while
considering the grant of interim stay/relief in a writ petition under Article 227 of the Constitution of
India, the High Court has to bear in mind the limited jurisdiction of superintendence under Article
227 of the Constitution. Therefore, while granting any interim stay/relief in a writ petition under
Article 227 of the Constitution against an order passed by the National Commission, the same shall
always be subject to the rigour of the powers to be exercised under Article 227 of the Constitution of
India.” (Emphasis supplied)

11

M/S Universal Sompo General Insurance ... vs Suresh Chand Jain on 26 July, 2023

38. In the aforesaid view of the matter, we have reached to the conclusion that we should not
adjudicate this petition on merits. We must ask the petitioner herein to first go before the
jurisdictional High Court either by way of a writ application under Article 226 of the Constitution or
by invoking the supervisory jurisdiction of the jurisdictional High Court under Article 227 of the
Constitution. Of course, after the High Court adjudicates and passes a final order, it is always open
for either of the parties to thereafter come before this Court by filing special leave petition, seeking
leave to appeal under Article 136 of the Constitution.

39. We take notice of the order passed by this Court dated 29.03.2023 which reads thus:

“2. In the meantime, there shall be stay of the impugned judgment and order, subject
to deposit of 50 per cent of the awarded amount in this Court.”

40. However, in the aforesaid context, it is also necessary for us to look into the office report dated
03.07.2023, which reads thus:

“It is further submitted that Dr. S.K. Verma, Advocate for respondent no.1 has on
28.06.2023 filed an application for release of deposited amount made by the
Petitioner. However, the same is defective as original property papers are not filed.
Also, the documents relating to valuation of property are not filed as in the lease
papers the amount mentioned is Rs. 6,30,000/-. Hence, the amount was not
disbursed to the respondent no.1.”

41. It appears from the aforesaid that the complainant was not in a position to withdraw the fifty per
cent amount deposited by the petitioner herein. It further appears that the amount deposited by the
petitioner herein is still with the Registry of this Court. Since we are not entertaining this petition on
merits, we direct the Registry to refund the amount to the petitioner after due and proper
verification.

42. In the result, this petition is disposed of with liberty to the petitioner to approach the
jurisdictional High Court and challenge the order passed by the NCDRC, in accordance with law.

43. It is needless to clarify that we have not expressed any opinion on the merits of the case. The
merits of the case shall be looked into by the jurisdictional High Court.

…….………………………J. (J.B. PARDIWALA) …………………………….J. (MANOJ MISRA) NEW DELHI;

JULY 26, 2023.

12