Maghavendra Pratap Singh @ Pankaj Singh vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 24 April, 2023

Maghavendra Pratap Singh @ Pankaj Singh vs The State Of
Chhattisgarh on 24 April, 2023

Author: Sanjay Karol

Bench: Sanjay Karol, B.R. Gavai

1

REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 915 OF 2016

MAGHAVENDRA PRATAP SINGH
@ PANKAJ SINGH                                    … APPELLANT

VERSUS

STATE OF CHHATTISGARH                              … RESPONDENT

JUDGMENT

SANJAY KAROL, J.

1. The following three questions arise for consideration :

1. Whether the Investigating Officer in the present case had complied with the duties
and responsibilities cast upon him by virtue of Chapter XII of Code of Criminal
Procedure Code, 1973?

2. Whether the court below, while acquitting all the other co−accused in connection
with the same crime, erred in not returning a finding qua the instant appellant – a
co−accused − in respect of a charged framed under Section 120−B of the Indian Date:
2023.04.25 13:42:16 IST Reason:

1

Maghavendra Pratap Singh @ Pankaj Singh vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 24 April, 2023

Penal Code, 1860?

3. Whether the impugned judgments convicting the appellant are sustainable in law
or not?

2. Maghavendra Pratap Singh @ Pankaj Singh (referred to as Pankaj Singh) has preferred the
present appeal against the Judgment dated 14.1.2016 passed by the High Court of Chhattisgarh at
Bilaspur in Criminal Appeal No.468 of 2013. He alone stands convicted for having committed an
offence punishable under Section 302, Indian Penal Code, 1860, with life imprisonment and a fine
of Rs.1000/− with further imprisonment of 6 months in default; under Section 201 of the IPC,
punishable with 7 years RI with a fine of Rs.1000/− and 6 months RI for default; under Section
25(1)(1−b)(a) of the Arms Act, 1959 3 years RI with fine of Rs.1000/− and 6 months RI for default.
The sentences were awarded to run concurrently.

3. The incident which led to the present case was that a businessman by the name of Goverdhan
Aggarwal (hereinafter, the deceased) and certain others were threatened, and a demand of rupees
ten lakhs was made from each of them. On 26.9.2009 the deceased left his office at about 7:00 PM
for his home when two motorcyclists shot him. He was taken to the District Hospital, Ambikapur, in
the car of PW−24, namely Prabodh Minz, where he died. That night, an FIR was registered at the
P.S. Gandhi Nagar (Ex.P−37). The body was sent for a post−mortem vide Memo under Ex.P−39.
After due investigation, a chargesheet was filed, stating that all the accused persons, including Sunil
Paswan, Pankaj Singh, and Pappu Tiwari, came together and, in agreement, committed or caused to
be committed the murder of Gowardhan Aggarwal. In pursuance of the said agreement, Pappu
Tiwari made available the motorcycle, Pankaj Singh conveyed the information of the deceased
having departed from his office, Abhishek Singh carried Sunil Paswan and the weapons as pillion
rider on the said motorcycle on the evening of 26.9.2009 at about 7:00 PM, where Sunil Paswan
then shot the deceased.

4. The Learned Additional District Judge, in Session Trial No. 76/2010, seized of the trial against
Sunil Paswan, Maghavendra Pratap Singh @ Pankaj Singh, Akhileshwar Pratap Singh @ Lalit Singh,
and Sidkant Tiwari @ Pappu Tiwari; and in Sessions Case 166/2010, Mannu Singh @ Gyanendra
Singh @ Manvendra Singh @ Abhishek Singh, Satish Tripathi, and Ganeshdutt Mishra.

A total of twenty− eight witnesses were examined, and the Trial Court framed eight issues for
consideration. Issues A, B and C concern the instant appellant. They are; A) whether the accused
persons have in agreement with each other and, in pursuance of criminal conspiracy, murdered the
deceased; B) whether the accused have in agreement with each other and with the intention to
screen each other from punishment concealed particular articles such as the motorcycle, pistol,
cartridges, scarf, etc. and C) whether Pankaj Singh has been found in possession of two 9mm pistols,
their magazines and thirty−three live cartridges without possessing the requisite licence thereof.

5. The Learned Additional District Judge disposed of both the cases with a common judgement
dated 25.03.2013. by which out of the seven persons named above, one, namely, Akhileshwar Pratap
Singh, was acquitted, and others were convicted and sentenced under various provisions of the

2

Maghavendra Pratap Singh @ Pankaj Singh vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 24 April, 2023

Indian Penal Code, 1860 and in certain cases under provisions of the Arms Act, 1959.

6. A total of five appeals were filed before the High Court. The status of all accused persons is as
under:

Accused                   Charge              Trial Court       High Court
1. Sunil Paswan           S. 302/120B,        Convicted. Life    Acquitted.
201(1), 120B IPC    imprisonment.
2. Maghavendra Pratap S. 302,120B,            Convicted. Life    Convicted.
Singh @ Pankaj Singh      201(1)/120B, IPC,   imprisonment.

S. 25(1) (1−B)a,
Arms Act.

3.Akhileshwar      Pratap S. 212, IPC.        Acquitted.        Not appealed.
Singh @ Lalit Singh
4.Siddhkant Tiwari @      S. 302/120B,
Pappu Tiwari              201(1), 120B IPC.
5.Mannu Singh @           S. 302/120B,        Convicted. Life    Acquitted.

Gyanendra Singh @          201(1), 120B IPC       imprisonment.
Manvendra Singh @
Abhishek Singh
6.Satish Tripathi          S. 212(1), 201(1),     Convicted. Five   Acquitted.
120B, IPC.             years rigorous
imprisonment.
7.Ganeshdutt Mishra        S. 212(1), IPC.        Convicted. Five   Acquitted.
years rigorous
imprisonment.

7. The High Court, vide Impugned judgement dated 14.01.2016, acquitted all the accused save and
except Maghavendra Pratap Singh @ Pankaj Singh, the present appellant.

8. This Court has therefore been called upon to examine the correctness of the conviction decision
and sentence rendered by the learned First Additional Sessions Judge, Ambikapur, District Sarguja,
Chhattisgarh, and as partly confirmed by the High Court. The Impugned Judgment

9. In the appeal preferred by the convicts (five in number) in terms of the impugned Judgment, the
High Court, while acquitting all the other convicts, namely, Satish Tripathi, Ganesh Datt Mishra,
Mannu Singh, and Sunil Paswan, has confirmed the conviction and sentence awarded to Pankaj
Singh as reproduced above. In doing so, the Court found the testimonies of Ashish Agrawal (PW−1),
Naresh Mandal (PW−

6), Avinash Tirki (PW−7) and Inspector J.S. Saggu (PW−23), Investigation Officer sufficient enough
to prove the guilt of Pankaj Singh warranting conviction and sentence. In paragraph 49 of its
Judgment, the High Court observed as under:

3

Maghavendra Pratap Singh @ Pankaj Singh vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 24 April, 2023

“49. On due consideration, the prosecution has proved entire circumstantial evidence
against the appellant Madvendra. The circumstances are fully established consistent
only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused and that is not explainable by any
other circumstances except that appellant Madhvendra is guilty and evidence
collected by the prosecution is of the conclusive nature and tendency. The chain of
evidence is complete, it shows in all human probability the act must have been done
by the accused. The Prosecution has duly proved that appellant Madhvendra had
killed Gowardhan Agrawal and was also in possession of fire arm and cartridges in
contravention of relevant provisions of Arms Act and had caused disappearance of
evidence of offence committed by concealing the pistol, cartridges and other articles.
The conviction awarded to accused Madhvendra does not call for any interference.
The same is well founded.” Consideration of the Evidence on Record

10. It is pertinent to note that the prosecution's case rests solely on circumstantial evidence, as none
was found present at the scene of the incident.

11. Further, it is also not the case of the prosecution that the present appellant had either used or
shot the deceased with the gun allegedly recovered based on his statement (Ex. P−15), which was
purportedly made before the police officer (PW−23) in the presence of independent witnesses
namely, Naresh Mandal (PW−6) and Avinash Tirki (PW−7).

12. It will be helpful to refer to the general principle of cases revolving around circumstantial
evidence as encapsulated by Vijay Shankar v. State of Haryana (2015) 12 SCC 644. The relevant
portion is as follows:

“8. There is no eyewitness to the occurrence and the entire case is based upon
circumstantial evidence. The normal principle is that in a case based on
circumstantial evidence the circumstances from which an inference of guilt is sought
to be drawn must be cogently and firmly established; that these circumstances should
be of a definite tendency unerringly pointing towards the guilt of the accused; that
the circumstances taken cumulatively should form a chain so complete that there is
no escape from the conclusion that within all human probability the crime was
committed by the accused and they should be incapable of explanation of any
hypothesis other than that of the guilt of the accused and inconsistent with their
innocence vide Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra [Sharad
Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra, (1984) 4 SCC 116 :

1984 SCC (Cri) 487]. The same view was reiterated in Bablu v. State of Rajasthan
[Bablu v. State of Rajasthan, (2006) 13 SCC 116 : (2007) 2 SCC (Cri) 590].”

13. In light of the fact that all the co−accused who had preferred appeals stand acquitted by the
Court below, therefore, while fully appreciating the testimony of this witness, this Court confines the
discussions only concerning the present appellant, namely Pankaj Singh.

4

Maghavendra Pratap Singh @ Pankaj Singh vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 24 April, 2023

14. Interestingly, neither of the independent witness (PW 6 and PW

7) supported the prosecution case. Despite extensive cross− examination conducted by the Public
Prosecutor, nothing substantial could be elicited from their testimonies indicating any guilt of the
accused. Noticeably, both the witnesses are rustic villagers working as daily wagers, have deposed to
have signed blank papers, and are not residents of the area.

15. A perusal of the testimony of PW−6 unrefutably reveals the witness to have signed documents
which were blank, purportedly used by the police to strengthen this case for the commission of the
offence.

16. PW−6, while stating that he does not recognize the accused, admits that his signatures are on
several documents. He further says that he had signed blank papers under threat from police
officials. Such a statement is uncontroverted as the record does not reflect any cross−examination
on this issue or any other, for that matter. `

17. We also notice that PW−7, one of the persons on whom reliance was placed by the courts below,
states that he does not know the accused persons and that he had come to know from having
perused newspapers that the deceased was murdered.

18. We may also observe that PW−1, namely, Ashish Agrawal, nephew of the deceased, has not made
out any person to be responsible for the offence, nor has he expressed any doubt or pointed fingers
against any of the accused, much less the present appellant. He states he has “no information as to
how many persons, how hit to uncle with bullet coming with what mode.”

19. The testimony of the Investigating Officer Inspector J.S. Saggu (PW−23) runs into 97 pages.
Close examination of the same reveals that the witness miserably failed to investigate as is expected
and required of a police officer to investigate a crime of murder, especially when not even a single
eyewitness exists, and the entire case rests entirely on circumstantial evidence.

20. The homicidal death of Shri Goverdhan Aggarwal is not in dispute. Be that as it may, it has come
in the testimony of the Investigating Officer that on 27.9.2009, after registration of the complaint,
he visited the spot; carried out the preliminary investigation; sent the dead body for post−mortem
and collected several incriminating articles.

21. It is pertinent to note that his testimony reveals that the prime accused was Sunil Paswan, who
stands acquitted on all charges by the Court below, and this Court is not called upon examine the
complicity of the other accused.

22. It further emanates from the testimony of P.W. 23 that the present appellant was not present at
the spot of the crime. In fact, not even one person has disclosed his complicity in the crime. His
testimony further reads the complicity of Pankaj Singh in the crime, to be suspected only based on
the disclosure statements of co− accused Sunil Paswan (Ex. P−13) to the effect that the former could
get recovered pistol/bullets/live cartridges from the house of co− accused Abhishek Singh. The

5

Maghavendra Pratap Singh @ Pankaj Singh vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 24 April, 2023

courts below have disbelieved this part of the version of the deponent qua the other accused. Hence,
the High Court's reasoning in arriving at Pankaj Singh's guilt is illogical if not self−contradictory.

23. Furthermore, we notice that on 12.10.2009, Pankaj Singh was called to the police station, where
he recorded his statement, which corroborated what Sunil Paswan had said regarding him being
able to support the recovery of arms and ammunition from the house allegedly belonging to
Abhishek Singh. Under the statement, the incriminating material, i.e., three guns (one with an
empty cartridge); thirty− three live cartridges of 9mm; six empty 9 mm cartridges and four empty 9
mm cartridges, were recovered vide memo Ex. P−14. They were sent for analysis to the laboratory at
Chandigarh. Further, his statement shows that the accused, Pankaj Singh, was arrested on
22.10.2019 vide memo Ex. P−21/P−22.

24. Now significantly, the witness (P.W. 23) admits that the statements of neither Sunil Paswan nor
Pankaj Singh have been recorded by him, in his hand, or by any other named persons, under his
instructions. If that were so, it raises the question as to who prepared these memos, which still
needs to be answered by the prosecution.

25. Pertinent to note here is that no direct evidence is available which firmly proves the ballistic
report, i.e., the expert's report. Further, neither the expert who analysed and conducted the chemical
analysis nor the author of the report stand examined.

26. Statement of the Investigating Officer that appellant Pankaj Singh was called to the police
station itself is uninspiring in confidence, for there is no written communication on record which
reflects the same. Further, it is also not his version that he was called by any other mode or that the
co−accused had brought him to the police station.

27. We find PW−23 not to have placed on record any case diary indicating his movements to the
spot of recovery. In light of the given facts and circumstances, this fact acquires significance. It is
also observed that before arresting the accused, no information was ever supplied to the family
members of any of the accused persons. Moreover, some of the accused, residents of other States,
for instance, Uttar Pradesh, were arrested without supplying any information to their relatives. This
is in contravention to the directions issued in D.K Basu v. State of WB (1997) 1 SCC 416, the relevant
portion thereof is as under:− “(3) A person who has been arrested or detained and is being held in
custody in a police station or interrogation centre or other lock−up, shall be entitled to have one
friend or relative or other person known to him or having interest in his welfare being informed, as
soon as practicable, that he has been arrested and is being detained at the particular place, unless
the attesting witness of the memo of arrest is himself such a friend or a relative of the arrestee.

(4) The time, place of arrest and venue of custody of an arrestee must be notified by the police where
the next friend or relative of the arrestee lives outside the district or town through the Legal Aid
Organisation in the District and the police station of the area concerned telegraphically within a
period of 8 to 12 hours after the arrest.”

6

Maghavendra Pratap Singh @ Pankaj Singh vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 24 April, 2023

28. In pursuance of these directions, Section 79 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 was
introduced, laying down the process for “Warrant directed to police officer for execution outside
jurisdiction”.

29. The record does not reflect that the house from which the recoveries were affected belonged to
accused Abhishek Singh. Regarding the conduct of the search, we may also observe that the owner
of the house was not examined. This begs the question that if both Abhishek and Sunil were aware of
the situs of incriminating articles, then why is it that recoveries were not affected by their statements
or through them?

30. Nothing on the record suggests that the present appellant had conspired to commit the offence.
At best, as shown from the testimony of this deponent, the present appellant has only concealed the
relevant incriminating evidence/articles. The materials on record in no way establish that before the
commission of the offence, the accused had any common purpose, object or intention of committing
the crime, without the same being borne out of the records, the charge of criminal conspiracy and of
common intention which is to be read with Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code, fails.

31. For the charge of criminal conspiracy under Section 120B of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, to be
established, an agreement between the parties to do an unlawful act must exist. In some cases,
direct evidence to establish conspiracy may be absent, but when the lack of evidence is apparent, it
is not safe to hold a person guilty under this section. To prove the offence of criminal conspiracy, it
is imperative to show a meeting of the minds between the conspirators for the intended common
object. It was observed by a two−judge bench of this Court in Parveen v. State of Haryana, 2021 SCC
OnLine SC 1184, that “A few bits here and a few bits there on which prosecution relies, cannot be
held to be adequate for connecting the accused with the commission of crime of criminal
conspiracy.”

32. Keeping this abovesaid principle in view, we believe that the present appellant cannot be
convicted of criminal conspiracy under Section 120B, Indian Penal Code, 1860, solely for having
concealed the location of the incriminating materials/ articles and, in the absence of any evidence
establishing meeting of the minds. Given that all the other co−accused have been acquitted by the
courts below, meaning they were innocent of the crime, the fundamental requirement of a criminal
conspiracy is not met.

33. Needless to say, the charge of criminal conspiracy also fails on the ground that a single person
cannot hatch a conspiracy.

34. So far as the second question is concerned, we may refer to recent judgment of this Court in
Geeta Devi Vs. State of U.P. & Ors. 2022 SCC OnLine 57, wherein it was observed that the High
Court, by virtue of being the First Appellate Court ought to reappreciated and discussed the evidence
on record. Had that been done completely in the present case, the High Court would have returned a
finding on Section 120−B of IPC. The charge of criminal conspiracy requires meeting of the minds
prior to commission of offence, and with four of the five appeals being allowed and only the present
appellant being convicted, the basic requirement of the section, that is of two or more persons

7

Maghavendra Pratap Singh @ Pankaj Singh vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 24 April, 2023

agreeing to or causing to be done an illegal act or an act which is not per se illegal but it is done by
illegal means, is not met. The impugned judgment, however, only records that Section 10 and 30 of
the Evidence Act, 1872, which deal with things having been said or done by a conspirator in
reference to common design and a proved confession being considered as against another person;
are not applicable and then observes that the sentence handed down to Pankaj Singh does not call
for any interference. Therefore, the Court implies that the conviction in its entirety including the
sentence for criminal conspiracy is upheld. Such a view, in the considered view of this Court, cannot
be sustained.

35. Even about the search, we do not find the veracity of the Investigating Officer’s testimony to be
inspiring in confidence on account of various lapses. For he (a) did not examine the owner of the
house; (b) did not enter his movement in the case diary; (c) did not record that he took the accused
for effecting the recovery; (d) was not able to describe clearly the area from where the recovery was
effected;

(e) admits both the independent witnesses, who do not belong to the area from where the recoveries
were effected; (f) does not associate any of the residents of the area for conducting the search; (g)
does not examine any of the residents for carrying out any further investigation and (h) Most
importantly he admits that both the memo of arrest as also the recovery not to have been prepared
by him or bearing his signature and the same too, have many corrections and over−writing, thus
reducing the correctness and authenticity of this document.

36. Furthermore, he is not clear about the description of the articles recovered. Illustratively, in the
memo, he records one black colour scarf to have been recovered, but on a pointed query put by the
Court, he admitted that not to be so but only a black cloth which undoubtedly cannot be equated to a
scarf. Furthermore, there needs to be more clarity in his mind about whether the tank from where
the articles were recovered was full of water.

37. It has come on record that the recovered arms and ammunition were first sent to the laboratory
at Raipur and, after that, to the laboratory at Chandigarh. However, none had come forward to
prove the report received from the said laboratories. Furthermore, there is nothing on the record
besides any other scientific evidence linking the accused to the recovered articles.

38. The Investigating Officer is the person tasked with determining a direction, the pace, manner
and method of the investigation. In Amarnath Chaubey v. Union of India (2021) 11 SCC 80, it was
observed that the police has a primary duty to investigate upon receiving the report of the
commission of crime. In Manohar Lal Sharma v. Union of India (2014) 2 SCC 532, this Court
observed that one of the responsibilities of the police is protection of life, liberty and property of
citizens. The investigation of offences to bring the offender to the book and facilitate the ultimate
search for truth is one of the important duties the police has to perform. This is a statutory duty
under the Cr.P.C. and is also a constitutional obligation ensuring the maintenance of peace and the
upholding of rule of law.

8

Maghavendra Pratap Singh @ Pankaj Singh vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 24 April, 2023

39. On the responsibility cast on an officer investigating a crime, this Court in Common Cause v.
Union of India (2015) 6 SCC 332, observed as under :

“31. There is a very high degree of responsibility placed on an investigating agency to
ensure that an innocent person is not subjected to a criminal trial. This responsibility
is coupled with an equally high degree of ethical rectitude required of an investigating
officer or an investigating agency to ensure that the investigations are carried out
without any bias and are conducted in all fairness not only to the accused person but
also to the victim of any crime, whether the victim is an individual or the State.”

40. It is well recognised that the Magistrate concerned is not empowered to interfere with the
investigation being carried out up until the submission of the report by the said officer. Needless to
state then that the role of the Investigating Officer is essential and crucial. Chapter XII of Cr.P.C.
titled as “information to the police and their powers to investigate”, lays down the procedure and
course of action to be taken by the police upon receipt of the commission of an offence cognizable in
nature. Section 156 lays down the power of investigation; Section 157 the procedure thereof; Section
160 the power to require attendance of a witness, Section 161 conduct examination of such witness,
etc. Section 172 requires such police officer to maintain a case diary and Section 173 lays down the
format and the procedure for the report to be issued by such officer.

41. This Court has in Pooja Pal v. Union of India (2016) 3 SCC 135, expounded as under for criminal
investigations and its success :

“96. The avowed purpose of a criminal investigation and its efficacious prospects with
the advent of scientific and technical advancements have been candidly synopsised in
the prefatory chapter dealing with the history of criminal investigation in the treatise
on Criminal Investigation — Basic Perspectives by Paul B. Weston and Renneth M.
Wells:

“Criminal investigation is a lawful search for people and things useful in
reconstructing the circumstances of an illegal act or omission and the mental state
accompanying it. It is probing from the known to the unknown, backward in time,
and its goal is to determine truth as far as it can be discovered in any post−factum
inquiry.

Successful investigations are based on fidelity, accuracy and sincerity in lawfully
searching for the true facts of an event under investigation and on an equal
faithfulness, exactness, and probity in reporting the results of an investigation.
Modern investigators are persons who stick to the truth and are absolutely clear
about the time and place of an event and the measurable aspects of evidence. They
work throughout their investigation fully recognising that even a minor contradiction
or error may destroy confidence in their investigation.

9

Maghavendra Pratap Singh @ Pankaj Singh vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 24 April, 2023

The joining of science with traditional criminal investigation techniques offers new
horizons of efficiency in criminal investigation. New perspectives in investigation
bypass reliance upon informers and custodial interrogation and concentrate upon a
skilled scanning of the crime scene for physical evidence and a search for as many
witnesses as possible. Mute evidence tells its own story in court, either by its own
demonstrativeness or through the testimony of an expert witness involved in its
scientific testing. Such evidence may serve in lieu of, or as corroboration of,
testimonial evidence of witnesses found and interviewed by police in an extension of
their responsibility to seek out the truth of all the circumstances of crime happening.
An increasing certainty in solving crimes is possible and will contribute to the major
deterrent of crime—the certainty that a criminal will be discovered, arrested and
convicted.” (Emphasis in original)

42. With reference to case diaries, it has been observed by this Court in Bhagwant Singh v.
Commission of Police (1983) 3 SCC 344, a two−Judge Bench observed that entries into the police
diary shall be with (a) promptness; (b) in sufficient detail; (c) containing all significant facts; (d) in
chronological order; and (e) with complete objectivity.

43. This Court in Mohd. Imran Khan v. State (Govt. of NCT of Delhi), (2011) 10 SCC 192, observed
as under while noting the effect of objectionable features and infirmities on criminal investigations:

“31. The investigation into a criminal offence must be free from all objectionable
features or infirmities which may legitimately lead to a grievance to either of the
parties that the investigation was unfair or had been carried out with an ulterior
motive which had an adverse impact on the case of either of the parties. The
investigating officer is supposed to investigate an offence avoiding any kind of
mischief or harassment to either of the party. He has to be fair and conscious so as to
rule out any possibility of bias or impartial conduct so that any kind of suspicion to
his conduct may be dispelled and the ethical conduct is absolutely essential for
investigative professionalism. The investigating officer “is not merely to bolster up a
prosecution case with such evidence as may enable the court to record a conviction
but to bring out the real unvarnished truth”.

44. Keeping in view the aforesaid principles and applying them to the present set of facts, we may
observe that the Investigating Officer did not meet the obligations he was under. As we have noticed
above, numerous infirmities affected the conduct of the Investigation Officer calling into question,
credibly, the investigation conducted by him or upon his directions.

Conclusion

45. In the considered opinion of the Court, the High Court, without appreciating the testimonies of
the witnesses mentioned above in their true import and meaning, and without having any
discussion concerning the complicity of the accused, in a perfunctory manner held the prosecution
to have established the case, which is entirely circumstantial in nature, against the present

10

Maghavendra Pratap Singh @ Pankaj Singh vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 24 April, 2023

appellant. Significantly, the High Court holds that the evidence reveals that “in all human
probability the act must have been done by the accused”. Inter alia, it is this finding which we find to
be erroneous, for the principle of determining the guilt of the accused in a case involving
circumstantial evidence is not that of probability but certainty and that all the evidence present
should conclusively point towards only a singular hypothesis, which is the guilt of the accused,
Pankaj Singh.

46. Given the above, the Judgment dated 14.1.2016 passed by the High Court of Chhattisgarh at
Bilaspur in Criminal Appeal No.468 of 2013 titled Maghavendra Pratap Singh @ Pankaj Singh v.
State of Chhattisgarh is set aside and the appeal is allowed.

47. The three questions noted above are answered accordingly.

48. If not already released, the accused is directed to be set at liberty forthwith.

Interlocutory applications, if any, are disposed of.

...........................................J. (B.R. GAVAI) .........................................J. (SANJAY KAROL) Dated :
24th April, 2023;

Place : New Delhi.

11