Icici Lombard General Insurance Co. Ltd vs Rajani Sahoo on 2 January, 2025

Icici Lombard General Insurance Co. Ltd vs Rajani Sahoo on 2
January, 2025

Author: C.T. Ravikumar

Bench: C.T. Ravikumar

2025 INSC 6

                                                                      Non-Reportable

                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                           Civil Appeal No.         of 2025
                                            (@ SLP (C) No. 29302 of 2019)

                             ICICI Lombard General Insurance Co. Ltd.

                                                                       …Appellant(s)
                                                           Versus
                             Rajani Sahoo & Ors.
                                                                     …Respondent(s)

                                                         JUDGMENT

C.T. RAVIKUMAR, J.

1. Leave granted.

2. The insurer of the vehicle bearing Registration No. OR-04-D-5675, held as the offending vehicle,
filed the captioned appeal against the judgment dated 07.02.2018 passed by the High Court of
Orissa, at Cuttack in MACA No.627 of 2016 dismissing the appeal filed against the award dated
07.05.2016 passed by the Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal, Nayagarh, in MAC No.57 of 2009. The
claim petition was filed by the respondents herein seeking compensation for the death of one
Udayanath Sahoo who succumbed to the injuries sustained in a Date: 2025.01.02 16:40:40 IST
Reason:

motor vehicle accident involving the motorcycle, being driven by him and the vehicle
insured with the appellant. The aforesaid offending vehicle dashed against the rear
side of the motorcycle ridden by the deceased Udayanath Sahoo when he was going to
Bahadajhola at about 01.10 pm on 27.04.2019. Consequent to the hit, the motorcycle
dashed against a tree standing by the road and Udayanath Sahoo succumbed to the
injuries sustained and the pillion got severely injured. In connection with the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/111134267/

1

Icici Lombard General Insurance Co. Ltd vs Rajani Sahoo on 2 January, 2025

accident, FIR No.61/2009 was registered at Police Station Sarankul. The legal heirs
of deceased Udayanath Sahoo, the respondents herein filed a claim petition under
Section 166 of the Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 (for short, the MV Act) claiming
compensation of (cid:129) 10,50,000/-. The appellant was the second respondent therein.
On appreciating the evidence consisting both oral and documentary, the Tribunal
passed an award for (cid:129) 6,77,164/- along with the interest at the rate of 7% per annum
from the date of filing of the claim petition till the actual payment.

3. Feeling aggrieved by the award passed by the Tribunal contending that the accident had occurred
solely on account of the rash and negligent driving on the part of the deceased and not at all due to
the rash and negligent driving of the driver of the truck, which was insured with the appellant and
further that the Tribunal had erred in relying on the FIR and the other records, the appeal bearing
No. MACA No.627/2016 was filed by the appellant herein, which was dismissed by the High Court
as per the impugned judgment. Hence, this appeal.

4. Heard the learned counsel for the appellant as also the learned counsel appearing for the
respondents.

5. For understanding the case of the appellant, it is only appropriate to refer to the operative portion
of the impugned judgment which reads thus:-

“On a perusal of the impugned award it is seen that the learned Tribunal has taken
into consideration the evidence available on record, both oral and documentary,
including the police papers such as, F.I.R. (Exts. 1 and 2), Final Form (Ext. 3) and the
evidence of eye-witness (P.W. 2), in coming to hold that the driver of the offending
truck no. OR-04-D/5675 was rash and negligent in causing the accident, which
resulted in the death of Udayanath Sahoo, the rider of the motorcycle.

There is no dispute that in the Final Form submitted by the police after investigation,
the accused driver of the offending Truck has been found to be guilty of rash and
negligent driving, which resulted in the death of Udayanath Sahoo, the rider of the
motorcycle no. OR-205/2229. Therefore, the impugned findings of the learned
Tribunal cannot be faulted.”

6. The core contention of the appellant is that the Tribunal as also the High Court relied on the
fraudulent chargesheet prepared by the respondents in connivance with the police. In short, the
contention of the appellant is that the High Court erred in relying on the chargesheet to arrive at the
conclusion that the accident in question in which Udayanath Sahoo lost his life had occurred due to
the rash and negligent driving of the truck insured with the appellant. Though respondent Nos.1 and
2 did not file any counter affidavit, the learned counsel appearing for them would submit that there
is absolutely no illegality in relying on such documents consisting of FIR and the final report
prepared in relation to the accident in question by the police, for the purpose of considering the
question of negligence in a motor vehicle accident case. That apart, it is contended that the appellant
despite attributing connivance of the respondents with the police, the appellant failed to prove the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/111134267/

2

Icici Lombard General Insurance Co. Ltd vs Rajani Sahoo on 2 January, 2025

same. In short, it is submitted that the appeal is devoid of merit and the same is liable to be
dismissed.

7. As regards the reliability of charge sheet and other documents collected by the police during the
investigation in motor accident cases, this Court in the case of Mangla Ram v. Oriental Insurance
Co. Ltd. and Ors.1, held in paragraph No.27, thus : -

“27. Another reason which weighed with the High Court to interfere in the first
appeal filed by Respondents 2 & 3, was absence of finding by the Tribunal about the
factum of negligence of the driver of the subject jeep. Factually, this view is
untenable. Our understanding of the analysis done by the Tribunal is to hold that
Jeep No. RST 4701 was driven rashly and negligently by Respondent 2 when it
collided with the motorcycle of the appellant leading to the accident. This can be
discerned from the evidence of witnesses and the contents of the charge-sheet filed
by the police, naming Respondent 2. This Court in a recent decision in Dulcina
Fernandes [Dulcina Fernandes v. Joaquim Xavier Cruz, (2013) 10 SCC 646, noted
that the key of negligence on the part of the driver of the offending vehicle as set up
by the claimants was required to be decided by the Tribunal on the touchstone of
preponderance of probability and certainly not by standard of proof beyond
reasonable (2018) 5 SCC 656; 2018 INSC 311 doubt. Suffice it to observe that the
exposition in the judgments already adverted to by us, filing of charge-sheet against
Respondent 2 prima facie points towards his complicity in driving the vehicle
negligently and rashly. Further, even when the accused were to be acquitted in the
criminal case, this Court opined that the same may be of no effect on the assessment
of the liability required in respect of motor accident cases by the Tribunal”.

(Emphasis Supplied)

8. It is true that the Tribunal had looked into the oral and documentary evidence including the FIR,
final report and such other documents prepared by the police in connection with the accident in
question. The Tribunal had also taken note of the fact that based on the final report, the driver of the
offending truck was tried and found guilty for rash and negligent driving. The High Court took note
of such aspects and found no illegality in the procedure adopted by the Tribunal and consequently
dismissed the appeal. In the contextual situation it is relevant to refer to a decision of this Court in
Mathew Alexander v. Mohammed Shafi & Anr.2, this Court held thus:-

“12….A holistic view of the evidence has to be taken into consideration by the
Tribunal and strict proof of an accident caused by a particular vehicle in a particular
manner need not be established by the claimants. The claimants have to establish
their case on the touchstone of preponderance of probabilities. The standard of proof
beyond reasonable doubt cannot be applied while considering the petition seeking
compensation on account of death or injury in a road traffic accident. To the same
effect is the observation made by this Court in Dulcina Fernandes vs. Joaquim Xavier
Cruz, (2013) 10 SCC 646 which has referred to the aforesaid judgment in Bimla

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/111134267/

3

Icici Lombard General Insurance Co. Ltd vs Rajani Sahoo on 2 January, 2025

Devi.”

9. Thus, there can be no dispute with respect to the position that the question regarding negligence
which is essential for passing an award in a motor vehicle accident claim should be considered based
on the evidence available before the Tribunal. If the police records are available before the Tribunal,
taking note of the purpose of the Act it cannot be said that looking into (2023) 13 SCC 510; 2023
INSC 621 such documents for the aforesaid purpose is impermissible or inadmissible.

10. It is also a fact that the appellant had attributed that the respondent claimants connived with
police and fraudulently prepared the chargesheet. The contention is that the vehicle insured with the
appellant was not involved in the accident and the accident had occurred solely due to the rash and
negligence on the part of the deceased. But the evidence on record would reveal that pursuant to the
filing of the final report, cognizance was taken for rash and negligent driving which resulted in the
death of Udayanath Sahoo.

11. In view of the aforementioned circumstances and taking note of the concurrent findings of the
Tribunal and the High Court, we do not find any perversity in the impugned judgment warranting
interference by this Court. Resultantly, the appeal must fail and consequently it is dismissed.

……………………, J.

(C.T. Ravikumar) ……………………, J.

(Rajesh Bindal) New Delhi;

January 02, 2025.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/111134267/

4

