Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra
Limited on 3 March, 2023

Author: B.R. Gavai

Bench: Vikram Nath, B.R. Gavai

REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NO.684 OF 2021

MAHARASHTRA STATE ELECTRICITY
DISTRIBUTION COMPANY LIMITED                  ...APPELLANT (S)

VERSUS
ADANI POWER MAHARASHTRA LIMITED
& ORS.                          ...RESPONDENT (S)
WITH

CIVIL APPEAL NO.6927 OF 2021

INDEX

I.    INTRODUCTION……………………………………………..              Paras 1 and 2
II.    FACTS IN CIVIL APPEAL NO.684 OF 2021…………….   Paras 3 to 29
III.    FACTS IN CIVIL APPEAL NO.6927 OF 2021………….   Paras 30 to 39
IV.     SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE DISCOMS         Paras 43
………
V.     SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE GENERATING      Paras 44 and 45
COMPANIES        …………………………………………..
………
V.      RELEVANT DOCUMENTS………………………………….             Paras 46 to 83
VI.     JUDGMENTS CITED………………………………………..             Paras 84 to 93
VII.    STATUTORY PROVISIONS WITH REGARD TO          Paras 94 to 104
REGULATORY MECHANISM……………………………….

VIII.   CONSIDERATIONS………………………………………….              Para 105 onwards

Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
Narendra Prasad
Date: 2023.03.03
12:45:11 IST
Reason:

1

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

1
(cid:12)                        List of abbreviations:

1.    ACQ   -     Annual Contracted Quantity
2.    APML -      Adani Power Maharashtra Limited
3.    APTEL -     Appellate Tribunal for Electricity
4.    C&AG -      Comptroller and Auditor General of India
5.    CCEA -      Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs
6.    CERC -      Central Electricity Regulatory Commission
7.    CIL   -     Coal India Limited
8.    CPP   -     Captive Power Plants
9.    DISCOMS -   Distribution Companies
10.   FSA   -     Fuel Supply Agreement
11.   GCV   -     Gross Calorific Value
12.   GMR   -     GMR Warora Energy Ltd.
13.   GMRETL-     GMR Energy Trading Limited
14.   IPPs  -     Independent Power Producers
15.   LoA   -     Letter of Assurance
16.   MERC -      Maharashtra Electricity Regulatory Commission
17.   MoC   -     Ministry of Coal
18.   MoP   -     Ministry of Power
19.   MSEDCL -    Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution Company Limited
20.   NCDP -      New Coal Distributional Policy
21.   PLF   -     Plant Load Factor
22.   PPAs  -     Power Purchase Agreements
23.   PSA   -     Power Sale Agreement
24.   RFP   -     Request for Proposal
25.   SECL -      South Eastern Coal Limited
26.   SHR   -     Station Heat Rate
27.   TPPs  -     Thermal Power Stations
28.   UHBVNL-     Uttar Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam Limited
29.   WCL   -     Western Coal Limited

JUDGMENT

B.R. GAVAI, J.

INTRODUCTION

1. The questions involved in both these appeals, as in several other appeals, are common.

2. Three of the issues involved in the present appeals are also involved in the other appeals which
were listed along with these two appeals. However, the other appeals also involve some other
ancillary and incidental issues. As such, at the request of the learned counsel for the parties, we have
heard the present appeals. We have also heard the learned counsel appearing in the other appeals on

2

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

the three questions which are common. FACTS IN CIVIL APPEAL NO. 684 OF 2021

3. The facts, in brief, which arise in Civil Appeal No.684 of 2021 are thus:

4. The appellant-Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution Company Limited (hereinafter referred
to as “MSEDCL”) has entered into a long-term Power Purchase Agreements (“PPAs” for short) with
Adani Power Maharashtra Limited (hereinafter referred to as “APML”). The first of the PPAs is
dated 8 th September 2008 for 1320 MW (“1320 MW PPA” for short); the second one is dated 31st
March 2010 for 1200 MW (“1200 MW PPA” for short); the third one is dated 9 th August 2010 for
125 MW (“125 MW PPA” for short); and the fourth one is dated 16 th February 2013 for 440 MW
(“440 MW PPA” for short). These PPAs were entered into in pursuance of the competitive bidding
processes conducted by the appellant-MSEDCL under Section 63 of the Electricity Act, 2003
(hereinafter referred to as “the Electricity Act”) read with the Standard Bidding Guidelines issued by
the Ministry of Power (“MoP” for short).

5. Article 10 of the 1200 MW PPA dated 31 st March 2010 entered into between the
appellant-MSEDCL and respondent No.1-APML deals with “Change in Law”.

6. Article 10.1.2 defines the term “Change in Law”.

7. Article 10.2 deals with the application and principles for computing the impact of Change in Law.
Article 10.2.1 provides that while determining the consequence of a Change in Law under Article 10,
due regard has to be given to the principle, that to compensate the Party affected by such Change in
Law is to restore through monthly Tariff Payment, to the extent contemplated in Article 10, the
affected Party to the same economic position as if such Change in Law has not occurred.

8. Article 10.3 deals with “Relief for Change in Law”. Article 10.3.1 provides relief for Change in Law
during the Construction Period, whereas Article 10.3.2 provides for compensation to be paid on
account of Change in Law during Operating Period. For claiming relief on account of a Change in
Law, the Party is required to approach the Appropriate Commission along with documentary proof
of such increase/decrease in the cost of the Power Station or revenue/expense for establishing the
impact of such Change in Law. Article 10.3.4 provides finality to the decision of the Appropriate
Commission with regard to compensation determined under Articles 10.3.1 and 10.3.2.

9. On 18th October 2007, the Government of India, through the Ministry of Coal (“MoC” for short),
issued the New Coal Distributional Policy, 2007 (hereinafter referred to as “the NCDP, 2007”). As
per the NCDP 2007, 100% of the quantity as per the normative requirement of the consumers was to
be considered for the supply of coal, through Fuel Supply Agreement (“FSA” for short) by Coal India
Limited (“CIL” for short) at fixed prices to be declared/notified by CIL. The NCDP, 2007 also
provided that to meet the domestic requirement of coal, CIL may have to import coal as may be
required from time to time, if feasible. CIL was to adjust its overall price accordingly. It further
provided that it was the responsibility of CIL/Coal Companies to meet the full requirement of coal
under FSAs even by resorting to imports, if necessary.

3

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

10. It is not in dispute that in accordance with the NCDP, 2007, APML had applied for coal linkage
to MoC. It is also not in dispute that Western Coal Limited (“WCL” for short) and South Eastern
Coal Limited (“SECL” for short) issued two Letters of Assurance (LoAs) in favour of APML and
assured supply of coal.

11. Undisputedly, FSA was executed between APML and WCL for domestic coal linkage.
Subsequently, the FSA was amended and the quantum of coal assured by WCL was transferred to
SECL.

12. It is also not in dispute that subsequently, on 21 st June 2013, the Cabinet Committee on
Economic Affairs (“CCEA” for short), in view of the persistent shortage of domestic coal, approved a
revised mechanism for coal supply to power producers.

13. Thereafter, the Government of India, through the Ministry of Coal, issued Office Memorandum
dated 26 th July 2013 (hereinafter referred to as “NCDP 2013”), thereby approving a revised
arrangement for the supply of coal to the identified Thermal Power Stations (“TPPs” for short). The
said Office Memorandum provided that FSAs will be signed for the domestic coal quantity of 65%,
65%, 67%, and 75% of Annual Contracted Quantity (“ACQ” for short) for the remaining four years of
the 12th Plan for the power plants having normal coal linkages. It further provided that to meet the
balance FSA obligations towards the requirement of the said 78,000 MW TPPs, CIL may import coal
and supply the same to the willing power plants on a cost-plus basis. It further provided that the
power plants may also directly import coal themselves, if they so opt, in which case, the FSA
obligations on the part of CIL to the extent of import component would be deemed to have been
discharged.

14. On 31st July 2013, the MoP issued a letter to the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission
(“CERC” for short) and State Electricity Regulatory Commissions to consider as pass-through in
tariff the cost of alternate coal (procured to meet the shortfall in supply of domestic linkage coal) on
a case to case basis.

15. Contending that on account of the Change in Law, APML was entitled to compensation, APML
filed a Petition bearing Case No.189 of 2013 on 17 th December 2013 before the Maharashtra
Electricity Regulatory Commission (“MERC” for short).

16. MERC, vide order dated 15th July 2014, disposed the said Petition (i.e. Case No. 189 of 2013) by
approving a framework for determination of compensatory fuel charge, in view of the CCEA decision
of 21st June 2013 and the MoP’s advice dated 31st July 2013.

17. In compliance with the MERC’s order dated 15 th July 2014, APML filed another Petition before
the MERC bearing Case No. 140 of 2014 on 23 rd July 2014, inter alia, for approving a mechanism
for the determination of compensatory tariff.

18. The MERC, vide its order dated 20 th August 2014, formulated a mechanism for the
pass-through in tariff of the compensatory fuel charge that had been allowed in Case No.189 of

4

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

2013.

19. Subsequently, APML filed a Review Petition before the MERC bearing Case No.159 of 2014. The
same was disallowed by the MERC as being devoid of merits except on the issue of the effectiveness
of the compensatory fuel charge.

20. On 28th January 2016, the MoP issued the revised Tariff Policy. As per clause 6.1 of the revised
T a r i f f   P o l i c y ,   t h e   A p p r o p r i a t e   C o m m i s s i o n   w a s   r e q u i r e d   t o   c o n s i d e r   t h e   c o s t   o f
imported/market-based e-auction coal procured for making up the shortfall in the domestic coal for
pass-through in tariff of competitively bid projects.

21. Thereafter, on 9th March 2016, APML filed appeals before the Appellate Tribunal for Electricity
(hereinafter referred to as “APTEL”), being Appeal Nos. 129 of 2016 and 130 of 2016, challenging
the orders passed by the MERC in Case Nos.189 of 2013 and 140 of 2014. MSEDCL too filed
cross-appeals against the MERC orders being Appeal Nos. 187 and 188 of 2016.

22. On 4th May 2017, the learned APTEL remanded the issues raised in the cross-appeals filed by
APML and MSEDCL for fresh consideration by the MERC in the light of the judgment of this Court
in the case of Energy Watchdog v. Central Electricity Regulatory Commission and others1 which was
decided on 11th April 2017.

23. By order dated 7th March 2018, the MERC decided Case No.189 of 2013 and 140 of 2014,
wherein, while allowing the claims of APML for relief on account of a Change in Law for 1180 MW
capacity, it restricted it to the extent of the minimum supply obligations specified for the CIL
subsidiaries for the last four years of the 12th Five Year Plan period i.e. Financial Year 2013-14 to
Financial Year 2016-17 as per the NCDP, 2013. It further held that the alternate coal quantity for
meeting the domestic coal shortfall shall be computed based on the Station Heat Rate (“SHR” for
short) mentioned by APML in the bid documents and the middle value of the Gross Calorific Value
(“GCV” for short) range of assured coal grade for domestic coal as per the FSA/LoA/MoU.

1 (2017) 14 SCC 80

24. Being aggrieved thereby, APML preferred appeals before the learned APTEL. The learned
APTEL framed the following three issues:

“Issue No. 1: Whether the MERC was correct in holding that the net SHR submitted by the
Appellant in its bid or SHR and Auxiliary Consumption norms specified for new generating stations
under the MYT Regulations, 2011, whichever is superior shall form the basis for computing Change
in Law compensation under the PPAs?

Issue No. 2: Whether the MERC was correct in holding that the reference GCV of domestic coal
supplied by CIL shall be the middle value of GCV range of assured coal grade in LoA/FSA/MoU and
not the GCV as received?

5

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

Issue No. 3: Whether the MERC was correct in holding that for the purpose of Change in Law
compensation for 1180 MW capacity, shortfall in domestic linkage coal shall be assessed by
considering the coal supply as the maximum of (1) actual quantum of coal offered for offtake by CIL
under the LoA/FSA and (2) the minimum assured quantum in NCDP 2013 for the respective year?”

25. On Issue No.1, the learned APTEL held that APML was entitled to compensation on the ground
of Change in Law based on the SHR specified in the MERC MYT Regulations 2011 or the actual SHR
achieved by APML, whichever is lower.

26. On Issue No.2, the learned APTEL held that the compensation for the Change in Law approved
by the MERC shall be computed based on the actual GCV of coal received.

27. On Issue No.3, the learned APTEL held that under the NCDP, 2007, there was an assurance of
100% coal supply and as such, while granting compensation on the ground of Change in Law, it was
not justified to restrict it to the maximum of 35% to 25% for the respective four years of the 12 th
Plan.

28. The learned APTEL held that the restitution principle has to be applied. It further held that to
protect the interests of consumers, the Generators had itself indicated that the parameters which are
more beneficial to the consumers i.e. the lower amongst the actual or as per the Regulations would
protect the interests of the consumers.

29. Being aggrieved thereby, the MSEDCL has approached this Court by way of Civil Appeal No.684
of 2021. FACTS IN CIVIL APPEAL NO.6927 OF 2021

30. In Civil Appeal No.6927 of 2021, the MSEDCL challenges the concurrent orders passed by the
CERC dated 15 th November 2018 and the order passed by the learned APTEL dated 16 th July
2021.

31. MSEDCL issued a Request for Proposal (RFP) on 15 th May 2009 and initiated the competitive
bidding process for procurement of power on long-term basis. GMR Warora Energy Ltd. (“GMR” for
short) submitted its bid on 7th August 2009 and emerged as one of the successful bidders with a
levelized tariff of Rs. 2.879/kWh. Accordingly, the PPA was executed for the procurement of 200
MW of power on 17 th March 2010 by MSEDCL on long-term basis. Similarly in March 2012,
Respondent No. 2-Union Territory of Dadra & Nagar Haveli (“DNH” for short) issued an RFP for
the procurement of power through competitive bidding and GMR emerged as one of the successful
bidders.

32. Consequently, respondent No. 1 in Civil Appeal No.6927 of 2021 i.e. GMR entered into the
following long-term PPAs for the supply of power from the Project:

(a) Supply and sale of 200 MW of power on a long-term basis to MSEDCL in terms of
PPA dated 17 th March 2010. The cut-off date for this PPA is 31 st July 2009. Supply
of power in terms of the PPA commenced from 17th March 2014.

6

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

(b) Supply and sale of 200 MW of power on long term basis to Electricity
Department, DNH in terms of PPA dated 21 st March 2013. The cut-off date of this
PPA is 1 st June 2012. Supply of power in terms of the PPA commenced from 1 st
April 2013.

(c) Supply and sale of 150 MW of power on long term basis to TANGEDCO through
back-to-back arrangements as follows:

(i) Power Sale Agreement (PSA) dated 1 st March 2013 between GMR Energy Trading
Limited (GMRETL) and GMR, based on which a bid was submitted to TANGEDCO;

(ii) PPA dated 27th November 2013 between GMRETL and TANGEDCO for the
supply of power from GMR to TANGEDCO.

The cut-off date of this PPA is 27th February 2013.

(iii) PPA dated 3rd May 2014 between GMR and GMRETL recording the terms and conditions in
accordance with PPA between GMRETL and TANGEDCO. The supply of power under the PPA
commenced on 22nd October 2015.

33. Petition No. 8/MP/2014 was filed by GMR claiming compensation on account of the impact of
the Change in Law events during the Operation period and Construction period under MSEDCL and
DNH PPAs. The Commission, by order dated 1st February 2017, had allowed some of the claims of
GMR on the ground of Change in law. Vide the said order, it has also disallowed some of the claims.
Aggrieved by the said order, GMR filed Appeal No. 111 of 2017 before the learned APTEL in respect
of the compensation claims disallowed by the Commission. Similarly, Appeal No. 290/2017 was
filed by DNH Power Distribution Company Ltd against the said order dated 1st February 2017
disputing the compensation claims allowed to GMR under some Change in Law events.

34. During the pendency of the above said appeals, GMR has filed Petition (i.e. Petition
No.88/MP/2018) seeking the following reliefs:

“(a) Confirms that the following operational parameters which are imperative of
calculation of compensation due to the Petitioner on account of change in law events,
are to be considered on actuals:

(i) Auxiliary Power Consumption

(ii) Station Heat Rate

(iii) Gross calorific Value

(b) Confirm that levy of Service Tax & Swachh Bharat Cess on coal transportation is
on all components as per rail invoice;

7

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

(c) Release of amounts due to the Petitioner from Respondent No. 1, MSEDCL in
light of the Commission’s order dated 1.2.2017 in Petition No. 8/MP/2014.”

35. Two of the issues involved in the present appeals with regard to SHR and GCV also fell for
consideration before the CERC.

36. The CERC found that the CERC norms applicable for the period 2009-14 and 2014-19 do not
provide the norms for 300 MW units. It further found that the CERC norms provide for a
degradation factor of 6.5% and 4.5% respectively towards Heat Rate over and above the Design Heat
Rate. It found that since the Design Heat Rate is 2211 kcal/kWh, the gross Heat Rate works out to
2355 kcal/kWh and 2310 kcal/kWh for the period 2009-14 and 2014-19 respectively. It directed that
the SHR of 2355 kcal/kWh during the period 2009-14 and 2310 kcal/kWh during the period
2014-19 or the actual SHR, whichever was lower, shall be considered for calculating the coal
consumption for compensation under the Change in Law.

37. Insofar as the GCV is concerned, the CERC found that in the 2014 Tariff Regulations of the
Commission, the measurement of GCV has been specified on “as received” basis. It, therefore, found
that it would be appropriate if the GCV on “as received” basis is considered for computation of
compensation for Change in Law.

38. Being aggrieved by the order passed by the CERC dated 15th November 2018, the MSEDCL
preferred an appeal being Appeal No.342 of 2019 before the learned APTEL. The learned APTEL did
not find merit in the submission of the MSEDCL and as such, dismissed the appeal by judgment and
order dated 16 th July 2021.

39. Being aggrieved thereby, MSEDCL has approached this Court by way of Civil Appeal No.6927 of
2021.

40. The arguments on behalf of the appellant-MSEDCL in Civil Appeal No.684 of 2021 were
advanced by Shri Gopal Jain, learned Senior Counsel, whereas arguments in Civil Appeal No.6927 of
2021 were advanced by Shri G. Sai Kumar, learned counsel.

41. We have also heard Shri Balbir Singh, learned Additional Solicitor General and Shri M.G.
Ramachandran, learned Senior Counsel appearing for some of the State Electricity Distribution
Companies, whose matters are not being decided by this judgment, but wherein the aforesaid three
questions/issues are common.

42. On behalf of the respondent-APML as well as the respondent-GMR, Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi,
learned Senior Counsel advanced the arguments. His arguments were supplemented by Shri Vishrov
Mukherjee, learned Counsel. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE DISCOMS

43. The main arguments that were advanced on behalf of the Distribution Companies (hereinafter
referred to “DISCOMS”) are as under:

8

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

(i) The SHR and GCV value are declared in the bid document and it is not permissible
for the Generating Companies to claim advantage on the basis of SHR value which is
different than the one quoted i.e. the SHR value as provided in the Tariff Regulations
or the actual. It is their submission that the declaration of operational parameters i.e.
SHR and GCV were the mandate of the bid in case of Case-1 competitive bidding
process. It is submitted that if deviation from such declared bid parameters for
compensating the bidder/ Generating Companies/ Generators under the PPA on the
ground of Change in Law is permitted, it will take away the very sanctity of the bid.

(ii) It is submitted that to ensure serious participation in the bid process and for
timely completion of commencement of supply of power, the Competitive Bidding
Guidelines 2005 itself mandates the bidder/generator/Generating Companies to
have a ‘firm’ fuel arrangement. It is their submission that it is mandatory for the
bidder/generator to declare the ‘quantity’ of fuel required to generate power for the
entire term of the PPA. The DISCOMS argued that the quantity of fuel can only be
ascertained by applying the SHR and GCV components as declared in the bid.

(iii) It is submitted that the RFP itself mandated the participating bidders/generators
to submit documentary evidence with regard to the ‘quantity’ of fuel required to
generate power for the entire term of 25 years of the PPA.

(iv) It is submitted that for ascertaining the ‘quantity’, it was also necessary for the
bidder/generator to provide ‘supporting computation’ by declaring the SHR and GCV
value applicable for the entire term of the PPA.

(v) It is the contention on behalf of the DISCOMS that the bidder/generator, while
submitting his/its bids, is required to submit the bids by taking into consideration all
factors, including risks regarding fluctuations, availability of fuel/coal, etc. It is
submitted that if there is any change with regard to the availability of fuel or the rate
a t   w h i c h   a   b i d d e r / g e n e r a t o r   i s   r e q u i r e d   t o   p r o c u r e   t h e   c o a l ,   t h e n   t h e
bidder/generator has to suffer the consequences thereof as he/it has submitted
his/its bid with eyes open.

(vi) The thrust of the argument of the DISCOMS is that in a competitive bid based
PPA under Section 63 of the Electricity Act, the quoted tariff is sacrosanct and it is
not open for the respondent/generator to seek higher tariff or extra compensation
under the PPA, except as per Article 13 of the PPA dealing with impact of Change in
Law. It is submitted that the reliance placed by the learned APTEL on the judgment
of this Court in the Case of Energy Watchdog (supra) is totally misconceived.

(vii) It is, therefore, submitted that the relief for the impact of NCDP 2013 is
admissible only to the extent of the changes brought about by the NCDP 2013 and not
in excess thereof. It is submitted that the Change in Law made by the Central
Government on 31st July 2013 was vis-

9

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

à-vis the NCDP 2007 which was in force as on the cut-off date provided in Article 13.1 of the PPA i.e.
7 days before the bid submission date. It is submitted that the very purpose of compensating the
party affected by Change in Law is to restore, through monthly tariff payments, the affected party to
the same economic position as if the Change in Law had not occurred.

(viii) It is submitted that as per para 2.2 of the NCDP 2007 read with para 5.2, CIL was entitled to
meet the shortfall in the availability of domestic coal by importing coal. In such event, the
Generators were required to pay the higher cost of imported coal to CIL. It is submitted that while
submitting the bids, the bidders/generators, therefore, had submitted their bids for supply of
electricity to the DISCOMS knowing the position that they will not be compensated for higher cost
of imported coal separately, over and above the quoted tariff /quoted energy charges, in the event of
supply of imported coal by CIL.

(ix) It is contended that, if in the event the Generator could have procured the fuel/coal at a lesser
price, then the benefit which would have occurred to him/it on account of such saving in
procurement would have gone to him/it. On the same analogy, if the Generator is required to obtain
the fuel/coal at a higher price then he/it cannot be heard to say that he/it should be compensated
for the same.

(x) It is submitted that, as a matter of fact, till 31 st July 2013 i.e. when the NCDP 2013 was brought
into effect, there could have been no claims from the Generators for increase in tariff to be allowed
for higher coal cost on account of imported coal supply. It is submitted that if the NCDP 2013 had
not brought about a Change in Law, the position as prevalent before would have continued. It is
submitted that this Court has consistently held that an unprecedented increase in input cost cannot
be a ground for a supplier not to perform the obligations under a binding contract or seek higher
price or compensation for such performance.

(xi) It is the submission of the DISCOMS that the benefit on account of the Change in Law brought
into effect by the NCDP 2013 has to be restricted only to the extent of shortfall as provided by the
said policy. It is submitted that if it was the intention of the NCDP 2013 to provide for relief through
the Change in Law/policy decision for the shortfall even below the specified percentages i.e. for
entire shortfall on actual basis, then there was no rationale in specifying the percentages in the
NCDP 2013.

(xii) It is further contended by the DISCOMS that the contention of the Generating Companies that
Shakti Policy 2017 was a continuation of NCDP 2013 is incorrect. It is submitted that the first part
under (A) of the Shakti Policy 2017 deals with the old regime of LoA/FSA which is the NCDP aspect.
The second part under (B) deals with the new transparent coal allocation policy called SHAKTI. It is
submitted that, as a matter of fact, SHAKTI and allocation of coal thereunder was admissible only to
Entities which did not have any LoA/FSA under the NCDP 2007 or the NCDP 2013. Reliance in this
respect has been placed on the judgment of this Court in the case of Jaipur Vidyut Vitaran Nigam
Ltd. and others v. Adani Power Rajasthan Limited and another2 (hereinafter referred to as “Adani
Rajasthan case”) 2 2020 SCC Online SC 697

10

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

(xiii) It is submitted that the law laid down by this Court in the case of Energy Watchdog (supra) has
been applied by the learned APTEL in a patently erroneous and perverse manner.

(xiv) It is submitted that the total quantum of coal required is to be computed not in an abstract
manner but is to be necessarily based on the SHR of the power station. It is submitted that the SHR
has nothing to do with coal quality or GCV of coal. It is submitted that the SHR is the boiler and
turbine characteristic of a thermal power station and, therefore, indicative of the quality and
efficiency of the machine. It is submitted that the quantum of coal requirement is less with lower
SHR and increases with higher SHR, inasmuch as it relates to the ability and efficiency of the
machines to extract heat energy from coal to produce per unit of electricity.

(xv) It is submitted that in Case 2 bidding, the net SHR is a bidding parameter as coal linkage is
arranged by the entity inviting bids, and actual cost of coal is allowed as a pass-through in the tariff
as per the formula specified. It is their submission that there are no quoted energy charges in Case 2
bidding but only quoted fixed charges. It is submitted that, whereas, in Case 1 bidding, SHR may
not, as such, be the criteria for selection but is a necessary requirement/ condition to be given for
identifying the quantum of coal required to generate electricity over the length of the PPA. While
submitting his/its bid and quoting energy charges, the bidder/generator was required to take into
consideration the quantum of coal requirement which, in turn, is based on the SHR and auxiliary
consumption parameters to be given by the bidder/generator. It is submitted that the coal Supply
Agreement for quantum of coal is signed by CIL only for the quantum as determined above, based
on the SHR and operating parameters provided by the bidder/generator. It is submitted that the
view taken by the learned APTEL is contrary to the view taken by it between the same parties in its
judgment dated 13th April 2018 in Appeal No. 210 of 2017.

(xvi) It is submitted that if the SHR which is higher than the one quoted by the bidder/generator is
to be taken into consideration, then it will amount to granting premium to the Generator for its
inefficiency. It is submitted that if the coal consumption increases on account of highest SHR, the
excess expenditure on quantum of coal is to be borne by the Generator.

(xvii) It is submitted that if the bid assumed SHR is 2200 kcal/kg and actual SHR is 2300 kcal/kg,
when the quoted tariff is based on the SHR of 2200 kcal/kg, for Change in Law impact, SHR of 2300
kcal/kg cannot be permitted to be used for computation of compensation for Change in Law.

(xviii) It is submitted that the impugned judgment permitting the actual SHR or the SHR given in
Tariff Regulations, whichever is lower, if upheld, would amount to converting the scope of Section
63 tariff determination into a Section 62 cost plus tariff determination. It is submitted that this is
impermissible in a competitive bid based PPA.

(xix) It is further submitted that the MERC Tariff Regulations expressly provides that the Tariff
Regulations will have no application to Section 63 tariff determination and the same is governed by
the guidelines of the Central Government under Section 63 of the Electricity Act.

11

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

(xx) It is submitted that perusal of Regulation 2(2)(a) of the Central Electricity Regulatory
Commission (Terms and Conditions of Tariff) Regulations, 2019 would reveal that they are not
applicable where the tariff has been discovered through tariff based competitive bidding in
accordance with the guidelines issued by the Central Government and adopted by the Commission
under Section 63 of the Electricity Act.

(xxi) It is submitted that when admittedly there is bid assumed SHR as per bidding conditions, the
learned APTEL cannot ignore the same on the purported ground of equity and provide for an
alternate parameter for computational purpose of actual SHR with the ceiling as under the Tariff
Regulations. It is submitted that this will result in changing the bidding terms and conditions after
the bid was accepted and became final.

(xxii) It is further submitted that the finding that the GCV computation is to be made on ‘as received’
basis, is also patently erroneous. It is submitted that the real purpose behind relying on the said
methodology of computation is to recover the grade slippage in the coal grade actually supplied as
against the coal grade billed by the Coal Company and all the losses in the heat value of the coal
during the time period when the coal is taken delivery from the coal mines and transported to the
Power Plant and unloading at the Power Plant site.

(xxiii) It is submitted that the evaluation of GCV on air dried basis by Coal Company was well
known/existing even prior to bidding and the Generators were very much aware of it.

Accordingly, the same has already been factored into while the Generators submitted their bids. As
such, if the computation of GCV is permitted on ‘as received’ basis, the Generators will be doubly
compensated. In any case, it is submitted that if the Generators had any issues with regard to the
grade of coal i.e. GCV range and quantum, then that is an issue between the Generators and the
respective Coal Companies, which is required to be resolved under the FSA between them. The
D I S C O M S   c a n n o t   b e   r o p e d   i n t o   f o r   t h e   r e s o l u t i o n   o f   s u c h   d i s p u t e s   b e t w e e n   t h e
Generators/Generating Companies and the Coal Companies.

(xxiv) Lastly, it is submitted that since the letter of the MoP, which has been considered as a Change
in Law event, is dated 31st July 2013, the learned APTEL could not have given effect to the same
from 1st April 2013. It is submitted that this would permit giving the benefit of compensation with
retrospective effect.

(xxv) Insofar as the reliance placed by the Generating Companies on the judgment of this Court in
Adani Rajasthan case is concerned, it is submitted that the said judgment would not be applicable to
the facts of the present case. It is submitted that in the said case, there was no FSA and the State
Government had undertaken to supply the entire coal quantum.

(xxvi) It is further submitted that the judgment of this Court in the case of Nabha Power Limited
(NPL) v. Punjab State Power Corporation Limited (PSPCL) and another3 would also not be
applicable to the facts of the present case inasmuch as the said case was under Case-2. (xxvii) It is
submitted that the inability of a Generator to seek sufficient relief from the Coal Companies cannot

12

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

be a reason to claim relief from the Distribution Licensees/DISCOMS or the consumers. The
DISCOMS cannot be penalized on account of failure by the Coal Companies of supplying sufficient
coal.

(xxviii) An additional ground in Civil Appeal No.6927 of 2021 raised is that CERC has erred in
holding 3 (2018) 11 SCC 508 that the principle of late payment surcharge envisaged in Articles 8.3.5
and 8.8.3 of the PPA is applicable towards payment of the balance amounts by MSEDCL in respect
of the relief under Change in Law.

SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE GENERATING COMPANIES

44. As against this, it is submitted on behalf of the Generating Companies as under:

(i) It is submitted that under the NCDP 2007, 100% normative coal requirement of
Generating Companies was assured to be supplied by the CIL. However, by NCDP
2013, the responsibility of CIL to supply coal was reduced to 65%, 65%, 67% and 75%
of ACQ for the remaining years of the 12th Five Year Plan i.e. Financial Year 2013-

14 to Financial Year 2016-17.

(ii) It is submitted that the NCDP has been held to be a law for the purposes of the Electricity Act. It
is, therefore, submitted that the Generating Companies are entitled to compensation for the
shortfall of coal in terms of NCDP 2013 and the same has to be paid on actuals, i.e. to the extent the
shortfall in coal supply actually exists.

(iii) It is submitted that the said issue is no more res integra and is covered by the judgment of this
Court in the case of Energy Watchdog (supra) and in Adani Rajasthan case (supra).

(iv) It is submitted that, as per the guideless issued by the MoP, for Case-1 bidding, SHR and GCV
are not bid parameters. The SHR and GCV mentioned in the bid is part of technical information and
is not relevant for computing Change in Law compensation. It is submitted that there are substantial
distinctions between Case-1 and Case-2 bid. The first one is that in Case-1 bid, SHR and GCV are not
bid parameters, whereas in Case-2, SHR and GCV are bid parameters. Secondly, in Case-1 bidding,
energy charge is not computed since the energy charge forms part of quoted tariff, whereas in
Case-2 bidding, energy charge is computed based on the net heat rate quoted in the financial bid.
Thirdly, in Case-1 bidding, the PPA has no definition of quoted Net Heat Rate/SHR, whereas in
Case-2 bid, the PPA defines quoted Net Heat Rate/SHR. It is, therefore, submitted that in Case-1 bid
there is no consideration of SHR and GCV in the formula of energy charge, whereas in Case-2 bid,
these two parameters provide the formula for computing energy charge.

(v)       It is submitted that the learned APTEL in the

13

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

case      of   Wardha     Power    v.     Reliance

Infrastructure & Ors.4 has held that if SHR and GCV as submitted in the bid are considered for
Change in Law compensation, it may result in over or under recovery and should be considered only
on ‘actuals’. It is submitted that the said judgment in Wardha Power (supra) has not been
challenged/appealed against and has thus attained finality.

(vi) The Generators further rely on the judgment of this Court in Adani Rajasthan case (supra). It is
submitted that in the said case, the learned APTEL had held that operational parameters (like SHR
and Auxiliary consumption) must be considered as per ‘normative’ value, and this view has been
upheld by this Court.

(vii) It is further submitted that the MERC in its order dated 7th March 2018 in Case No.123 of 2017
(JSW v. MSEDCL) has held that the lower of actual or normative parameter for Auxiliary
consumption (an operational parameter like SHR) has to be considered for Change in Law
compensation. It is submitted that the MSEDCL has not challenged the said judgment, which has
thus attained finality.

(viii) It is submitted that the SHR is continuously being monitored and its actual value, as certified
by Energy Auditors, is submitted to MSEDCL along with claims. As such, ‘actuals’ can be
ascertained and verified for computation purposes.

(ix) It is submitted that, equally, the GCV of coal is certified by third party sampling agencies. A GCV
certificate is submitted to MSEDCL for each railway rake separately, along with claim.

Such ‘actuals’ on ‘as received’ basis can be ascertained/verified for computational purposes.

(x) It is further submitted that some of the DISCOMS in the proceedings before the CERC have
contended that the SHR shall be considered after ascertaining actual design heat rate and margin as
per CERC Regulations from time to time. They have further taken a stand that Auxiliary
Consumption shall be considered as per CERC Regulations. On affidavit, it is also stated that GCV of
alternate coal shall be as certified by a Third Party Sampling Agency, for which the Commission
should provide appropriate guideline. It is, however, submitted that now the DISCOMS are taking a
U-turn by contending that the SHR should be based on bid assumed parameters.

(xi) It is submitted that, in any case, to maintain balance, APML had itself offered for the benefit to
be granted on the lower of ‘actual’ or ‘normative’ SHR as per Regulations. The same has been
accepted by the learned APTEL. It is submitted that this will ensure that no inefficiency is passed on
to consumers and, at the same time, the Generator is restituted.

(xii) It is submitted that had there been no occurrence of Change in Law event, i.e. there was no
shortfall in coal supply, the tariff payment to the Generating Companies would have been based on
quoted energy charge. In such a situation, SHR and GCV of coal would not have come into the

14

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

picture. However, when there is an occurrence of Change in Law event, the principle of ‘Restitution’
comes into play. It is submitted that ‘restitution’ can take place only with consideration of ‘actual’
parameters.

(xiii) It is submitted that taking this into consideration, expert bodies like the CERC and APTEL
have allowed the SHR and GCV to be determined on ‘actual’ basis.

(xiv) It is submitted that the SHR indicated in the bid as part of technical information does not
conform to the mandate of restitution as it cannot put the Generator back to the same economic
position had Change in Law event not occurred.

(xv) It is submitted as per the NCDP 2007, 100% normative requirement of coal was to be supplied
by the CIL. However, due to shortfall of coal in the country, the responsibility of CIL to supply coal
was reduced to 65%, 65%, 67% and 75% of the ACQ. The shortfall in coal was to be met either by the
CIL or by the Generating Companies/Generators by importing coal. It is submitted that the higher
cost of such imported coal was allowed to be a pass-through.

(xvi) It is submitted that a conjoint reading of CERC statutory advice dated 20th May 2013, CCEA
decision dated 21st June 2013, MoP letter dated 31st July 2013, and clause 6.1 of the Tariff Policy
2016 issued by the MoP would reveal that pass-through of the higher cost of quantity of shortfall in
coal procured from alternate sources was to be allowed. It is submitted that this position has been
upheld by the judgments of this Court in the case of Energy Watchdog (supra) and Adani Rajasthan
case (supra). (xvii) It is submitted that this pass-through is by way of restitution due to shortfall in
100% assured quantity of coal and it cannot be limited to the percentages/trigger levels specified in
the NCDP 2013. It is submitted that the principle of restitution would require the pass-through to
the extent the supply from CIL was cut down. It is submitted that an argument to the contrary has
already been rejected by this Court in the case of Adani Rajasthan case (supra).

(xviii) In addition to the judgments of this Court in the cases of Energy Watchdog (supra) and Adani
Rajasthan case (supra), the Generating Companies also rely on the judgment of this court in the case
of Uttar Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam Limited (UHBVNL) and another v.

Adani Power Limited and others5.

(xix) It is also submitted that the contention on the part of the DISCOMS that Adani Rajasthan 5
(2019) 5 SCC 325 case (supra) would not be applicable to the facts of the present case, inasmuch as
there was no FSA scenario, is also factually incorrect.

45. In addition to the aforesaid submissions, the respondent in Civil Appeal No.6927 of 2021 i.e.
GMR, the following submissions have been made.

(i) That Schedule 10 of the PPA executed between GMR and MSEDCL clearly mentions that the
levelized tariff will be as per CERC Regulations.

15

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

(ii) It is submitted that the normative SHR as mentioned in the bid is computed assuming power
plant is operating at 85% of the Plant Load Factor (“PLF” for short). It is, however, submitted that
the PLF is at the sole discretion of the procurer-DISCOMS as they decide the quantum of power to
off-take.

(iii) It is submitted that the SHR is a real-time operating parameter which varies from time to time,
and it is computed by working out the total electricity generated from the amount of coal consumed
in heat value (kCal) terms.

(iv) It is further submitted that the GCV of coal actually delivered at site and fed to the boiler varies
from wagon to wagon. It cannot be a homogeneous value.

(v) It is further submitted that the details given in the bid with regard to SHR and GCV were only
indicative of the coal linkage to show that GMR had the necessary means to supply power on
sustained basis and was a serious bidder, and to further demonstrate its meeting of the eligibility
requirement prescribed under the RFP.

(vi) It is submitted that the supporting documents/information regarding fuel only provides the
quantity of coal required for the project at Normative PLF and SHR computed as per CERC norms,
which is 2355 kCal/kWh. It is submitted that MSEDCL is now insisting on Design Gross Heat Rate
of 2211 kCal/kWh, which was not considered even for computation of quantum of coal at the time of
bid submission.

(vii) It is further submitted that the Central Electricity Authority, vide Notifications dated 17th
October 2017 and 18th October 2017, has even allowed for loss in GCV from ‘as received basis’ to ‘as
fired basis’ and as such, there is no reason as to why GCV could not be computed on ‘as received
basis’.

(viii) It is further submitted that the MSEDCL cannot be permitted to equate GMR’s case with
APML and Rattan India Power Limited inasmuch as GMR falls under the jurisdiction of CERC,
whereas the other two fall under the jurisdiction of MERC.

(ix) Insofar as late payment charges are concerned, it is submitted that MSEDCL had unilaterally
deducted the amount, which is contrary to the provisions of the PPA and as such, both CERC and
learned APTEL have rightly held that GMR was entitled to late payment surcharge in terms of
Article 8.3.5. Reliance in this respect is placed on the judgment of this Court in the case of
Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution Company Limited v.

Maharashtra Electricity Regulatory Commission and others6 and Tamil Nadu Generation &
Distribution Corporation 6 (2022) 4 SCC 657 Limited v. PPN Power Generating Company Private
Limited7 RELEVANT DOCUMENTS

46. For considering the rival submissions, it will be relevant to refer to certain documents placed on
record.

16

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

47. The MoP notified the Competitive Bidding Guidelines, 2005 (hereinafter referred to as “the said
Guidelines”) on 19 th January 2005. The said Guidelines were framed under Section 63 of the
Electricity Act. It will be relevant to refer to the following part of the preamble of the said
Guidelines.

“1. Preamble ………..

These guidelines have been framed under the above provisions of section 63 of the Act. The specific
objectives of these guidelines are as follows:

1. Promote competitive procurement of electricity by distribution licensees;

2. Facilitate transparency and fairness in procurement processes;

3. Facilitate reduction of information asymmetries for various bidders;

7 (2014) 11 SCC 53

4. Protect consumer interests by facilitating competitive conditions in procurement
of electricity;

5. Enhance standardization and reduce ambiguity and hence time for materialization
of projects;

6. Provide flexibility to suppliers on internal operations while ensuring certainty on
availability of power and tariffs for buyers.”

48. Paragraph 2 of the said Guidelines deals with the scope of the Guidelines. Para
2.2 of the said Guidelines reads thus:

“2.2. The guidelines shall apply for procurement of base-load, peak-load and seasonal
power requirements through competitive bidding, through the following
mechanisms:

(i) Where the location, technology, or fuel is not specified by the procurer (Case 1);

(ii) For hydro-power projects, load center projects or other location specific projects
with specific fuel allocation such as captive mines available, which the procurer
intends to set up under tariff based bidding process (Case 2).

However separate RFP shall be used for procuring base load or peak load or seasonal load
requirements as the case may be.”

17

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

49. It can thus be seen that Para 2.2 distinguishes two types of cases, viz., Case-1 and Case-2. Case-1
deals with the case where the location, technology, or fuel is not specified by the procurer. Case-2
deals with hydro-power projects, load center projects or other location specific projects with specific
fuel allocation such as captive mines available, which the procurer intends to set up under tariff
based bidding process.

50. Paragraph 3 of the said Guidelines deals with preparation for inviting bids. Clause (I) of Para 3.2
deals with Case-2, whereas clause (II) of Para 3.2 deals with Case-1. Sub-clause (i) of clause (II) of
Para 3.2 requires the bidder to undertake site identification and land acquisition. The bidder is
required to submit a copy of notification issued for the land in question under Section 4 of the Land
Acquisition Act, 1894. For the part of land excluding that which is to be acquired under the Land
Acquisition Act, 1894, the bidder is required to furnish documentary evidence to establish
allotment/ lease/ ownership/ vesting of at least one-third area of the said land. Under sub-clause
(ii), the bidder is required to submit environmental clearance for the power station. Under sub-
clause (iii), the bidder is required to supply forest clearance, if applicable, for the land for the power
station. Sub-clause (iv) is the most important for the resolution of the present dispute, which reads
thus:

“3. Preparation for inviting bids 3.1 ………… 3.2 (I) …………… (II) ………………

(i) ………………

(ii) ………………

(iii) ………………

iv) Fuel Arrangements: (a) In the following cases fuel arrangements shall have to be
made for the quantity of fuel required to generate power from the phase of the power
station from which power is proposed to be supplied at Normative Availability for the
term of the PPA.

(cid:134) In case of domestic coal, the Bidder shall have made firm arrangements for fuel tie up either by
way of coal block allocation or fuel linkage (cid:134) In case of domestic gas, the Bidder shall have made
firm arrangements for fuel tie up by way of long term fuel supply agreement for the term & quantity
as per Government of India gas allocation policy

b) Fuel arrangements in the following cases shall have to be made for the quantity of fuel required to
generate power from the power station for the total installed capacity.

(cid:134) In case of imported coal, the Bidder shall have either acquired mines having proven reserves for at
least 50% of the quantity of coal required OR shall have a fuel supply agreement for at least 50% of
the quantity of coal required for a term of at least five (5) years or the term of the PPA, whichever is
less.

18

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

(cid:134) In case of RLNG, the Bidder shall have made firm arrangements for fuel tie up by way of fuel
supply agreement for at least 50% of the quantity of fuel required for a term of at least five (5) years
or the term of the PPA, whichever is less.

Blending of Imported and Domestic coal may be used in which case, criteria for imported and
domestic coal shall be met separately in the ratio of blending.”

51. It can thus be seen that in case of domestic coal, the bidder is required to make firm
arrangements for fuel tie up either by way of coal block allocation or fuel linkage.

52. Clause (b) of sub-clause (iv) of clause (II) of Para 3.2 deals with imported coal, in which case the
bidder shall have either acquired mines having proven reserves for at least 50% of the quantity of
coal required OR shall have a fuel supply agreement for at least 50% of the quantity of coal required
for a term of at least five years or the term of the PPA, whichever is less.

53. Paragraph 4 of the said Guidelines deals with Tariff Structure. It will be relevant to refer to Para
4.2, which reads thus:

“4. Tariff Structure 4.1 ……..

4.2. In case of long term procurement with specific fuel allocation (Case 2), the
procurer shall invite bids on the basis of capacity charge and net quoted heat rate.
The net heat rate shall be ex-bus taking into account internal power consumption of
the power station. The energy charges shall be payable as per the following formula:

Energy Charges = Net quoted heat rate X Scheduled Generation X Monthly Weighted
Average Price of Fuel/Monthly Average Gross Calorific Value of Fuel If the price of
the fuel has not been determined by the Government of India, government approved
mechanism or the Fuel Regulator, the same shall have to be approved by the
appropriate Regulatory Commission.

In case of coal/lignite fuel, the cost of secondary fuel oil shall be factored in the
capacity charges.”

54. It can thus be seen that insofar as Case-2 is concerned, the procurer is required to invite bids on
the basis of capacity charge and net quoted heat rate. The net heat rate is required to be ex-bus
taking into account internal power consumption of the power station. It further provides that if the
price of the fuel is not determined by the Government of India, government approved mechanism or
the Fuel Regulator, the same shall have to be approved by the appropriate Regulatory Commission.

55. Para 4.4 provides that the capacity charge shall be paid based on actual availability, as per
charges quoted in Rs./kwh and shall be limited to the normative availability. It further provides that
the normative availability for Case-1 and thermal stations under Case-2 shall be a maximum of 85%.

19

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

56. Para 4.7 is another important clause for the resolution of the present dispute, which reads thus:

“4.7. Any change in law impacting cost or revenue from the business of selling
electricity to the procurer with respect to the law applicable on the date which is 7
days before the last date for RFP bid submission shall be adjusted separately. In case
of any dispute regarding the impact of any change in law, the decision of the
Appropriate Commission shall apply.”

57. It can thus be seen that any Change in Law impacting cost or revenue from the business of
selling electricity to the procurer with respect to the law applicable on the date which is 7 days
before the last date for RFP bid submission shall be adjusted separately. It provides that in case of
any dispute regarding the impact of any Change in Law, the decision of the Appropriate Commission
shall apply.

58. It will also be relevant to refer to Para 4.12, which reads thus:

“4.12 No adjustment shall be provided for heat rate degradation of the generating
stations. Even in case of bids based on net heat rate, the bidder shall factor in site
conditions, loading conditions, frequency variations etc and no adjustment shall be
allowed on the quoted net heat rate for the duration of the contract.”

59. It can thus be seen that no adjustment is to be provided for heat rate degradation of the
generating stations. Even in case of bids based on net heat rate, the bidder shall factor in site
conditions, loading conditions, frequency variations etc. and no adjustment shall be allowed on the
quoted net heat rate for the duration of the contract.

60. The NCDP 2007 would be of vital importance. Clause 2.2 thereof deals with Power Utilities
including Independent Power Producers (IPPs)/Captive Power Plants (CPPs) and Fertilizer Sector.
Clause 2.2 reads thus:

“2. Distribution and Pricing of coal to different consumers/sector(s):

2.1. ……………… 2.2 Power Utilities including Independent Power Producers
(IPPs)/Captive Power Plants(CPPs) and Fertilizer Sector 100% of the quantity as per
the normative requirement of the consumers would be considered for supply of coal,
through Fuel Supply Agreement (FSA) by Coal India Limited (CIL) at fixed prices to
be declared/notified by CIL. The units/power plants, which are yet to be
commissioned but whose coal requirements has already been assessed and accepted
by Ministry of Coal and linkage/Letter of Assurance (LoA) approved as well as future
commitments would also be covered accordingly.”

61. It can thus be seen that the NCDP 2007 assured 100% of the quantity as per the normative
requirement of the consumers for supply of coal, through FSA by CIL at fixed prices to be
declared/notified by CIL. It further provided that the units/power plants, which are yet to be

20

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

commissioned but whose coal requirements has already been assessed and accepted by MoC and
linkage/Letter of Assurance (LoA) approved as well as future commitments would also be covered in
accordance therewith.

62. It will also be relevant to note the following part of clause 5.2 of the NCDP 2007.

“5. Policy for New Consumers 5.1. …………… 5.2. …………… In order to meet the domestic
requirement of coal, CIL may have to import coal as may be required from time to time, if feasible.
CIL may adjust its overall price accordingly. Thus, it will be the responsibility of CIL/Coal
companies to meet full requirement of coal under FSAs even by resorting to imports, if necessary.”

63. It can thus be seen that clause 5.2 of the NCDP 2007 provides that in order to meet the domestic
requirement of coal, CIL may have to import coal as may be required from time to time, if feasible. It
further provided that CIL would adjust its overall price accordingly. The NCDP 2007 emphasizes the
responsibility of CIL/Coal Companies to meet full requirement of coal under FSAs even by resorting
to imports, if necessary.

64. It will also be relevant to refer to the communication addressed by the MoP dated 9 th May 2013
to the Secretary, CERC.

“Subject: Impact on tariff on the concluded PPAs due to domestic coal availability.

Sir, Coal linkages have been granted for power projects under the New Coal Distribution Policy
2007 (NCDP), which mandates that CIL will meet 100% of normative requirement of power sector.
Para 5.2 of NCDP provides that “In order to meet the domestic requirement of coal, CIL may have to
import coal as may be required from time to time, if feasible. CIL may adjust its overall price
accordingly. Thus, it will be the responsibility of CIL/Coal companies to meet full requirement of
coal under FSAs even by resorting to imports, if necessary”. Post NCDP MoC granted linkages
between 2008-2010 with the assumption that it would meet coal requirement at around 85% PLF.
On this basis LoAs were issued by coal companies, after getting commitment guarantees in the form
of Bank Guarantee from the developers thereby undertaking an explicit obligation to supply coal to
the extent of the specified quantity to the power developer. Having obtained the LOA the developers
would have proceeded on the assumption of getting the requisite quantity of domestic coal with the
disincentive trigger of 90% of LoA quantity prevailing under the then Fuel Supply Agreement (FSA)
with a provision for CIL resorting to import of coal to bridge the gap, if any. It is assumed that the
power producers would have factored this assurance regarding coal supply while submitting their
bids in response to Case 1 and Case 2 competitive bidding for long term power purchase agreements.
Thus, while the fuel price risk would have been taken into account and factored in the escalable
component of energy charges, it is assumed that no fuel availability risk would have been taken into
consideration on account of the LOAs given by CIL.

2. It now transpires that on account of the limited availability of coal Ministry of Col has indicated
that CIL may not be in a position to supply more than 60 to 65% of ACQ to those power producers
who had been earlier issued LOAs of normative quantities corresponding to 85% PLF.

21

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

Simultaneously, it has been proposed that the disincentive trigger for coal supply would be brought
down from 90% to 60 to 65% by CIL in the new fuel supply agreements to be signed with these
power producers. This obviously would create a situation where the power producers would have to
arrange fuel from open market including imports either through CIL or directly. In view of this
scenario, PPAs which are already concluded between the developers and discoms as a result of
competitive bidding in the last few years based on domestic coal linkage (LOA) may have to use
imported coal to bridge the shortage of domestic coal in order to fulfil that contractual obligations.
The Association of Power Producers represented on this issue of shortage of domestic coal and its
consequential effect on the concluded PPAs through competitive bidding route.

3. The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) has also considered the situation arising out
of the inadequate availability of coal leading to this non-fulfilment of the LOA commitments on the
part of CIL. CCEA has decided the following guidelines in its meeting held on 06.02.2013 in respect
of generating plants commissioned/to be commissioned during the period 1.4.09 to 31.03.15:

i) CIL will provide imported coal on cost plus basis to all producers willing to take such cost;

ii) That the higher cost of imported coal will be allowed as a pass through.

3. In view of the circumstances stated above CERC is requested to advice the Government on the
manner in which the issue of fuel availability risk arising out of CIL’s inability to meet its LOA
commitments could be addressed with regard to power producers who have already entered into
long term PPAs with distribution companies based on such commitments and the feasibility of
passing on the additional cost of procuring market fuel incurred by the power developers on account
of the circumstances stated in the aforesaid paras. CERC is also requested to suggest appropriate
ways for issuing advisory to SERCs/State Governments which may necessitated to be issued by MoP
for the implementation of the above.

4. CERC’s considered advice is requested in this matter at the earliest.

5. This issues with the approval of MOSP (I/C).”

65. Perusal of the communication dated 9th May 2013 would clearly show that the NCDP 2007
mandates that CIL will meet 100% of normative requirement of power sector. It states that, post
NCDP 2007, MoC has granted linkages between 2008-2010 with the assumption that it would meet
coal requirement at around 85% of the PLF. On that basis, the LoAs were issued by Coal Companies,
after getting commitment guarantees in the form of Bank Guarantees from the developers, thereby
undertaking an explicit obligation to supply coal to the extent of the specified quantify to the power
developer. It further states that having obtained the LoA, the developers would have proceeded on
the assumption of getting the requisite quantity of domestic coal with the disincentive trigger of
90% of LoA quantity prevailing under the then FSA with a provision for CIL resorting to import of
coal to bridge the gap, if any. It specifically mentions that the power producers would have factored
in this assurance regarding coal supply while submitting their bids in response to Case-1 and Case-2
competitive bidding for long-term PPAs.

22

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

66. The said communication further records that it now transpires that on account of the limited
availability of coal, MoC has indicated that CIL may not be in a position to supply more than 60 to
65% of ACQ to those power producers who had been earlier issued LoAs of normative quantities
corresponding to 85% of the PLF. It was proposed that the disincentive trigger for coal supply would
be brought down from 90% to 60 to 65% by CIL in the new FSAs to be signed with these power
producers. It further states that in view of this scenario, PPAs which are already concluded between
the developers and the DISCOMS as a result of competitive bidding in the last few years based on
domestic coal linkage (LoA) may have to use imported coal to bridge the shortage of domestic coal
in order to fulfil their contractual obligations.

67. The communication further records that the CCEA has also considered the situation arising out
of the inadequate availability of coal leading to the non-fulfilment of its LOA commitments on the
part of the CIL. The CCEA, therefore, in its meeting held on 6th February 2013 has decided the
following guidelines in respect of generating plants commissioned/to be commissioned during the
period 1st April 2009 to 31st March 2015:

ii) That CIL will provide imported coal on cost plus basis to all producers willing to
take such cost;

iii) That the higher cost of imported coal will be allowed as a pass-through.

68. The communication therefore requested the CERC to advise the Government on the manner in
which the issue of fuel availability risk, arising out of CIL’s inability to meet its LOA commitments,
could be addressed. The CERC was also requested to suggest appropriate ways for issuing advisories
to SERCs/State Governments by the MoP, which may be necessitated for the implementation of the
above.

69. In pursuance of the aforesaid Communication dated 9th May 2013, the CERC issued Statutory
Advice on 20 th May 2013 under Section 79(2) of the Electricity Act regarding impact on tariff of the
concluded PPAs due to domestic coal availability. It will be relevant to refer to the following part of
the said statutory advice.

“2. The matter was considered in the Commission. The Commission appreciates the need for
securing fuel supply for various projects in order to ensure optimum generation from the power
plants in the country. Non-availability of adequate quantum of coal has posed serious challenge to
power generation as reflected in the data compiled by the Central Electricity Authority (CEA): the
Plant Load Factor (PLF) of the generating stations across the country has been severely affected for
want of adequate coal supply by CIL/Coal Companies.

3. The proposal to make CIL supply imported coal on cost plus basis to all power projects
commissioned or to be commissioned during the period 1.4.2009 to 31.3.2015 and willing to take
such coal would require appropriate change in the NCDP, as at present it is the full responsibility of
CIL to meet full requirement of coal under FSAs even by resorting to import; if necessary. As a
follow up, the FSAs between the CIL/its subsidiaries and the power producers will have to be

23

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

modified through Supplementary Agreements.”

70. It can thus clearly be seen that the CERC has noted that the non-availability of adequate
quantum of coal has posed serious challenge to power generation as reflected in the data compiled
by the Central Electricity Authority (CEA). It further noted that the PLF of the generating stations
across the country has been severely affected for want of adequate coal supply by CIL/Coal
Companies. It further records that to give effect to the proposal to make CIL supply imported coal
on cost plus basis to all power projects commissioned or to be commissioned during the period from
1st April 2009 to 31st March 2015 and willing to take such coal, would require appropriate change in
the NCDP, as at present it is the full responsibility of CIL to meet full requirement of coal under
FSAs even by resorting to import, if necessary. It further states that as a follow up, the FSAs between
the CIL/its subsidiaries and the power producers will have to be modified through Supplementary
Agreements.

71. After referring to clause 10.1.1 of the Standard PPA for Procurement of Power under Case-1
Bidding Procedure, which deals with ‘Change in Law’, the statutory advice states thus:

“For claiming any benefits under change in law, the Project Developer would have to
move the appropriate Commission and the decision of that Commission in this
regard would be final, in terms of the provisions of Articles 10.3.3 and 10.3.4 of the
Standard PPA. The appropriate Commissions are expected to take decisions on the
merits of each case including the claims of the Project Developers for compensation
on account of imported coal after consultation with the stakeholders.”

72. It can thus be seen that the CERC states that for claiming any benefits under the Change in Law,
the Project Developer would have to move the appropriate Commission. It further records that the
appropriate Commissions are expected to take decisions on the merits of each case including the
claims of the Project Developers for compensation on account of imported coal after consultation
with the stakeholders.

73. Subsequent to the aforesaid communication, the MoC issued a Press Release on 21st June 2013.
It will be relevant to refer to the following part of the said Press Release.

“The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) today approved the following mechanism for
supply of coal to power producers:

(i) Coal India Ltd. (CIL) to sign Fuel Supply Agreements (FSA) for a total capacity of
78000 MW including cases of tapering linkage, which are likely to be commissioned
by 31.03.2015. Actual coal supplies would however commence when long term Power
Purchase Agreements (PPAs) are tied up.

(ii) Taking into account the overall domestic availability and actual requirements,
FSAs to be signed for domestic coal quantity of 65 percent, 65 percent, 67 percent
and 75 percent of Annual Contracted Quantity (ACQ) for the running four years of

24

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

the 12th Five Year Plan.

(iii) To meet its balance FSA obligations, CIL may import coal and supply the same to
the willing Thermal Power Plants (TPSs) on cost plus basis. TPPs may also import
coal themselves. MoC to issue suitable instructions.

(iv) Higher cost of imported coal to be considered for pass through as per modalities
suggested by CERC. MoC to issue suitable orders supplementing the New Coal
Distribution Policy (NCDP).

MoP to issue appropriate advisory to CERC/SERCs including modifications if any in the bidding
guidelines to enable the appropriate Commissions to decide the pass through of higher cost of
imported coal on case to case basis.”

74. It is thus clear that taking into account the overall domestic availability and actual requirements,
FSAs were to be signed for domestic coal quantity of 65%, 65%, 67% and 75% of ACQ for the
running/remaining four years of the 12th Five Year Plan. It can further be seen that the CCEA has
also taken a decision that CIL may import coal to meet its balance FSA obligations and supply the
same to the willing TPPs on cost plus basis. TPPs may also be permitted to import coal themselves.
It further provided that the higher cost of imported coal was to be considered for pass-through as
per the modalities suggested by the CERC.

75. In pursuance thereof, the Government of India, through MoC, issued Office Memorandum dated
26th July 2013. The said Office Memorandum reads thus:

“Sub: New Coal Distribution Policy -

further instructions regarding implementation thereof.

The New Coal Distribution Policy (NCDP) was issued vide this Ministry's Office
Memorandum NO. 23011/4/2007-

CPD dated 18.10.2007, laying down the guidelines for distribution and pricing of coal to various
sectors. As per para 2.2 of the said policy, Power Utilities including Independent Power Producer
were to be supplied 100 per cent of the quantity as per their normative requirement through Fuel
Supply Agreement(s) (FSAs) by Coal India Limited (CIL) at fixed prices to be declared/notified by
CIL. As per para 5.2, in order to meet the domestic requirement, CIL was to import coal as required
from time to time, if feasible and adjust the overall price accordingly.

2. Government has now approved a revised arrangement for supply of coal to the identified Thermal
Power Stations (TPPs) of 78,000 MW capacity commissioned or likely to be commissioned during
the period from 01.04.2009 to 31.03.2015. Taking into account the overall domestic availability and
the likely actual requirements of these TPPs, it has been decided that FSAs will be signed for the
domestic coal quantity of 65%, 65%, 67% and 75% of ACQ for the remaining four years of the 12th

25

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

Plan for the power plants having normal coal linkages. Cases of tapering linkage would get coal
supplies as per the Tapering Linkage Police. To meet its balance FSA obligations towards the
requirement of the said 78,000 MW TPPs, CIL may import coal and supply the same to the willing
power plants on cost plus basis. Power plants may also directly import coal themselves, if they so
opt, in which case, the FSA obligations on the part of CIL to the extent of import component would
be deemed to have been discharged.

3. Para 2.2 and 5.2 of the New Coal Distribution Policy issued vide OM No. 23011/4/2007-CPD
dated 18.10.2007 stand modified to the above extent.

4. The above guidelines will also be applicable to the distribution of coal from Singreni Collieries
Company Limited (SCCL).

5. CIL and its subsidiaries and SCCL are advised to take further action accordingly.”

76. It can thus be seen that the NCDP 2013 also specifically states that, as per NCDP 2007 and
specifically paragraph 2.2 thereof, Power Utilities, including IPPs, were to be supplied 100% of the
quantity as per their normative requirement through FSAs by CIL at fixed prices to be
declared/notified by CIL. It further reiterates that, as per para 5.2, in order to meet the domestic
requirement, CIL was to import coal as required from time to time, if feasible, and adjust the overall
price accordingly.

77. Para 2 of the NCDP 2013 states that the Government has now approved a revised arrangement
for supply of coal to the identified TPPs of 78,000 MW capacity commissioned or likely to be
commissioned during the period from 1 st April 2009 to 31st March 2015. It states that, taking into
account the overall domestic availability and the likely actual requirements of these TPPs, it was
decided that FSAs will be signed for the domestic coal quantity of 65%, 65%, 67% and 75% of ACQ
for the remaining four years of the 12 th Plan for the power plants having normal coal linkages. It
further states that to meet the balance FSA obligations towards the requirement of the said 78,000
MW TPPs, CIL may import coal and supply the same to the willing power plants on cost plus basis.
It further states that the power plants may also directly import coal themselves, if they so opt, in
which case, the FSA obligations on the part of CIL to the extent of import component would be
deemed to have been discharged.

78. Immediately thereafter, on 31st July 2013, the MoP addressed a communication to the
Secretary, CERC. It will be relevant to refer to Para 2 of the said communication, which reads thus:

“2. After considering all aspects and the advice of CERC in this regard, Government
has decided the following in June, 2013:

i) taking into account the overall domestic availability and actual requirements, FSAs
to be signed for domestic coal component for the levy of disincentive at the quantity
of 65%, 65%, 67% and 75% of Annual Contracted Quantity (ACQ) for the remaining
four years of the 12th Plan.

26

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

ii) to meet its balance FSA obligations, CIL may import coal and supply the same to
the willing TPPs on cost plus basis.

TPPs may also import coal themselves if they so opt.

iii) higher cost of imported coal to be considered for pass through as per modalities
suggested by CERC.”

79. It can thus clearly be seen that the Government, after considering all aspects and
the advice of CERC in this regard, decided that the higher cost of imported coal was
to be considered for pass-through as per modalities suggested by the CERC.

80. It will also be relevant to refer to Para 4 of the said communication, which reads
thus:

“4. As per decision of the Government, the higher cost of import/market based e-
auction coal be considered for being made a pass through on a case to case basis by
CERC/SERC to the extent of shortfall in the quantity indicated in the LoA/FSA and
the CIL supply of domestic coal which would be minimum of 65%, 65%, 67% and 75%
of LoA for the remaining four years of the 12th Plan for the already concluded PPAs
based on tariff based competitive bidding.”

81. Perusal of para 4 would clearly reveal that the higher cost of import/market based
e-auction coal was to be considered for being made a pass-through on a case to case
basis by CERC/SERC to the extent of shortfall in the quantity indicated in the
LoA/FSA. It further reiterates that CIL may supply domestic coal which would be
minimum of 65%, 65%, 67% and 75% of LoA for the remaining four years of the 12th
Plan for the already concluded PPAs based on tariff based competitive bidding.

82. The MoP thereafter vide Resolution dated 28th January 2016 notified the ‘Tariff
Policy’. It will be relevant to refer to clause 6.1 of the said Policy, which reads thus:

“6.0 GENERATION ……………… 6.1 Procurement of power As stipulated in para 5.1,
power procurement for future requirements should be through a transparent
competitive bidding mechanism using the guidelines issued by the Central
Government from time to time. These guidelines provide for procurement of
electricity separately for base load requirements and for peak load requirements. This
would facilitate setting up of generation capacities specifically for meeting such
requirements.

However, some of the competitively bid projects as per the guidelines dated 19 th January, 2005
have experienced difficulties in getting the required quantity of coal from Coal India Limited (CIL).
In case of reduced quantity of domestic coal supplied by CIL, vis-a-vis the assured quantity or
quantity indicated in Letter of Assurance/FSA the cost of imported/market based e-auction coal

27

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

procured for making up the shortfall, shall be considered for being made a pass through by
Appropriate Commission on a case to case basis, as per advisory issued by Ministry of Power vide
OM No. FU-

12/2011-IPC (Voi-IJI) dated 31.7.2013.”

83. It is thus clear that the Tariff Policy dated 28 th January 2016 provided that the power
procurement for future requirements should be through a transparent competitive bidding
mechanism using the guidelines issued by the Central Government from time to time. It further
provides the guidelines for procurement of electricity separately for base load requirements and for
peak load requirements. It further notes that some of the competitively bid projects as per the
guidelines dated 19th January, 2005 have experienced difficulties in getting the required quantity of
coal from CIL. It further provides that in case of reduced quantity of domestic coal supplied by CIL
vis- à-vis the assured quantity or quantity indicated in LoA/FSA, the cost of imported/market based
e-auction coal procured for making up the shortfall shall be considered for being made a
pass-through by Appropriate Commission on a case to case basis. This is in pursuance of the
advisory issued by Ministry of Power dated 31st July 2013.

JUDGMENTS CITED

84. Having considered these documents, we will now consider the judgments which are relied on by
both the parties.

85. In the case of Energy Watchdog (supra), after several rounds of litigation, the learned APTEL
held that generation and sale of power by Adani Power to GUVNL and Haryana Utilities was a
composite scheme within the meaning of Section 79(1)(b) of the Electricity Act and, therefore, the
CERC would have jurisdiction to proceed further in the matter. It further held that force majeure
was made out on the facts of the said cases and reversed the CERC’s/Commission’s order on that
score. It also held that the Change in Law provisions do not apply to foreign law and, therefore,
changes in Indonesian law did not come within the scope of the provisions. Insofar as changes in
Indian law were concerned, it held that the government policies that were relied upon did not
constitute “law”. The said decision of the learned APTEL was assailed before this Court. This Court
while rejecting the argument on the ground of force majeure observed thus:

“42. It is clear from the above that the doctrine of frustration cannot apply to these
cases as the fundamental basis of the PPAs remains unaltered. Nowhere do the PPAs
state that coal is to be procured only from Indonesia at a particular price. In fact, it is
clear on a reading of the PPA as a whole that the price payable for the supply of coal is
entirely for the person who sets up the power plant to bear. The fact that the fuel
supply agreement has to be appended to the PPA is only to indicate that the raw
material for the working of the plant is there and is in order. It is clear that an
unexpected rise in the price of coal will not absolve the generating companies from
performing their part of the contract for the very good reason that when they
submitted their bids, this was a risk they knowingly took. We are of the view that the

28

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

mere fact that the bid may be non- escalable does not mean that the respondents are
precluded from raising the plea of frustration, if otherwise it is available in law and
can be pleaded by them. But the fact that a non-escalable tariff has been paid for, for
example, in the Adani case, is a factor which may be taken into account only to show
that the risk of supplying electricity at the tariff indicated was upon the generating
company.”

86. This Court, thereafter, considered as to whether any Change in Law could be stretched to mean
“all laws”. This Court held that Clause 4.7 read with Clause 5.17 of the Guidelines would reveal that it
would not include changes in Indonesian law, being foreign and not Indian law.

87. In Energy Watchdog (supra), this Court also had an occasion to consider the MoP
communication dated 31 st July 2013, the relevant part of which has already been reproduced by us
herein above. This Court observed thus:

“56. However, insofar as the applicability of Clause 13 to a change in Indian law is
concerned, the respondents are on firm ground. It will be seen that under Clause
13.1.1 if there is a change in any consent, approval or licence available or obtained for
the project, otherwise than for the default of the seller, which results in any change in
any cost of the business of selling electricity, then the said seller will be governed
under Clause 13.1.1. It is clear from a reading of the Resolution dated 21-6-2013,
which resulted in the letter of 31-7-2013, issued by the Ministry of Power, that the
earlier coal distribution policy contained in the letter dated 18-3-2007 stands
modified as the Government has now approved a revised arrangement for supply of
coal. It has been decided that, seeing the overall domestic availability and the likely
requirement of power projects, the power projects will only be entitled to a certain
percentage of what was earlier allowable. This being the case, on 31-7-2013…..”

88. This Court, thereafter, referred to the Tariff Policy dated 28th January 2016, the relevant part of
which has already been reproduced by us herein above. This Court observed thus:

“57. Both the letter dated 31-7-2013 and the revised Tariff Policy are statutory
documents being issued under Section 3 of the Act and have the force of law. This
being so, it is clear that so far as the procurement of Indian coal is concerned, to the
extent that the supply from Coal India and other Indian sources is cut down, the PPA
read with these documents provides in Clause 13.2 that while determining the
consequences of change in law, parties shall have due regard to the principle that the
purpose of compensating the party affected by such change in law is to restore,
through monthly tariff payments, the affected party to the economic position as if
such change in law has not occurred. Further, for the operation period of the PPA,
compensation for any increase/decrease in cost to the seller shall be determined and
be effective from such date as decided by the Central Electricity Regulation
Commission. This being the case, we are of the view that though change in
Indonesian law would not qualify as a change in law under the guidelines read with

29

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

the PPA, change in Indian law certainly would.”

89. It can thus clearly be seen that insofar as the arguments with regard to effect of the Change in
Law being given on the basis of ACQ is concerned, the same stands specifically rejected.

90. A bench of three learned Judges of this Court in Adani Rajasthan case (supra) also had an
occasion to consider a similar issue. An argument which is sought to be advanced before us that the
Change in Law claim may be confined only to 35 to 40% was also advanced in the said case.
Rejecting the said contention, this Court observed thus:

“50. Shri C. Aryama Sundaram argued that the FSA related approximately 61 per cent
of the fuel requirement. Thus, the change in law claim may be confined to 35 to 40
per cent. The argument cannot be accepted as bidding was not based on dual fuel, but
was evaluated on domestic coal. There was no such stipulation that evaluation of
bidding was done on domestic basis; the tariff was to be worked out in the aforesaid
ratio of 60 : 40 per cent of imported coal and domestic coal respectively. Apart from
that, we find from the order of the APTEL, that change in law provision would be
limited to a shortfall in the supply of domestic linkage coal......

51. It was clarified that APRL would be entitled to relief under the change in law
provision to the extent of shortage in supply in domestic linkage coal. Thus, we find
no merit in the submission raised. We find the findings of the APTEL to be
reasonable, proper, and unexceptional.”

91. In the said case (i.e. Adani Rajasthan case) also, the provision with regard to the
Change in Law was similar to the one that falls for consideration in the present case.
This Court observed thus:

“59. The change in policy and in the terms and conditions prescribed for obtaining
any consents, clearances and permits or the inclusion of any new terms or conditions
for obtaining such consents, clearances, and permits are also included. The
submission raised on behalf of appellant that there is no question seeking benefit due
to change in foreign law is based on wrong factual premise. The relief was not
claimed on the basis of change in foreign law. Apart from that, admission has been
relied upon change in law. The PPA was based on the domestic law and there was a
change in domestic law. Thus, consequences must follow. The Government of
Rajasthan entered into a MoU with APRL with respect to coal linkage in 2008 to
provide coal linkage or coal from other sources.

60. We find similarity in the present case as well as the Energy Watchdog. The factual
matrix was similar with the present case.

We find that the RERC and the APTEL have recorded the concurrent finding on facts. We find no
ground to interfere. No substantial question of law is involved. It was held in Energy Watchdog, that

30

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

change in law was brought about in the NCDP of 2007 by the decision of 26.7.2013. It is provided in
Article 10.2.1 how the change in law is to be applied to compensate for the impact.”

92. In the case of Uttar Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam Limited (UHBVNL) (supra), this Court observed
thus:

“13. A reading of Article 13 as a whole, therefore, leads to the position that subject to
restitutionary principles contained in Article 13.2, the adjustment in monthly tariff
payment, in the facts of the present case, has to be from the date of the withdrawal of
exemption which was done by administrative orders dated 6-4- 2015 and 16-2-2016.
The present case, therefore, falls within Article 13.4.1(i). This being the case, it is clear
that the adjustment in monthly tariff payment has to be effected from the date on
which the exemptions given were withdrawn. This being the case, monthly invoices to
be raised by the seller after such change in tariff are to appropriately reflect the
changed tariff. On the facts of the present case, it is clear that the respondents were
entitled to adjustment in their monthly tariff payment from the date on which the
exemption notifications became effective. This being the case, the restitutionary
principle contained in Article 13.2 would kick in for the simple reason that it is only
after the order dated 4-5-2017 [Adani Power Ltd. v. Uttar Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam
Ltd., 2017 SCC OnLine CERC 66] that CERC held that the respondents were entitled
to claim added costs on account of change in law w.e.f. 1-4-2015. This being the case,
it would be fallacious to say that the respondents would be claiming this
restitutionary amount on some general principle of equity outside the PPA. Since it is
clear that this amount of carrying cost is only relatable to Article 13 of the PPA, we
find no reason to interfere with the judgment of the Appellate Tribunal.

93. This Court specifically rejected the contention of the DISCOMS that the Generator was claiming
the restitutionary amount on some general principle of equity outside the PPA. This Court held that
the amount of carrying cost was relatable to Article 13 of the PPA.

STATUTORY PROVISIONS WITH REGARD TO REGULATORY MECHANISM

94. We will now consider the relevant provisions of the Electricity Act.

95. Section 70 of the Electricity Act deals with constitution of the Central Electricity Authority
(“CEA”). The CEA shall consist of not more than 14 Members (including its Chairperson) of whom
not more than 8 are required to be full-time Members to be appointed by the Central Government.
It will be relevant to refer to sub-section (5) of Section 70 of the Electricity Act, which reads thus:

“(5) The Members of the Authority shall be appointed from amongst persons of
ability, integrity and standing who have knowledge of, and adequate experience and
capacity in, dealing with problems relating to engineering, finance, commerce,
economics or industrial matters, and at least one Member shall be appointed from
each of the following categories, namely:—

31

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

(a) engineering with specialisation in design, construction, operation and
maintenance of generating stations;

(b) engineering with specialisation in transmission and supply of electricity;

(c) applied research in the field of electricity;

(d) applied economics, accounting, commerce or finance.”

96. It can thus clearly be seen that the Members of the CEA are required to be persons who have
adequate experience and capacity in dealing with problems relating to engineering, finance,
commerce, economics or industrial matters. Four of the Members are required to be from the
categories as mentioned in clauses (a) to (d). One of them has to be an engineer with specialization
in design, construction, operation and maintenance of generating stations. One of them has to be an
engineer with specialization in transmission and supply of electricity; one has to be a person who is
expert in applied research in the field of electricity; one of them has to be an expert in applied
economics, accounting, commerce or finance.

97. Section 73 of the Electricity Act deals with functions and duties of the CEA. The CEA is required
to advise the Central Government on various matters with regard to generation, transmission,
trading, distribution and utilization of electricity. It is also required to advise the Central
Government on any matter on which its advice is sought or make recommendation to that
Government on any matter if, in the opinion of the CEA, the recommendation would help in
improving the generation, transmission, trading, distribution and utilization of electricity.

98. Section 76 of the Electricity Act provides for constitution of the CERC. The CERC is a five
member body which consists of a Chairperson and three other Members, and the Chairperson of the
CEA who shall be the ex officio Member. A high-level Selection Committee consisting of 6 high
officials selects the Members of the CERC and the learned APTEL.

99. Section 77 of the Electricity Act provides for qualifications for appointment of Members of the
CERC. Sub-section (1) of Section 77 provides that Chairperson and the Members of the CERC shall
be persons having adequate knowledge of, or experience in, or shown capacity in, dealing with,
problems relating to engineering, law, economics, commerce, finance or management. It further
requires that one person to be appointed must be having qualifications and experience in the field of
engineering with specialization in generation, transmission or distribution of electricity. One person
to be appointed has the qualifications and experience in the field of finance. Clause (c) of
sub-section (1) of Section 77 of the Electricity Act requires that two persons are required to have
qualifications and experience in the field of economics, commerce, law or management. The proviso
to sub-section (1) of the Section 77 of the Electricity Act provides that not more than one Member
shall be appointed under the same category under clause (c).

100. Sub-section (2) of Section 77 of the Electricity Act, which is a non-obstante clause, empowers
the Central Government to appoint any person as the Chairperson from amongst persons who is, or

32

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

has been, a Judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice of a High Court notwithstanding
anything contained in sub-section (1). However, such appointment cannot be made except after
consultation with the Chief Justice of India.

101. Section 79 of the Electricity Act deals with the functions of the CERC. One of the functions of
the CERC under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of Section 79 is to regulate the tariff of generating
companies owned or controlled by the Central Government. Clause (b) requires it to regulate the
tariff of generating companies other than those owned or controlled by the Central Government
specified in clause (a), if such generating companies enter into or otherwise have a composite
scheme for generation and sale of electricity in more than one State.

102. Similarly, Section 82 of the Electricity Act deals with constitution of a State Commission.
Section 83 of the Electricity Act permits a Joint Commission to be constituted by an agreement
between two or more Governments of States. It also permits the Central Government to constitute a
Joint Commission in respect of one or more Union Territories, and one or more Governments of
States. Under Section 84, the persons to be appointed as the Chairperson and the Members of the
State Commission are required to have adequate knowledge of, and have shown capacity in, dealing
with problems relating to engineering, finance, commerce, economics, law or management.
Sub-section (2) of Section 84 of the Electricity Act permits the State Government to appoint any
person as the Chairperson from amongst persons who is, or has been, a Judge of a High Court.
However, such an appointment can be made only after consultation with the Chief Justice of that
High Court. A high-level Selection Committee under the Chairmanship of a person who has been a
Judge of the High Court, the Chief Secretary of the concerned State and the Chairperson of the CEA
or the Chairperson of the CERC selects the Chairperson and the Members of the State Commission.
Analogous to Section 79, Section 86 of the Electricity Act defines the functions of the State
Commission. Clause (b) of sub-section (1) of Section 86 of the Electricity Act requires the State
Commission to regulate electricity purchase and procurement process of distribution licensees
including the price at which electricity shall be procured from the generating companies or licensees
or from other sources through agreements for purchase of power for distribution and supply within
the State.

103. Section 110 of the Electricity Act provides for establishment of the Appellate Tribunal. Section
111 of the Electricity Act provides for appeal to Appellate Tribunal by any person aggrieved by an
order made by an adjudicating officer under the said Act (except under Section 127) or an order
made by the Appropriate Commission. Section 112 deals with composition of the Appellate Tribunal.
It provides that it shall consist of a Chairperson and three other Members. Section 113 provides for
qualifications for appointment of Chairperson and Members of Appellate Tribunal. Only a person
who is, or has been a Judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice of a High Court is entitled to
be the Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal. For being a Member of the Appellate Tribunal,
following three categories have been provided for:

(i) A person is, or has been, or is qualified to be, a Judge of a High Court; or

33

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

(ii) A person is, or has been, a Secretary for at least one year in the Ministry or
Department of the Central Government dealing with economic affairs or matters or
infrastructure; or

(iii) A person is, or has been, a person of ability and standing, having adequate
knowledge or experience in dealing with the matters relating to electricity generation,
transmission and distribution and regulation or economics, commerce, law or
management.

104. It can thus be seen that the CEA, CERC and learned APTEL are bodies consisting of experts in
the field. CONSIDERATIONS

105. The issues with regard to SHR and GCV have been considered by the CERC in its order dated 15
th November 2018 in the case of GMR Warora Energy Limited v. Maharashtra State Electricity
Distribution Company Limited & Anr 8. It will be relevant to reproduce the relevant part of the
CERC’s order dated 15th November 2018, which reads thus:

“29. The submissions regarding SHR and GCV have been considered. The APTEL in
its judgement dated 12.9.2014 in Appeal No. 288 of 2013 (M/s Wardha Power
Company Limited V Reliance Infrastructure Limited & anr) has ruled that
compensation under Change in Law cannot be correlated with the price of coal
computed from the energy charge and the technical parameters like the Heat Rate
and gross GCV of coal given in the bid documents for establishing the coal
requirement. The relevant observations of APTEL are extracted as under:

“26. The price bid given by the Seller for fixed and variable charges both escalable
and non-escalable is based on the Appellant’s perception of risks and estimates of
expenditure at the time of submitting the bid. The energy charge as quoted in the bid
may not match with the actual energy charge corresponding to the actual landed
price of fuel. The seller in its bid has also not quoted the price of coal. Therefore, it is
not correct to co-relate the compensation on account of Change in Law due to change
in cess/excise duty on coal, to the coal price computed from the quoted energy
charges in the Financial bid and the heat rate and Gross Calorific value of Coal given
in the bidding documents by the bidder for the purpose of establishing the coal
requirement. The coal price so calculated will not be equal to the actual price of coal
and therefore, compensation for Change in Law computed on such price of coal will
not restore the economic position of the Seller to the same level as if such Change in
Law has not occurred.”

30. In the light of the above observations, the technical parameters such as Heat Rate
and GCV of coal as per the bidding document cannot be considered for deciding the
coal requirement for the purpose of calculating the relief under Change in law.
Therefore, the submissions of the Respondent, MSEDCL to consider the bid
parameters are not acceptable. The Respondent has also relied on MERC order with

34

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

regard to GCV. As regards SHR, it was also suggested by MERC that net SHR as
submitted in the bid or SHR norms specified for new thermal stations as per MYT
Regulations, whichever is superior, shall be applicable. In our view, the decision in
the said order has been given in the facts of the case and does not have any binding
effect in case of the projects regulated by this Commission. Moreover, the SHR given
in the bid are under test conditions and may vary from actual SHR. The Commission
after extensive stakeholders(cid:136) consultation has specified the SHR norms in the 2014
Tariff Regulations. Therefore, it would be appropriate to take SHR specified in the
Regulations as a reference point instead of other parameters as suggested by
MSEDCL.

31. In the present case, the Petitioner has considered SHR of 2355 kcal/Kwh whereas,
the Respondent MSEDCL has considered the Design Heat Rate of 2211 kcal/kWh as
submitted in the RFP. It is pertinent to mention that the CERC norms applicable for
the period 2009-14 and 2014-19 do not provide the norms for 300 MW units, but
provide for a degradation factor of 6.5% and 4.5% respectively towards Heat Rate
over and above the Design Heat Rate. As the Design Heat Rate is 2211 kcal/kWh, the
gross Heat Rate works out to 2355 kcal/kWh (2211 x 1.065)and 2310 kcal/kWh (2211
x 1.045) for the period 2009- 14 and 2014-19 respectively. Accordingly, we direct that
the SHR of 2355 kcal/kWh during the period 2009-14 and 2310 kcal/kwh during the
period 2014- 19 or the actual SHR whichever is lower, shall be considered for
calculating the coal consumption for the purpose of compensation under change in
law. The Petitioner and the Respondent MSEDCL are directed to carry out
reconciliation on account of these claims annually.

32. In case of GCV, the Respondent has submitted that it should be mid value of GCV
band which should be applied on GCV measured on ‘as billed’ basis. In our view, on
account of the grade slippage of the coal supplied by CIL, it would not be appropriate
to consider GCV on ‘as billed’ basis. In the 2014 Tariff Regulations of the
Commission, the measurement of GCV has been specified as on ‘as received’ basis.
Therefore, it will be appropriate if the GCV on ‘as received’ basis is considered for
computation of compensation for Change in law.”

106. The CERC has referred to the judgment of the learned APTEL dated 12th September 2014 in
Appeal No. 288 of 2013 in the case of M/s Wardha Power Company Limited v. Reliance
Infrastructure Limited & anr. wherein the learned APTEL has held that it is not correct to co-relate
the compensation on account of Change in Law due to change in cess/excise duty on coal to the coal
price computed from the quoted energy charges in the financial bid and the heat rate and GCV of
coal given in the bidding documents by the bidder for the purpose of establishing the coal
requirement. The learned APTEL has held that the coal price so calculated will not be equal to the
actual price of coal and therefore, compensation for Change in Law computed on such price of coal
will not restore the economic position of the seller to the same level as if such Change in Law had
not occurred.

35

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

107. The CERC has further found that the SHR given in the bid are under test conditions and may
vary from actual SHR. The CERC has specifically observed that after extensive stakeholders’
consultation, the CERC has specified the SHR norms in the 2014 Tariff Regulations. It, therefore,
found that it will be appropriate to take SHR specified in the Regulations as a reference point
instead of other parameters as suggested by MSEDCL.

108. The CERC further found that the CERC norms applicable to the period 2009-14 and 2014-19 do
not provide the norms for 300 MW units, but provide for a degradation factor of 6.5% and 4.5%
respectively towards Heat Rate over and above the Design Heat Rate. The CERC found that since the
Design Heat Rate was 2211 kcal/kWh, the gross Heat Rate worked out to 2355 kcal/kWh (2211 x
1.065) and 2310 kcal/kWh (2211 x 1.045) for the period 2009-14 and 2014-19 respectively. The
CERC, therefore, directed that the SHR of 2355 kcal/kWh during the period 2009-14 and 2310
kcal/kwh during the period 2014-19 or the actual SHR, whichever is lower, shall be considered for
calculating the coal consumption for the purpose of compensation under the Change in Law.

109. These findings of the CERC are affirmed by the learned APTEL in its Judgment dated 16 th July
2021. The learned APTEL observed thus:

“8.8 We are in agreement with the observations made by the CERC. Relegating the
Appellant to the contractual remedy under the FSA when the genesis of the
Appellant’s claim is Change in Law under the PPA would not be appropriate. It is,
however, made clear that if the Appellant were to receive any disincentive or
compensation from the coal company on account of short supply or grade slippage,
such compensation will be adjusted/credited against the Change in Law
compensation payable by the Respondent, MSEDCL.”

110. The learned APTEL in its judgment dated 14 th September 2020 in Appeal No.182 of 2019 in
the case of Adani Power Maharashtra Limited (APML) v. Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution
Company Ltd. (impugned in Civil Appeal No. 684 of 2021) has referred to the order of MERC dated
7th March 2018 in Case No.123 of 2017 (JSW Energy Ltd. v. MSEDCL), wherein it held that
Auxiliary Consumption has to be considered as lower of actual or MYT norms for the purpose of the
Change in Law compensation. The learned APTEL held that in view of its earlier order, the State
Commission, being MERC, ought to have followed the same approach for SHR in the present case
also. It has been found that there is no reason for the MERC to apply two different principles for
Auxiliary Consumption and SHR, when both are operational parameters and the Commission was
dealing with the same PPA in both cases.

111. The learned APTEL has also referred to the following observations of the CERC in its order
dated 16 th May 2019 in the case of GMR Warora Energy Limited v. MSEDCL and Anr. (Petition
No.284/MP/2018):

“52. It is pertinent to mention that similar submissions of the Respondent, MSEDCL
were considered by the Commission in Petition No.88/MP/2018 and it was observed
by order dated 15.11.2018 that SHR given in the bid is under test conditions and may

36

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

vary from actual SHR. Therefore, it would only be correct to take SHR specified in the
tariff Regulations as a reference point instead of other parameters suggested by
MSEDCL. It was also held that SHR as a bidding document cannot be considered for
deciding the coal requirement for the purpose of calculating relief under change in
law…” [emphasis supplied]

112. The learned APTEL thereafter held that the SHR submitted in the bid was not a bid parameter
as per the bidding guidelines. It concurred with the findings of the CERC that the SHR specified in
the Tariff Regulations was as a reference point. It held that it cannot be used as the basis for
computing the coal shortfall requirement and, thereby, for computation of Change in Law
compensation to be awarded to the generating company. It held that such linking of Change in Law
compensation to the SHR mentioned in the bid documents would not restitute the affected party to
the same economic position as if the approved Change in Law event had not occurred.

113. Insofar as the GCV is concerned, the CERC in the case of GMR Warora Energy Limited (supra)
has specifically rejected the contention of the MSEDCL that the GCV should be taken at the mid
value of GCV band which should be applied on GCV measured on ‘as billed’ basis. The CERC held
that, on account of the grade slippage of the coal supplied by CIL, it would not be appropriate to
consider GCV on ‘as billed’ basis. It has been held that in the 2014 Tariff Regulations of the
Commission, the measurement of GCV has been specified as on ‘as received’ basis. Therefore, it will
be appropriate if the GCV on ‘as received’ basis is considered for computation of compensation for
the Change in Law. This finding of the CERC is affirmed by the learned APTEL.

114. The learned APTEL in the case of Adani Power Maharashtra Limited (APML) (supra) has also
considered the issue as to whether the reference GCV of domestic coal supplied by CIL for
computing the Change in Law compensation should be “the middle value of GCV range of assured
coal grade in LoA/FSA/MoU”. The learned APTEL observed that it was a fact that there is no
guidance in the PPAs or in the bidding Guidelines as to the reference GCV that should be applied in
case of the Change in Law claims in Case 1 bid projects where SHR or GCV is not a bid parameter. It,
however, held that the overarching principle for Change in Law compensation was that the
generating company should not be left with in a worse economic position. It held that the GCV ‘as
received’ should be the appropriate basis to assess the quantum of shortfall in domestic coal and
calculate the Change in Law compensation accordingly.

115. It is also relevant to note that the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (“C&AG” for short),
in its Performance Audit Report on “Fuel Management of Coal Based Power Stations of NTPC
Limited” submitted to MoP, had observed that the ‘quality assessment of coal has inherent as well as
manmade infirmities due to heterogeneous nature of coal and sampling errors’. The C&AG,
therefore, recommended to the MoP that there was a need to appropriately review the methods for
energy pricing and had requested the MoP to coordinate with CERC in light of the audit findings.
The MoP, therefore, addressed a communication dated 28th June 2017 to the CEA. In the said
communication, the MoP had stated that the NTPC has highlighted the issues of sampling error on
account of change of point of sampling for measurement of GCV from “as fired” to “as received”
basis as per the 2014 Tariff Regulations, non-homogeneous nature of samples taken from the

37

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

wagons, loss of GCV from point of “as received” to the point of “as fired”, and difficulty with coal
sampling through ‘Augurs’. It further states that the MoP had also sought views of the CERC on the
said issue. The CERC had, therefore, requested the MoP for consulting CEA in this regard and
accordingly the matter was referred to CEA.

116. The CEA in its communication dated 17th October 2017 stated thus:

“The issue has been examined in CEA. After preliminary discussions with NTPC on
the issue on 05.09.2017, CEA has also taken views of other specialist agencies in the
field of coal such as CIMFR and CPRI in the meeting held on 21.09.2017.

It is acknowledged that there is a loss of GCV from point of “as received” to the point
of “as fired” inside a power plant mainly due to following factors:

(i) Effect of Moisture in GCV of coal sample taken from Wagon Top As stated by
C&AG, there are sampling errors on account of heterogeneous nature of coal. This
issue was deliberated in detail with CIMFR and CPRI. Both CIMFR and CPRI
acknowledged the difference in wagon top-

bottom GCV due to heterogeneous nature of coal, tendency of moisture to settle at
the bottom and exposure of top layer to atmosphere.

CEA is of the view that GCV measurement of wagon top coal will give comparatively
higher GCV value due to steeling of moisture at the bottom of the wagon and loss of
moisture from wagon top during transportation of coal, however, loss in GCV will
vary as per seasonal variations.

(ii) Loss in GCV during coal storage inside power plant CEA is of the view and also
substantiated by many national and international papers that there is a loss of GCV in
the coal stock where coal is stored inside the power plant, mainly due to oxidation
and weathering effect. Further, most of the losses in GCV during long storage of coal
takes place in the initial period of storage, mostly due to loss in volatile content.

(iii) Reduction in GCV during handling inside power plant C&AG in its Performance
Audit Report has observed that GCV of coal progressively decreased from ‘as billed’
stage to ‘as fired’ stage.

It is acknowledged that there are minor unavoidable losses inside the power plant in
handling the coal starting from unloading point to the point of bunkering. Loss in
GCV may occur mainly due to dust suppression measures used around coal
conveyors and transfer points, loss in volatile matter during crushing of the coal etc.
CEA has also examined the views taken by various state regulators for considering
such loss for the purpose of tariff allowed to generators. However, as the margin
would vary from plant to plant, season to season and varying coal characteristics,

38

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

CEA is of the opinion that a margin of 85-100 kcal/kg for a non-pit head station may
be considered as a loss of GCV measured at wagon top till the point of firing of coal in
boiler.”

117. Vide Corrigendum dated 18th October 2017, in the last sentence, after the words wagon top, the
words “at unloading point” were added.

118. The aforesaid advice was given by the CEA after holding meeting on 21st September 2017 with
specialist agencies in the field of coal such as CIMFR and CPRI. It has also examined the views taken
by various state regulators for considering such loss for the purpose of tariff allowed to generators.
While considering at what point of time the margin may be considered as a loss of GCV, the CEA
considered the views of all the stakeholders. It, thereafter, opined that the loss of GCV should be
measured at wagon top till the point of firing of coal in boiler.

119. As already discussed herein above, the CEA is an independent body having Members who are
experts in various fields related to electricity generation, transmission, finance, etc.

120. It could thus be seen that two expert bodies i.e. the CERC and the learned APTEL have
concurrently held, after examining the material on record, that the factors of SHR and GCV should
be considered as per the Regulations or actuals, whichever is lower. The CERC as well as the State
Regulatory bodies, after extensive consultation with the stakeholders, had specified the SHR norms
in respective Tariff Regulations. In addition, insofar as GCV is concerned, the CEA has opined that
the margin of 85-100 kcal/kg for a non-pit head station may be considered as a loss of GCV
measured at wagon top till the point of firing of coal in boiler.

121. In this respect, we may refer to the following observations of this Court in the case of Reliance
Infrastructure Limited v. State of Maharashtra and others9.

“38. MERC is an expert body which is entrusted with the duty and function to 9 (2019) 3 SCC 352
frame regulations, including the terms and conditions for the determination of tariff. The Court,
while exercising its power of judicial review, can step in where a case of manifest unreasonableness
or arbitrariness is made out. Similarly, where the delegate of the legislature has failed to follow
statutory procedures or to take into account factors which it is mandated by the statute to consider
or has founded its determination of tariffs on extraneous considerations, the Court in the exercise of
its power of judicial review will ensure that the statute is not breached. However, it is no part of the
function of the Court to substitute its own determination for a determination which was made by an
expert body after due consideration of material circumstances.

39. In Assn. of Industrial Electricity Users v. State of A.P. [Assn. of Industrial Electricity Users v.
State of A.P., (2002) 3 SCC 711] a three-Judge Bench of this Court dealt with the fixation of tariffs
and held thus : (SCC p. 717, para 11) “11. We also agree with the High Court [S. Bharat Kumar v.
State of A.P., 2000 SCC OnLine AP 565 : (2000) 6 ALD 217] that the judicial review in a matter with
regard to fixation of tariff has not to be as that of an appellate authority in exercise of its jurisdiction
under Article 226 of the Constitution.

39

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

All that the High Court has to be satisfied with is that the Commission has followed the proper
procedure and unless it can be demonstrated that its decision is on the face of it arbitrary or illegal
or contrary to the Act, the court will not interfere. Fixing a tariff and providing for cross-subsidy is
essentially a matter of policy and normally a court would refrain from interfering with a policy
decision unless the power exercised is arbitrary or ex facie bad in law.”

122. As already discussed herein above, various expert bodies including the CERC and the learned
APTEL, after taking into consideration various relevant factors, have decided the issue with regard
to SHR and GCV. Not only that, but another expert body i.e. CEA has also advised that GCV value
has to be taken not only on ‘as received’ but on ‘as fired’ basis.

123. Recently, the Constitution Bench of this Court in the case of Vivek Narayan Sharma v. Union of
India10 has held that the Courts should be slow in interfering with the decisions 10 2023 SCC
OnLine SC 1 taken by the experts in the field and unless it is found that the expert bodies have failed
to take into consideration the mandatory statutory provisions or the decisions taken are based on
extraneous considerations or they are ex facie arbitrary and illegal, it will not be appropriate for this
Court to substitute its views with that of the expert bodies.

124. That leaves us with the third issue as to whether the MERC was correct in holding that, for the
purpose of Change in Law compensation, shortfall in domestic linkage coal shall be assessed by
considering the coal supply as the maximum of (1) actual quantum of coal offered for offtake by CIL
under the LoA/FSA and (2) the minimum assured quantum in NCDP 2013 for the respective year.

125. Undisputedly, vide the NCDP 2007, insofar as the power utilities including IPPs/CPPs and
Fertilizer Sector are concerned, the MoC had assured 100% of the quantity as per the normative
requirement of the consumers for supply of coal, through FSA by CIL at fixed prices to be
declared/notified by CIL. The units/power plants, which were yet to be commissioned but whose
coal requirements has already been assessed and accepted by the MoC and linkage/LoA approved as
well as future commitments, were also to be covered by the said Policy. Para 5.2 of the NCDP 2007
also provided that in order to meet the domestic requirement of coal, CIL may have to import coal as
may be required from time to time, if feasible. The CIL was to adjust its overall price accordingly.
There was an unequivocal assurance given that it will be the responsibility of CIL/Coal Companies
to meet full requirement of coal under FSAs even by resorting to imports, if necessary.

126. However, in 2013, on account of the limited availability of coal, the MoC had indicated that CIL
may not be in a position to supply more than 60 to 65% of ACQ. The Union of India, therefore,
realised that PPAs which are already concluded between the developers and the DISCOMS as a
result of competitive bidding in the last few years based on domestic coal linkage (LoA) may have to
use imported coal to bridge the shortage of domestic coal in order to fulfill their contractual
obligations.

127. The CCEA considered the issue and decided that the higher cost of imported coal will be
allowed as a pass-through. This is evident from the communication dated 9 th May 2013 addressed
by the MoP to the CERC.

40

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

128. The CERC also considered the issue. It noted that it was the full responsibility of CIL to meet
full requirement of coal under FSAs even by resorting to import, if necessary. After referring to the
Change in Law clause, the CERC, in its advice dated 20th May 2013, stated that for claiming any
benefit under Change in Law, the Project Developer would have to move the appropriate
Commission and the appropriate Commissions are expected to take decisions on the merits of each
case including the claims of the Project Developers for compensation on account of imported coal.
Such decisions were required to be taken after consultation with the stakeholders.

129. The Government of India through MoP, in its Press Note dated 21st June 2013, published the
decision of the CCEA which clearly provided that the higher cost of imported coal was to be
considered for pass-through as per the modalities suggested by CERC.

130. The MoP, thereafter, addressed a communication dated 31st July 2013 to the Secretary, CERC
specifically pointing out the decision of the CCEA to the effect that the higher cost of imported coal
was to be considered for pass-through as per the modalities suggested by CERC. The
communication states that, as per the decision of the Government, the higher cost of import/market
based e-auction coal will have to be considered for being made a pass-through on a case to case basis
by CERC/SERC to the extent of shortfall in the quantity indicated in the LoA/FSA.

131. The Tariff Policy dated 28 th January 2016 issued by the MoP in paragraph 6.1 also specifically
notes this position and states that, in case of reduced quantity of domestic coal supplied by CIL
vis-à-vis the assured quantity or quantity indicated in LoA/FSA, the cost of imported/market based
e- auction coal procured for making up the shortfall shall be considered for being made a
pass-through by the Appropriate Commission.

132. Undisputedly, in the case of Energy Watchdog (supra) as well as in Adani Rajasthan case
(supra) this Court has held that on account of the Change in Law, the generating companies were
entitled to compensation so as to restore the party to the same economic position as if such Change
in Law had not occurred. Had the Change in Law not occurred, the generating companies would
have been entitled to the supply as assured by the CIL/Coal Companies under the FSA.

133. It is contended by the DISCOMS that in the case of Energy Watchdog (supra), this Court has
specifically held that the doctrine of force majeure was not applicable if there was an unexpected rise
in the price of coal and, as such, it will not absolve the generating companies from performing their
part of the contract. It is submitted that when the bidders submitted their bids, this was a risk they
knowingly took. We find the said submission to be without substance. The generators are not
claiming compensation on the basis of rise in price of coal or on the ground of force majeure. Their
claims, in fact, are on the basis of the Change in Law, which this Court, in the case of Energy
Watchdog (supra) as well as in Adani Rajasthan case (supra), has upheld on the ground of Change in
Law.

134. The contention of the DISCOMS that the Adani Rajasthan case (supra) is not applicable to the
facts of the present case inasmuch as in Adani Rajasthan case (supra), the State of Rajasthan had
assured 100% coal supply and that it was not a case of FSA, is, in our considered view, without

41

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

substance. In the present case also, the NCDP 2007 had assured 100% fuel/coal supply of the
normative value.

135. The restitutionary principle has been stated by this Court in the case of Uttar Haryana Bijli
Vitran Nigam Limited (UHBVNL) (supra) thus:

(cid:12)          “10. Article    13.2    is   an    in-built
restitutionary       principle       which

compensates the party affected by such change in law and which must restore, through monthly
tariff payments, the affected party to the same economic position as if such change in law has not
occurred. This would mean that by this clause a fiction is created, and the party has to be put in the
same economic position as if such change in law has not occurred i.e. the party must be given the
benefit of restitution as understood in civil law. ………….”

136. Undisputedly, the claim of APML stands on the basis of the Change in Law. The DISCOMS,
which are instrumentalities of the State, cannot be expected to argue contrary to the stand of the
Government, which clearly provides that the generators would be entitled to pass-through for the
coal required to be imported or purchased from the open market on the ground of Change in Law.

137. Shri M.G. Ramachandran, learned Senior Counsel has also made a submission that though the
Change in Law event is dated 31st July 2013, the learned APTEL has erred in giving effect to the
same from 1st April 2013. In this respect, it is to be noted that the Change in Law has been made
applicable to the remaining four years of the 12th Plan for power plants. The MERC, in the case of
APML, as well as the CERC, in the case of GMR, has given effect to the Change in Law for the last
four financial years beginning from the Financial Year 2013-2014. The financial year begins from 1st
of April of every year. Apart from that, from the perusal of the orders passed by the learned APTEL
in both the matters, it is clear that no such challenge was made before the learned APTEL, and, even
in the present appeals, there is ground to this effect in the Memo of Appeals. Only oral submissions
have been sought to be made in that regard.

138. In view of the concurrent orders of the authorities with regard to the date on which the Change
in Law compensation is to be given, we see no reason to entertain such a plea, which does not have a
foundation in the pleadings.

139. Another contention raised on behalf of the DISCOMS is that if the generators are permitted to
claim compensation on the basis of actual SHR or the SHR as per the Regulations, whichever is
lower, it will permit them to take advantage of their inefficiency. It is submitted that lesser the SHR,
greater the efficiency of the machine and, therefore, higher the generation of electricity. Per contra,
when the machine is inefficient, the SHR is higher and the electricity generation is lower. The SHR
is not only dependent on the efficiency of the machine but on various other factors. One of the other
factors is the PLF. In this respect, it will be relevant to refer to the statutory advice issued by the
CERC on 20th May 2013, the relevant part of which has already been reproduced hereinabove. It
clearly states that for want of adequate coal supply by CIL/Coal Companies, the PLF of the
generating stations across the country has been severely affected. As such, the contention in that

42

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

regard, in our considered view, is without substance.

140. Apart from that, it appears that various DISCOMS are taking self-contradictory stands. In
Petition No. 97 of 2017 between M/s Adani Power Limited v. Uttar Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam Ltd.
& Anr., the DISCOMS have filed an affidavit stating thus:

“a. While deciding the relief on account of Change in Law under Article 13 of the PPA
may be pleased to consider improved efficiency parameters in line with CERC Tariff
Regulations such that the impact on consumers of the Respondents in minimal in
nature.

b. Any relief (if granted), may be passed after considering the following significant
observations:

(i) The actual impact of the said period should be calculated on the basis of various
factors namely the quantum of requirement on normative procedures such as the
following:

i. Station Heat Rate shall be considered after ascertaining actual design heat rate and
margin as per CERC regulations from time to time.

ii. Similarly, Auxiliary Consumption shall be considered as per CERC regulations.

iii. GCV of alternate coal shall be as certified by Third Party Sampling Agency for
which the Hon’ble Commission should provide appropriate the guideline.

iv. The targeted PLF;

v. The accurate date of actual coal utilized by the Petitioner on a monthly and yearly
basis;

vi. The quantity of coal offered by the MCL which was rejected or not taken by the
Petitioner;

vii. The quantum of actual of electricity generated by the Petitioner Thus, it is
submitted that the Petitioner’s claim for relief in this regard requires to be computed
in a categorical and systematic manner taking the above parameters into
consideration. The Petitioner’s computation as stated in its petition is therefore liable
to be rejected as it is general and vague in nature.

(ii) Further, the Petitioner has indicated the impact limited to the past period only.
However, the Respondents humbly request the Hon’ble Commission to only approve
such claims for the past period, after considering the above along with a formula for
the future period.” [emphasis supplied]

43

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

141. It can thus be seen that the DISCOM-UHBVNL has itself stated that improved efficiency
parameters in line with CERC Tariff Regulations should be considered for deciding the relief on
account of Change in Law, such that the impact on consumers of the respondents is minimal in
nature. It has also requested for any relief, if granted, to take into consideration the SHR after
ascertaining actual design heat rate and margin as per CERC regulations from time to time.
Similarly, it has also requested that Auxiliary Consumption be considered as per the CERC
Regulations. Insofar as the GCV of alternate coal is concerned, it has further stated that it has to be
certified by Third Party Sampling Agency.

142. It is not in dispute that the SHR is required to be audited continuously and the GCV has to be
certified by a Third Party Sampling Agency.

143. It is further pertinent to note that the MERC itself in its order dated 7th March 2018 in Case
No.123 of 2017 (JSW v. MSEDCL), has taken a totally contradictory stand. It will be relevant to refer
to paragraph 19.11 of the said order dated 7 th March 2013, which reads thus:

“19.11 In view of the above, financial impact of Change in Law on the auxiliary
consumption to restore the generator to the same economic position as if such
Change in Law has not occurred is allowed. The Change in Law shall be applicable on
auxiliary consumption of the Unit as per the Norms laid down by the Commission or
actual, whichever is less since the tariff of the project is based on Competitive Bidding
the auxiliary power consumption considered is not known.

However this auxiliary consumption should be at a normative value corresponding to
Scheduled generation only.

Moreover, this Change in Law with respect to auxiliary consumption shall not include
power consumption for staff colonies of the generating station.” [emphasis supplied]

144. It is, thus, difficult to appreciate as to how the MERC, in one case, has taken a
view that Change in Law on the Auxiliary Consumption has to be as per the Norms
laid down by the Commission or actual, whichever is less, when it has rejected the
same in the case of APML in the order dated 7 th March 201811.

145. We may gainfully refer to the stand taken by the Union of India in the case of
Energy Watchdog (supra), which reads thus:

“15. The learned Attorney General appearing on behalf of the Union of India,
submitted before us that he was not interested in the ultimate outcome of the appeals
before us. He was only appearing in order to apprise us that the electricity sector,
having been privatised, has largely fulfilled the object sought to be achieved by the
2003 Act, which is that electricity generation, being delicensed, should result in
production of far greater electricity than was earlier produced.

44

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

He urged us not to disturb the delicate balance sought to be achieved by the Act i.e. that producers
or generators of electricity, in order that they set up power plants, be entitled to a reasonable margin
of profit and a reasonable return on their capital, so that they are induced to set up more and more
power plants. This must be consistent with competitiveness among them, which then translates
itself into reasonable tariffs that are payable by consumers of electricity. For this purpose, he relied
strongly upon Section 3 of the Electricity Act, which states that the Central Government, shall from
time to time, prepare a National Electricity Policy and a tariff policy in consultation with the State
Governments, and the authority for development of the power system, based on optimal utilisation
of natural resources. According to him, the National Electricity Policy and Tariff Policy that are
issued from time to time, being statutory in nature, are binding on all concerned. This is, in fact,
further recognised by Section 61(i) by which the appropriate Commission, in specifying terms and
conditions for determination of tariffs, shall be guided by the National Electricity Policy and Tariff
Policy. The Central Government's role can further be seen even in Section 63, where guidelines that
are binding on all are issued by the Central Government in cases where there is a transparent
process of bidding.

16. Further, according to the learned Attorney General, Section 79(4) also points in the same
direction, stating that, in discharge of its functions, the Central Commission shall be guided by the
National Electricity Policy, National Electricity Plan, and tariff policy published under Section 3. He
also referred us to the Cabinet Committee for Economic Affairs recognising the overall shortfall in
manufacture of domestic coal and the new coal distribution policy issued in July 2013 pursuant to
the Cabinet Committee which, according to him, are in the nature of binding directions making it
clear that as generators of electricity, who depend upon indigenous coal, have been given less coal
than was anticipated, should be allowed either to import the coal themselves, or purchase imported
coal from Coal India Ltd., with the difference in price being passed through to them. He further
referred to and relied upon the revised tariff policy of 28-1-2016 for the same purpose.” [emphasis
supplied]

146. The submissions made by the learned Attorney General have to be construed in reference to the
purpose for which the Electricity Act came to be enacted. Prior to the Electricity Act coming into
effect, matters with regard to generation, transmission, distribution and supply of electricity were
governed by three enactments, viz., the Indian Electricity Act, 1910, the Electricity (Supply) Act,
1948 and the Electricity Regulatory Commission Act, 1998. The Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948
mandated the creation of a State Electricity Board. However, it was found that over a period of time,
the performance of the said Electricity Boards had deteriorated on account of various factors. As
such, it was found necessary to enact a new legislation to meet various challenges. The statement of
objects and reasons would reveal that one of the main features for enactment of the Electricity Act
was delicensing of generation and freely permitting captive generation. As such, the learned
Attorney General, in the case of Energy Watchdog (supra), stated that the electricity sector, having
been privatized, had largely fulfilled the object sought to be achieved by the Electricity Act. After the
enactment of the Electricity Act, delicensed electricity generation resulted in production of far
greater electricity than was earlier produced. The learned Attorney General had further urged the
Court not to disturb the delicate balance sought to be achieved by the Electricity Act, i.e. that
producers or generators of electricity, in order that they set up power plants, be entitled to a

45

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

reasonable margin of profit and a reasonable return on their capital, so that they are induced to set
up more and more power plants.

147. It is further to be noted that, though it was sought to be contended in the case of Energy
Watchdog (supra) that in a case under Section 63 of the Electricity Act, the Commission was only to
adopt a tariff as determined through a transparent process of bidding, this Court rejected the said
contention. It held that, in fact, Sections 62 and 63 of the Electricity Act deal with ‘determination’ of
tariff, which is part of ‘regulating’ tariff. It further held in a situation where the guidelines issued by
the Central Government under Section 63 cover the situation, the Central Commission is bound by
those guidelines and must exercise its regulatory functions.

148. It would be relevant to refer to clause 4.7 of the guidelines issued by the Union of India, which
have been held to be binding in the case of Energy Watchdog (supra), which reads thus:

“Clause 4.7. (amended) Any change in law impacting cost or revenue from the
business of selling electricity to the procurer with respect to the law applicable on the
date which is 7 days before the last date for RFP bid submission shall be adjusted
separately. In case of any dispute regarding the impact of any change in law, the
decision of the appropriate Commission shall apply.”

149. The judgment of this Court in the case of Energy Watchdog (supra) has been approved by a
three Judge Bench of this Court in Adani Rajasthan case (supra).

150. In spite of this legal position and the stand taken by the Union of India, the DISCOMS are
taking a stand which is contrary to the stand of the Union of India. In Energy Watchdog (supra), it
was also sought to be urged by DISCOMS that even on account of Change in Law, adjustments
would not be permissible, which contention was outrightly rejected. We have come across a number
of matters wherein concurrent orders passed by the Regulatory Body and the Appellate Forum are
assailed. Such a litigation would, in fact, efface the purpose of the Electricity Act. As already
discussed herein above, one of the major reasons for the enactment of the Electricity Act was the
deterioration in performance of the State Electricity Boards.

151. In that view of the matter, we find that the stand taken by the DISCOMS that, since the loss
being sustained by the generating companies is on account of non-fulfillment of obligation by
CIL/Coal Companies, they should be relegated to the remedy available to them in law against the
CIL/Coal Companies, is totally unreasonable. The claim is based on change of NCDP 2007 by NCDP
2013, which, undisputedly, is covered by the term ‘Change in Law’.

152. Recently, this Court, in the case of Central Warehousing Corporation v. Adani Ports Special
Economic Zone Limited (APSEZL) and others12, has deprecated the practice of different
instrumentalities of the State taking contradictory/different positions/stands on the same issue.

153. In the present case, the learned APTEL has also held that SHR and GCV has to be taken into
consideration as per the ‘actual’ or the Tariff Regulations, whichever is lower and as 12 2022 SCC

46

Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 3 March, 2023

OnLine SC 1398 such, balanced the interests of generators as well as consumers.

154. That leaves us to deal with the additional point raised in the case of GMR (i.e. Civil Appeal
No.6927 of 2021).

155. The CERC, apart from its finding on SHR and GCV, has also directed late payment surcharge to
be paid. The same has been affirmed by the learned APTEL. The CERC as well as the learned
APTEL, on the interpretation of Articles 8.3.5 and 8.8.3 of the PPA, have concurrently found that
the procurer had delayed the payment by not making the payment within the due date and, as such,
GMR was entitled to late payment surcharge. We find no reason to interfere with the said
concurrent findings of fact.

156. We, therefore, find no merit in the appeals. The appeals are dismissed. There shall be no order
as to costs. Pending application, if any, shall stand disposed of.

…….........................J. [B.R. GAVAI] …….........................J. [VIKRAM NATH] NEW DELHI;

MARCH 03, 2023

47