Mahmood Ali vs State Of U.P. on 8 August, 2023

Mahmood Ali vs State Of U.P. on 8 August, 2023

Author: B.R. Gavai

Bench: B.R. Gavai

2023 INSC 684                                                             NON-REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2341 OF 2023
(Arising out of S.L.P. (Criminal) No. 12459 of 2022)

MAHMOOD ALI & ORS.                             …APPELLANT(S)

VERSUS

STATE OF U.P. & ORS.                          …RESPONDENT(S)

JUDGMENT

J.B. PARDIWALA, J. :

1. Leave granted.

2. This appeal is at the instance of the original accused persons of the First
Information Report (FIR) No. 127 of 2022 registered with the Mirzapur Police
Station, District Saharanpur, State of U.P. dated 04.06.2022 for the offences
punishable under Sections 420, 467, 468, 471, 342, 386, 504 and 506 resply of the
Indian Penal Code (IPC) and is directed against the order passed by the High Court of
Judicature at Allahabad dated 08.07.2022 in the Criminal Miscellaneous Writ
Petition No. 7335 of 2022 by which the High Court rejected the 15:45:17 IST Reason:

Writ Petition and thereby declined to quash the said FIR for the offences enumerated
above.

3. The FIR in question reads as thus:-

“Sir, it is submitted that the applicant has worked for may years in the offices of
different government approved mining lease holders in Saharanpur district. Mining
industry is the main source of employment in the Behat area of Saharanpur district.
The educated youth of the area earn their livelihood by working in the offices of sone
crushers and mining lease holders established in the area due to unemployment. In

1

Mahmood Ali vs State Of U.P. on 8 August, 2023

this way, thousands of people earn their livelihood by working in mining offices and
stone crushers at the local level. Taking advantage of the unemployment and
helplessness of the applicant, Mohammad Wajid s/o Iqbal obtained his signature on
some papers on 1.8.2008 and after that he kept on making the applicant sign other
papers and blank cheques. The applicant kept signing those papers so as to save his
job and out of fear, because he refused to sign, he would have been threatened with
removal from the job and harassed by implicating him in some false case.

Mohammad Iqbal used to threaten the applicant repeatedly that if he would not listen to him, he
would send him to jail and would also get his family finished. Due to this fear, the applicant
remained silent for so many years and continued to lead the life of slavery. Thereafter the applicant
came in contact with those who are sharing the evil deeds of Mohammad Iqbal with the Hon’ble
Supreme Court and Central agencies. I was fraudulently appointed as a Director in the company by
Mohammad Iqbal and Mohammad Wajid s/o Iqbal. When I came to know about the fake
appointment, I resigned from that company on 22 March 2017. I was appointed as a Director by
fraudulently obtaining my signature on papers without my consent, whereas I was not even aware at
that time as to what is a Director or a company and why my signature is being obtained? I left the
job in 2017 as I was not even paid salary for 2 years after 2015. I along with those who were exposing
their misdeeds have brought many of their misdeeds to the notice of central agencies. The above
persons are so clever fraudsters that they have filed a bogus Writ Criminal (Miscellaneous) Petition
No.2342 of 2019 in the Hon’ble High Court Allahabad in the name of the applicant. When I came to
know about this, I appeared before the Hon’ble Judge in the Hon’ble High Court, Allahabad made
him aware of the truth that at present I do not work with the aforesaid persons and in the past also I
have worked in his mining lease office only and never did a job in their University. A copy of the
order of the Hon’ble Court is enclosed. It has also come to my notice that the misdeeds of
Mohammad Iqbal are being investigated by the Special Investigation Team (SIT). I want to
cooperate in the investigation going on against them so that the misdeeds of the above persons can
be exposed. I have seen the terrible forms of the above persons for many years and have suffered
their wrath. I was forced to work in their office by being held as a hostage and being threatened to be
killed by Mohammad Iqbal alias Bala s/o Abdul Waheed and his sons by showing fear of life. These
persons did not even pay the salary to me for 2 years. When I asked for my salary, Mohammad Iqbal
alias Bala and his sons and brother put a pistol (Tamancha) on my temporal region and said that we
are spending a lot of money in the pairvi of case in the court. If you ask for money, we will kill you.
Thus, they withheld my salary for 2 years. Even on festivals like Holi and Diwali, they did not permit
me to leave, while these are the main festivals of the mine. I don’t know how many lives have been
destroyed by Mohammad Iqbal alias Bala and his sons and brother and how many families have
been ruined. Mohammad Iqbal alias Bala and his family members create panic among the people
and threaten to send them to jail by implicating in a false/fake cases. Because of Mohammad Iqbal
alias Bala and his family, I had to face many false cases and I was so tensed that I had a heart attack
and since then I am alive by taking medicines regularly. I do not want that the life of any other
family or person to be destroyed because of such mafias. It has also come to my notice that there are
many illegal properties in the name of the company in which I was fraudulently shown as a director.
I do not have any relation or concern with any of his company/property, nor is any of his property
registered in my name. Therefore, I request to cooperate with me in the investigation so that

2

Mahmood Ali vs State Of U.P. on 8 August, 2023

innumerous misdeeds of Mohammad Iqbal alias Bala s/o Abdul Waheed and his sons Abdul Wajid,
Javed, Alishan, Afzal and his brother Mehmood can be exposed and they can be punished. Such
people are a threat to the society. …”

4. Thus, a plain reading of the aforesaid FIR reveals that the original first informant namely
Ravinder Kumar (the respondent No. 3 herein) claims to be an illiterate person and was in the
employment of the accused persons from 01.08.2008. It is alleged that taking advantage of the
helplessness of the first informant, the appellant No. 2 herein, Abdul Wajid obtained his signature
on some papers on 01.08.2008 and later, the appellant No. 2 kept on compelling the first informant
to sign other papers and bank cheques without the consent of the first informant and without
bringing anything to the notice of the first informant in regard to the cheques, blank papers, etc. It is
also alleged that the first informant was fraudulently appointed as a Director of a Company by the
appellant 3 Mohd. Iqbal and the appellant No. 2 Abdul Wajid. Upon coming to know about the said
fake appointment, the first informant resigned from the Company on 22.03.2017. It is further
alleged that a Writ Criminal (Misc) Petition No. 2342 of 2019 was also filed before the High Court in
the name of the first informant. The first informant was also allegedly forced to work in the office of
the accused persons virtually as a hostage, and threats were administered to kill him. It is alleged
that the accused persons are involved in illegal mining, etc. and are exploiting poor persons.

5. The appellants herein went before the High Court by filing Criminal Miscellaneous Writ Petition
No. 7335 of 2022 for the purpose of getting the FIR quashed. The High Court declined to quash the
FIR by way of an order dated 08.07.2022 which reads thus:-

“Heard learned counsel for the petitioners and learned AGA for the State.

This writ petition has been filed with the prayer to quash the First Information
Report, registered as Case Crime No.127 of 2022, under Sections 420, 467, 468, 471,
342, 386, 504, 506 IPC, Police Station Mirzapur, District Saharanpur, on the ground
that petitioners have been falsely implicated.

The First Information Report is by the informant, who claims to be an illiterate
person and was in the employment of accused petitioners from 1.8.2008. It is alleged
that in order to protect his employment the informant was made to sign on dotted
lines and without his knowledge he was also shown/made Director of a company. It is
alleged that the accused petitioners are involved in illegal mining etc. and are
exploiting poor persons. It is also stated that a petition was also filed at the instance
of informant without his knowledge. As per the FIR allegations the accused
petitioners are extending threats to the informant and therefore prayer is made to
protect their life and liberty.

Learned AGA points out that the third petitioner has a criminal history of 21 cases
lodged by the State and 09 complaint cases, whereas the second petitioner has a
criminal history of 14 cases and the first petitioner has a criminal history of 09 cases.

3

Mahmood Ali vs State Of U.P. on 8 August, 2023

Learned counsel for the petitioners with reference to the supplementary affidavit
filed states that in most of these cases appropriate protection has already been
granted by the competent authority.

Be that as it may, this Court is not required to make any observation with regard to
correctness or otherwise of the FIR allegations. The ascertainment of facts in respect
of the FIR would be open for examination at the stage of investigation.

Considering the fact that there are large number of criminal cases lodged against the
petitioners and prima facie allegations with regard to commissioning of cognizable
offence in the FIR are disclosed, we decline to exercise our extraordinary jurisdiction
in the matter in view of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of State of
Telangana Vs. Habib Abdullah Jellani, (2017) 2 SCC 779, as also in the case of
Neeharika Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. Vs. State of Maharashtra and Others, (2021) SCC
Online SC 315.

Writ petition, accordingly, is dismissed.

Dismissal of this writ petition, however, will not preclude the petitioners from seeking appropriate
protection under the Code of Criminal Procedure, which shall be dealt with on its own merit and in
accordance with law.”

6. In view of the aforesaid, the appellants are before this Court with the present appeal.

SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANTS

7. Mr. Siddhartha Dave, the learned senior counsel appearing for the appellants herein in his written
submissions has stated as under:-

“(a) The allegations in the First Information Report are not only absurd but also
highly improbable given that the said incident allegedly occurred in the year 2008
while the FIR has been lodged after an inordinate delay of 14 years, that is, on
4.06.2022, which has not been explained.

(b) It is respectfully submitted that the alleged First Information Report is absolutely
false and frivolous, and on a reading of the said FIR, the offence under Sections 420,
467, 468, 471, 342, 386, 504 and 506 of IPC is clearly not made out against the
Petitioners. Although the Complainant has alleged that upon coming to know about
his fraudulent appointment as a Director of a Company, he resigned from the
Company way back in the year 2017 but no complaint during this period was ever
lodged by the Complainant. Further the name of the said Company has also not been
mentioned in the FIR.

4

Mahmood Ali vs State Of U.P. on 8 August, 2023

(c) It is submitted that the Respondents have incorrectly projected the Petitioners to
be hardened criminals when the fact is that every time the Petitioners and their
family members were granted protection by the Courts, the Police immediately
registered new FIRs against them. It is submitted that the State of Uttar Pradesh is
misusing its administrative as well as police machinery to harass the Petitioners and
their family members by registering false cases against them. Further the State
authorities have not only illegally demolished three residential houses of the
Petitioners but has also registered false criminal cases against even those persons
who stand surety for the Petitioners and their family members in cases where bail or
anticipatory bail has been granted to them. The Petitioners are neither members of
any Gang nor are they involved in illegal mining or land grabbing activities.

(d) It is submitted that after the change of Government in the State of Uttar Pradesh
in the year 2017, the ruling party came to power and immediately after the change of
Government the Petitioners along with their family members were falsely implicated
in more than 30 criminal cases at the behest of the ruling party. The Petitioners are
being unnecessarily harassed by the State machinery including the Police. Although
the Respondent State is heavily relying upon the criminal cases registered against the
Petitioners and their family members to show that they are habitual offenders but till
date the Petitioners have not been convicted by any Court of law and moreover every
time the Petitioners or their family members gets protection (anticipatory bail or stay
of arrest) from either this Hon’ble Court or the Hon’ble High Court, the local Police
immediately registers false cases against them.

(e) It is submitted that the alleged Look Out Notice dated 10.05.2022 was issued
much prior to the registration of the present FIR No. 195 of 2022 which was
registered on 25.08.2022.

(f) It is respectfully submitted that the alleged First Information Report has been maliciously
instituted at the behest of the present ruling party in the State of Uttar Pradesh to wreak vengeance
and to settle political scores with Petitioner No.3 Iqbal alias Bala as he belongs to a rival political
party and he was also a Member of Legislative Council from the period 2011 to 2016. The Petitioner
belongs to a respectable family of Saharanpur and he is running several Charitable Institutions.

(g) The allegations made in the First Information Report do not prima facie constitute any offence
or make out a case under Sections 420, 467, 468, 471, 342, 386, 504, 506 of IPC against the
Petitioners and thus, the FIR is liable to be quashed. It is pertinent to mention that even after the
charge sheet has been filed, the petition for quashing of a FIR is well within the powers of a Court of
law [Please see: ANAND KUMAR MOHATTA & ANOTHER VS.

STATE (NCT OF DELHI), DEPARTMENT OF HOME & ANOTHER (2019) 11 SCC 706 at paragraph
14 & 16].

5

Mahmood Ali vs State Of U.P. on 8 August, 2023

(h) For the reasons mentioned above, the Special Leave Petition may be allowed and the order of the
Hon’ble High Court refusing to quash the FIR No. 127 of 2022 dated 4.06.2022 be set aside.”
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE STATE

8. Ms. Garima Prasad, the learned Additional Advocate General appearing for the State of U.P. in
her written submissions has stated as under:-

“(a) The Investigation has been completed and chargesheet is ready to file against the
Petitioners but due to stay order of this Hon’ble Court, the chargesheet could not be
submitted.

(b) It is submitted that the Petitioner Mohd. Iqbal @ Bala, his brother and their sons
are the mining mafia in western Uttar Pradesh and several number of criminal cases
are registered against him and his family members.

(c) The Investigation Officer also recorded the statement of the independent
witnesses and collected the other material evidence against the Petitioner and other
accused persons, which prima facie shows that the Petitioner ad other accused
persons have committed the serious offences.

(d) It is correct and admitted that with the change of dispensation/Government,
complainants/terrified peoples /aggrieved persons, who are poor persons, poor
farmers, small contractors, have been able to come forward to register or lodge
criminal complaints against the Gangster Iqbal @ Bala and his family members as
well as associates. Due to illegal support by the earlier dispensation/ Government to
these criminals, actions were not taken.

(e) Recently, this Hon’ble Court has held in case Mahendra Prasad Tiwari Vs Amit
Kumar Tiwari & Anr reported as 2022 SCC Online SC 1057 held that delay is
registration of the FIR is not ground to discharge.

(f) This Hon’ble Court has held in case Thakur Ram v.

State of Bihar, reported as (1966) 2 SCR 740, that barring a few exceptions, in criminal matters the
party who is treated as the aggrieved party is the State which is the custodian of the social interests
of the community at large and so it is for the State to take all the steps necessary for bringing the
person who has acted against the social interests of the community to book.

(g) It is submitted that this Hon’ble Court has held in case Sohan Singh and Another vs. State of
Bihar, (2010) 1 SCC 68, has held that “When FIR by a Hindu lady is to be lodged with regard to
commission of offence like rape, many questions would obviously crop up for consideration before
one finally decides to lodge the FIR. It is difficult to appreciate the plight of who has been criminally
assaulted in such a manner. Obviously, the prosecutrix must have also gone through great turmoil
and only after giving it a serious thought, must have decided to lodge the FIR.”

6

Mahmood Ali vs State Of U.P. on 8 August, 2023

(h) The impugned first information report prima facie reveals commission of cognizable offences
and which inspire confidence that it is clear from the contents of the FIR that serious crime was
committed by the Petitioner and other accused persons.

(i) In view of the aforementioned factual & legal submissions, it is most respectfully submitted that
the present special leave petition of the Petitioners is liable to be dismissed with exemplary cost and
the impugned order dated 08.07.2022 passed by the Hon’ble High Court in Criminal Misc. Writ
Petition No. 7335 of 2022 is liable to be upheld.” ANALYSIS

9. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having gone through the
materials on record, the only question that falls for our consideration is whether the FIR bearing No.
127 of 2022 should be quashed?

10. We are of the view that even if the entire case of the prosecution is believed or accepted to be
true, none of the ingredients to constitute the offence as alleged are disclosed. It is pertinent to note
that the FIR in question came to be lodged after a period of 14 years from the alleged illegal acts of
the appellants. It is also pertinent to note that in the FIR no specific date or time of the alleged
offences has been disclosed.

11. The entire case put up by the first informant on the face of it appears to be concocted and
fabricated. At this stage, we may refer to the parameters laid down by this Court for quashing of an
FIR in the case of State of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal, AIR 1992 SC 604. The parameters are:-

“(1) Where the allegations made in the first information report or the complaint, even
if they are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie
constitute any offence or make out a case against the accused.

(2) Where the allegations in the first information report and other materials, if any,
accompanying the FIR do not disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an
investigation by police officers under Section 156(1) of the Code except under an
order of a Magistrate within the purview of Section 155(2) of the Code.

(3) Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR or complaint and the
evidence collected in support of the same do not disclose the commission of any
offence and make out a case against the accused.

(4) Where, the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a cognizable offence but
constitute only a non-cognizable offence, no investigation is permitted by a police
officer without an order of a Magistrate as contemplated under Section 155(2) of the
Code.

(5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so absurd and inherently
improbable on the basis of which no prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion
that there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused. (6) Where there is

7

Mahmood Ali vs State Of U.P. on 8 August, 2023

an express legal bar engrafted in any of the provisions of the Code or the concerned
Act (under which a criminal proceeding is instituted) to the institution and
continuance of the proceedings and/or where there is a specific provision in the Code
or the concerned Act, providing efficacious redress for the grievance of the aggrieved
party.

(7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with mala fide and/or where
the proceeding is maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking
vengeance on the accused and with a view to spite him due to private and personal
grudge.” We are of the view that the case of the present appellants falls within the
parameters Nos. 1, 5 and 7 resply of Bhajan Lal (supra).

12. At this stage, we would like to observe something important. Whenever an accused comes before
the Court invoking either the inherent powers under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
(CrPC) or extraordinary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution to get the FIR or the
criminal proceedings quashed essentially on the ground that such proceedings are manifestly
frivolous or vexatious or instituted with the ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance, then in such
circumstances the Court owes a duty to look into the FIR with care and a little more closely. We say
so because once the complainant decides to proceed against the accused with an ulterior motive for
wreaking personal vengeance, etc., then he would ensure that the FIR/complaint is very well drafted
with all the necessary pleadings. The complainant would ensure that the averments made in the
FIR/complaint are such that they disclose the necessary ingredients to constitute the alleged
offence. Therefore, it will not be just enough for the Court to look into the averments made in the
FIR/complaint alone for the purpose of ascertaining whether the necessary ingredients to constitute
the alleged offence are disclosed or not. In frivolous or vexatious proceedings, the Court owes a duty
to look into many other attending circumstances emerging from the record of the case over and
above the averments and, if need be, with due care and circumspection try to read in between the
lines.

The Court while exercising its jurisdiction under Section 482 of the CrPC or Article 226 of the
Constitution need not restrict itself only to the stage of a case but is empowered to take into account
the overall circumstances leading to the initiation/registration of the case as well as the materials
collected in the course of investigation. Take for instance the case on hand. Multiple FIRs have been
registered over a period of time. It is in the background of such circumstances the registration of
multiple FIRs assumes importance, thereby attracting the issue of wreaking vengeance out of
private or personal grudge as alleged.

13. In State of Andhra Pradesh v. Golconda Linga Swamy, (2004) 6 SCC 522, a two-Judge Bench of
this Court elaborated on the types of materials the High Court can assess to quash an FIR. The Court
drew a fine distinction between consideration of materials that were tendered as evidence and
appreciation of such evidence. Only such material that manifestly fails to prove the accusation in the
FIR can be considered for quashing an FIR. The Court held:-

8

Mahmood Ali vs State Of U.P. on 8 August, 2023

“5. …Authority of the court exists for advancement of justice and if any attempt is made to abuse
that authority so as to produce injustice, the court has power to prevent such abuse. It would be an
abuse of the process of the court to allow any action which would result in injustice and prevent
promotion of justice. In exercise of the powers court would be justified to quash any proceeding if it
finds that initiation or continuance of it amounts to abuse of the process of court or quashing of
these proceedings would otherwise serve the ends of justice. When no offence is disclosed by the
complaint, the court may examine the question of fact. When a complaint is sought to be quashed, it
is permissible to look into the materials to assess what the complainant has alleged and whether any
offence is made out even if the allegations are accepted in toto.

6. In R.P. Kapur v. State of Punjab, AIR 1960 SC 866 : 1960 Cri LJ 1239, this Court summarised
some categories of cases where inherent power can and should be exercised to quash the
proceedings : (AIR p. 869, para 6)

(i) where it manifestly appears that there is a legal bar against the institution or continuance e.g.
want of sanction;

(ii) where the allegations in the first information report or complaint taken at its face value and
accepted in their entirety do not constitute the offence alleged;

(iii) where the allegations constitute an offence, but there is no legal evidence adduced or the
evidence adduced clearly or manifestly fails to prove the charge.

7. In dealing with the last category, it is important to bear in mind the distinction between a case
where there is no legal evidence or where there is evidence which is clearly inconsistent with the
accusations made, and a case where there is legal evidence which, on appreciation, may or may not
support the accusations. When exercising jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code, the High
Court would not ordinarily embark upon an enquiry whether the evidence in question is reliable or
not or whether on a reasonable appreciation of it accusation would not be sustained. That is the
function of the trial Judge. Judicial process, no doubt should not be an instrument of oppression, or,
needless harassment. Court should be circumspect and judicious in exercising discretion and should
take all relevant facts and circumstances into consideration before issuing process, lest it would be
an instrument in the hands of a private complainant to unleash vendetta to harass any person
needlessly. At the same time the section is not an instrument handed over to an accused to
short-circuit a prosecution and bring about its sudden death…..” (Emphasis supplied)

14. In the result, this appeal succeeds and is hereby allowed. The impugned order passed by the
High Court of Judicature at Allahabad is hereby set aside. The criminal proceedings arising from
FIR No. 127 of 2022 dated 04.06.2022 registered at Police Station Mirzapur, Saharanpur, State of
U.P. are hereby quashed.

15. It is needless to clarify that the observations made in this judgment are relevant only for the
purpose of the FIR in question and the consequential criminal proceedings. None of the
observations shall have any bearing on any of the pending criminal prosecutions or any other

9

proceedings.

Mahmood Ali vs State Of U.P. on 8 August, 2023

………………………………..J. ( B.R. GAVAI ) ………………………………..J. ( J.B. PARDIWALA ) NEW
DELHI;

AUGUST 08, 2023

10