Mangilal vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 July, 2023

Mangilal vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 July, 2023

Author: M.M. Sundresh

Bench: M. M. Sundresh, A.S. Bopanna

1

CORRECTED
2023 INSC 634
REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1651 OF 2023

MANGILAL                                                        ...APPELLANT

VERSUS

THE STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH                                     ...RESPONDENT

JUDGMENT

M.M. SUNDRESH, J.

1. The appellant stood charged and convicted under Section 8(b) read with Section 15(c) of the
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (hereinafter referred to as “the NDPS Act”).
The Additional Sessions Judge, Special Court NDPS, Jaora, District Ratlam, Madhya Pradesh,
convicted the appellant and sentenced him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 10 years. It was
accordingly confirmed by the High Court of Madhya Pradesh. Aggrieved, the present appeal is filed.
THE CASE OF THE PROSECUTION IN A NUTSHELL:

2. The Assistant Sub Inspector, H.S. Sengar, posted at Police Station Kalukheda received an
information through a telephonic message on 20.05.2010 that the appellant and co- accused
Mathuralal against whom the trial stood abated due to his death were in the process of supplying
narcotic substance in the nature of poppy straw. Upon registering the information in the Daily Diary
and without wasting time on the procedural compliance, the police force stopped a tractor in which
bags containing the contraband were seized. The accused were told about the search upon due
compliance of Section 50 of the NDPS Act. A panchnama was written at the place of occurrence.
Samples were taken while the accused were informed about the reason for the arrest. A First
Information Report was registered under Section 8(b) read with section 15(c), Sections 25 and 29 of

1

Mangilal vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 July, 2023

the NDPS Act in Crime No. 53/10. A final report was filed before the jurisdictional Court on
13.09.2010. Before the trial court 16 prosecution witnesses have been shown in the list of witnesses
to have been examined by the prosecution while marking 48 exhibits.

3. Of these witnesses, the public witnesses, namely, P.W.2, P.W.3, P.W.4 and P.W.6 turned hostile.
Among them P.W.2 & P.W.6 were panch witnesses. These two witnesses signed majority of the
exhibits. P.W.5 though not declared hostile has deposed in clear term that the narcotic substance
was in existence at the police station even before the alleged occurrence. This part of the testimony
has not been questioned by the prosecution. Both the Courts placed reliance upon the FSL Report
along with the police witnesses in rendering conviction. To be noted, two of the witnesses bearing
testimony to the arrest memo have not been examined by the prosecution for the reasons best
known to it.

SCOPE OF SECTION 52A OF THE NDPS ACT, 1985:

Section 52A of the NDPS Act “52A. Disposal of seized narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances.— (1) The Central Government may, having regard to the
hazardous nature, vulnerability to theft, substitution, constraint of proper storage
space or any other relevant consideration, in respect of any narcotic drugs,
psychotropic substances, controlled substances or conveyances, by notification in the
Official Gazette, specify such narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances, controlled
substances or conveyance or class of narcotic drugs, class of psychotropic substances,
class of controlled substances or conveyances, which shall, as soon as may be after
their seizure, be disposed of by such officer and in such manner as that Government
may, from time to time, determine after following the procedure hereinafter
specified.

(2) Where any narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances, controlled substances or
conveyances has been seized and forwarded to the officer-in-charge of the nearest
police station or to the officer empowered under Section 53, the officer referred to in
sub-

section (1) shall prepare an inventory of such narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances, controlled
substances or conveyances containing such details relating to their description, quality, quantity,
mode of packing, marks, numbers or such other identifying particulars of the narcotic drugs,
psychotropic substances, controlled substances or conveyances or the packing in which they are
packed, country of origin and other particulars as the officer referred to in sub-section (1) may
consider relevant to the identity of the narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances, controlled
substances or conveyances in any proceedings under this Act and make an application, to any
Magistrate for the purpose of—

(a) certifying the correctness of the inventory so prepared; or

2

Mangilal vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 July, 2023

(b) taking, in the presence of such Magistrate, photographs of such drugs, substances or
conveyances and certifying such photographs as true; or

(c) allowing to draw representative samples of such drugs or substances, in the presence of such
Magistrate and certifying the correctness of any list of samples so drawn.

(3) Where an application is made under sub-section (2), the Magistrate shall, as soon as may be,
allow the application.

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872) or the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), every court trying an offence under this Act, shall treat the
inventory, the photographs of narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances, controlled substances or
conveyances and any list of samples drawn under sub-section (2) and certified by the Magistrate, as
primary evidence in respect of such offence.”

4. Sub-section (1) of Section 52A of the NDPS Act facilitates the Central Government a mode to be
prescribed to dispose of the seized narcotic substance. The idea is to create a clear mechanism for
such disposal both for the purpose of dealing with the particular case and to safeguard the
contraband being used for any illegal purpose thereafter.

5. Sub-section (2) of Section 52A of the NDPS Act mandates a competent officer to prepare an
inventory of such narcotic drugs with adequate particulars. This has to be followed through an
appropriate application to the Magistrate concerned for the purpose of certifying the correctness of
inventory, taking relevant photographs in his presence and certifying them as true or taking drawal
of samples in his presence with due certification. Such an application can be filed for anyone of the
aforesaid three purposes. The objective behind this provision is to have an element of supervision by
the magistrate over the disposal of seized contraband. Such inventories, photographs and list of
samples drawn with certification by Magistrates would constitute as a primary evidence. Therefore,
when there is non-compliance of Section 52A of the NDPS Act, where a certification of a magistrate
is lacking any inventory, photograph or list of samples would not constitute primary evidence.

6. The obvious reason behind this provision is to inject fair play in the process of investigation.
Section 52A of the NDPS Act is a mandatory rule of evidence which requires the physical presence of
a Magistrate followed by an order facilitating his approval either for certifying an inventory or for a
photograph taken apart from list of samples drawn. In due compliance of Section 52A(1) of the
NDPS Act the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) issued a Notification No. G.S.R. 339(E)
dated 10.05.2007 which furnishes an exhaustive manner and mode of disposal of drugs ending with
a certificate of destruction:

“4. Manner of disposal

1) Where any narcotic drug or psychotropic substances has been seized and
forwarded to the officer-in-charge of the nearest police station or to the officer
empowered under section 53, of the Act, or if it is seized by such an officer himself, he

3

Mangilal vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 July, 2023

shall prepare an inventory of such narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances as per
Annexure 1 to this notification and apply to any Magistrate under sub-section (2) of
section 52A as per Annexure 2 to this notification.

2) After the Magistrate allows the application under sub-section (3) of section 52A,
the officer mentioned in clause (1) above shall preserve the certified inventory,
photographs and samples drawn in the presence of the Magistrate as primary
evidence for the case and submit details of the drug consignments to the Chairman of
the Drug Disposal Committee for a decision by the committee on the disposal. The
officer shall send a copy of the details along with the drug consignments to the
officer-in-charge of the godown.

XXX                               XXX                             XXX
4.2 Mode of disposal of drugs.
(i)     Opium, morphine, codeine and thebaine shall be disposed of by transferring to the

Government Opium and Alkaloid Works under the Chief Controller of Factories.

(ii) In case of drugs other than the drugs mentioned in clause (i), the Chief Controller
of Factories shall be intimated by the fastest means of communication available,
details of drug consignments that are ready for disposal.

(iii) The Chief Controller of Factories shall indicate within 15 days of the date of
receipt of the communication, the quantities of drugs, if any, that are required by him
to supply as samples under Rule 67B.

(iv) Such quantities of drugs, if any, as required by the Chief Controller of Factories
under clause (iii) shall be transferred to him and the remaining quantities of drugs
shall be destroyed as per the procedure outlined in para 4.1.2.

(v) Destruction shall be by incineration in incinerators fitted with appropriate air
pollution control devices, which comply with emission standards. Such incineration
may only be done in places where adequate facilities and security arrangements exist.

In order to ensure that such incineration may not be a health hazard or polluting, consent of the
State Pollution Control Board or Pollution Control Committee, as the case may be, should be
obtained. Destruction shall be carried out at the presence of the Members of the Drug Disposal
Committee.

XXX                               XXX                             XXX

4.4 Certificate of destruction.

A certificate of destruction (in triplicate) containing all the relevant data like godown entry number,

4

Mangilal vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 July, 2023

gross and net weight of the drugs seized, etc., shall be prepared and signed by the chairman and
members of the Drug Disposal Committee as per format at Annexure 3. The original copy shall be
pasted in the godown register after making necessary entries to this effect, the duplicate to be
retained in the seizure case file and the triplicate copy will be kept by the Drug Disposal Committee.
Details of disposal of drugs shall be reported to the Narcotics Control Bureau in the Monthly Master
Reports.”

7. To be noted, the aforesaid notification was in existence at the time of the commission of the
offence alleged in the case on hand, stood repealed with effect from 23.12.2022 vide Notification No.
G.S.R.899(E). In any case a notification issued in derogation of the powers conferred under
sub-section (1) of Section 52A of the NDPS Act can never contradict the main provision, particularly
sub-Section (2). However, any guideline issued by way of a notification in consonance with Section
52A of the NDPS Act has to be followed mandatorily.

8. Before any proposed disposal/destruction mandate of Section 52A of the NPDS Act requires to be
duly complied with starting with an application to that effect. A Court should be satisfied with such
compliance while deciding the case. The onus is entirely on the prosecution in a given case to satisfy
the Court when such an issue arises for consideration. Production of seized material is a factor to
establish seizure followed by recovery. One has to remember that the provisions of the NDPS Act are
both stringent and rigorous and therefore the burden heavily lies on the prosecution.
Non-production of a physical evidence would lead to a negative inference within the meaning of
Section 114(g) of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (hereinafter referred to as the Evidence Act). The
procedure contemplated through the notification has an element of fair play such as the deposit of
the seal, numbering the containers in seriatimwise and keeping them in lots preceded by compliance
of the procedure for drawing samples. The afore-stated principles of law are dealt with in extenso in
Noor Aga v. State of Punjab, (2008) 16 SCC 417:

“89. Guidelines issued should not only be substantially complied with, but also in a
case involving penal proceedings, vis-à-vis a departmental proceeding, rigours of
such guidelines may be insisted upon. Another important factor which must be borne
in mind is as to whether such directions have been issued in terms of the provisions
of the statute or not. When directions are issued by an authority having the legal
sanction granted therefor, it becomes obligatory on the part of the subordinate
authorities to comply therewith.

90. Recently, this Court in State of Kerala v. Kurian Abraham (P) Ltd. [(2008) 3 SCC
582] , following the earlier decision of this Court in Union of India v. Azadi Bachao
Andolan [(2004) 10 SCC 1] held that statutory instructions are mandatory in nature.

91. The logical corollary of these discussions is that the guidelines such as those
present in the Standing Order cannot be blatantly flouted and substantial compliance
therewith must be insisted upon for so that sanctity of physical evidence in such cases
remains intact. Clearly, there has been no substantial compliance with these
guidelines by the investigating authority which leads to drawing of an adverse

5

Mangilal vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 July, 2023

inference against them to the effect that had such evidence been produced, the same
would have gone against the prosecution.

92. Omission on the part of the prosecution to produce evidence in this behalf must
be linked with a second important piece of physical evidence that the bulk quantity of
heroin allegedly recovered indisputably has also not been produced in court. The
respondents contended that the same had been destroyed. However, on what
authority it was done is not clear. Law requires that such an authority must flow from
an order passed by the Magistrate. Such an order whereupon reliance has been
placed is Exhibit PJ; on a bare perusal whereof, it is apparent that at no point of time
had any prayer been made for destruction of the said goods or disposal thereof
otherwise. What was necessary was a certificate envisaged under Section 110(1-B) of
the 1962 Act. An order was required to be passed under the aforementioned provision
providing for authentication, inventory, etc. The same does not contain within its
mandate any direction as regards destruction.

XXX XXX XXX

95. The High Court proceeded on the basis that non-production of physical evidence
is not fatal to the prosecution case but the fact remains that a cumulative view with
respect to the discrepancies in physical evidence creates an overarching inference
which dents the credibility of the prosecution. Even for the said purpose the retracted
confession on the part of the accused could not have been taken recourse to.

96. Last but not the least, physical evidence relating to three samples taken from the
bulk amount of heroin was also not produced. Even if it is accepted for the sake of
argument that the bulk quantity was destroyed, the samples were essential to be
produced and proved as primary evidence for the purpose of establishing the fact of
recovery of heroin as envisaged under Section 52-A of the Act.

XXX XXX XXX

100. Physical evidence of a case of this nature being the property of the court should
have been treated to be sacrosanct. Non-production thereof would warrant drawing
of a negative inference within the meaning of Section 114(g) of the Evidence Act.
While there are such a large number of discrepancies, if a cumulative effect thereto is
taken into consideration on the basis whereof the permissive inference would be that
serious doubts are created with respect to the prosecution's endeavour to prove the
fact of possession of contraband by the appellant. This aspect of the matter has been
considered by this Court in Jitendra v. State of M.P. [(2004) 10 SCC 562 : 2004 SCC
(Cri) 2028] in the following terms: (SCC p. 565, para 6) “6. … In the trial it was
necessary for the prosecution to establish by cogent evidence that the alleged
quantities of charas and ganja were seized from the possession of the accused. The
best evidence would have been the seized materials which ought to have been

6

Mangilal vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 July, 2023

produced during the trial and marked as material objects.

There is no explanation for this failure to produce them. Mere oral evidence as to their features and
production of panchnama does not discharge the heavy burden which lies on the prosecution,
particularly where the offence is punishable with a stringent sentence as under the NDPS Act.””

9. On the issue of seizure in the presence of Magistrate, we wish to place reliance upon the decision
of this Court in Union of India v. Mohanlal, (2016) 3 SCC 379:

“16. Sub-section (3) of Section 52-A requires that the Magistrate shall as soon as may
be allow the application. This implies that no sooner the seizure is effected and the
contraband forwarded to the officer-in-charge of the police station or the officer
empowered, the officer concerned is in law duty-bound to approach the Magistrate
for the purposes mentioned above including grant of permission to draw
representative samples in his presence, which samples will then be enlisted and the
correctness of the list of samples so drawn certified by the Magistrate. In other words,
the process of drawing of samples has to be in the presence and under the
supervision of the Magistrate and the entire exercise has to be certified by him to be
correct.

17. The question of drawing of samples at the time of seizure which, more often than
not, takes place in the absence of the Magistrate does not in the above scheme of
things arise. This is so especially when according to Section 52-A(4) of the Act,
samples drawn and certified by the Magistrate in compliance with sub-sections (2)
and (3) of Section 52-A above constitute primary evidence for the purpose of the trial.
Suffice it to say that there is no provision in the Act that mandates taking of samples
at the time of seizure. That is perhaps why none of the States claim to be taking
samples at the time of seizure.

18. Be that as it may, a conflict between the statutory provision governing taking of
samples and the Standing Order issued by the Central Government is evident when
the two are placed in juxtaposition. There is no gainsaid that such a conflict shall
have to be resolved in favour of the statute on first principles of interpretation but the
continuance of the statutory notification in its present form is bound to create
confusion in the minds of the authorities concerned instead of helping them in the
discharge of their duties. The Central Government would, therefore, do well, to
re-examine the matter and take suitable steps in the above direction.” FACTS AND
DISCUSSION:

10. We have heard the arguments of learned counsel for the appellant and the learned counsel
appearing for the State. Incidentally we perused the entire records.

11. The memorandum of informer’s information dated 20.05.2010 exhibited under P-3 indicates
signature of two witnesses, P.W.2 and P.W.6, both of them turned hostile. Though they admitted

7

Mangilal vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 July, 2023

their signature it was clearly deposed that they were not present at the scene of occurrence. In our
considered view the Court below have wrongly construed the evidence, in fact these two witnesses
were party to most of the exhibits running upto 13. Search warrant under Exhibit P-4 acknowledge
the fact that procedure contemplated under the NDPS Act has not been followed. As noted, one of
the witnesses to the seizure memo has not been examined while the other turned hostile. Both the
witnesses to the arrest memo have not been examined. On the issue of non- production of narcotic
substance and panch witnesses turning hostile we wish to reiterate the decision of this Court in
Jitendra v. State of M.P., (2004) 10 SCC 562:

“5. The evidence to prove that charas and ganja were recovered from the possession
of the accused consisted of the evidence of the police officers and the panch
witnesses. The panch witnesses turned hostile. Thus, we find that apart from the
testimony of Rajendra Pathak (PW 7), Angad Singh (PW 8) and Sub-Inspector D.J.
Rai (PW 6), there is no independent witness as to the recovery of the drugs from the
possession of the accused. The charas and ganja alleged to have been seized from the
possession of the accused were not even produced before the trial court, so as to
connect them with the samples sent to the Forensic Science Laboratory. There is no
material produced in the trial, apart from the interested testimony of the police
officers, to show that the charas and ganja were seized from the possession of the
accused or that the samples sent to the Forensic Science Laboratory were taken from
the drugs seized from the possession of the accused. Although the High Court noticed
the fact that the charas and ganja alleged to have been seized from the custody of the
accused had neither been produced in the court, nor marked as articles, which ought
to have been done, the High Court brushed aside the contention by observing that it
would not vitiate the conviction as it had been proved that the samples were sent to
the Chemical Examiner in a properly sealed condition and those were found to be
charas and ganja. The High Court observed, “non-production of these commodities
before the court is not fatal to the prosecution. The defence also did not insist during
the trial that these commodities should be produced”. The High Court relied on
Section 465 CrPC to hold that non-production of the material object was a mere
procedural irregularity and did not cause prejudice to the accused.

6. In our view, the view taken by the High Court is unsustainable. In the trial it was
necessary for the prosecution to establish by cogent evidence that the alleged
quantities of charas and ganja were seized from the possession of the accused. The
best evidence would have been the seized materials which ought to have been
produced during the trial and marked as material objects. There is no explanation for
this failure to produce them. Mere oral evidence as to their features and production
of panchnama does not discharge the heavy burden which lies on the prosecution,
particularly where the offence is punishable with a stringent sentence as under the
NDPS Act. In this case, we notice that panchas have turned hostile so the panchnama
is nothing but a document written by the police officer concerned.

8

Mangilal vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 July, 2023

The suggestion made by the defence in the cross-examination is worthy of notice. It was suggested
to the prosecution witnesses that the landlady of the house in collusion with the police had lodged a
false case only for evicting the accused from the house in which they were living. Finally, we notice
that the investigating officer was also not examined. Against this background, to say that, despite
the panch witnesses having turned hostile, the non-examination of the investigating officer and
non-production of the seized drugs, the conviction under the NDPS Act can still be sustained, is
far-fetched.” (emphasis supplied)

12. We further find that memorandum under Section 27 of the Act, as witnessed by the two
witnesses, P.W.3 and P.W.4 would be of no value in evidence as there is no discovery of new fact
involved. Be that as it may, these witnesses also turned hostile. The record would also indicate that
an order was passed by the trial Judge permitting the prosecution to keep the seized materials
within the police station, to be produced at a later point of time. This itself is a sufficient indication
that the mandate of Section 52A has not been followed. There is no explanation either for
non-production of the seized materials or the manner in which they are disposed of. No order
passed by the Magistrate allowing the application, if any, filed under Section 52A of the NDPS Act.
P.W.10, Executive Magistrate has deposed to the fact that he did not pass any order for the disposal
of the narcotics substance allegedly seized. Similarly, P.W.12 who is In- charge of Malkhana also did
not remember any such order having been passed. On the issue of disposing narcotic substance in
derogation of the compliance contained in Section 52A of the NDPS Act, this Court in Union of India
v. Jarooparam, (2018) 4 SCC 334 has held as follows:

“8. What transpires from the abovequoted paragraph is that after taking out two
samples of 30 gm each, the Executive Magistrate returned the entire remaining
seized property to the investigating officer PW 6. To further ascertain the same, we
have also carefully perused the exact content of the proceedings dated 14-10-2004
(Annexure P-5) recorded by the Executive Magistrate, Singoli Tappa. The
proceedings recorded as far as the respondent herein is concerned, read thus:

Proceedings 14-10-2004: Case submitted. Shri Harvinder Singh, Inspector
(Investigating Officer), Narcotics Bureau, Singoli has submitted three sealed packets
of seized stuff in Crime No. 1 of 2004 under Sections 8/18 and 8/29 of the NDPS Act,
1985. These packets were marked A, B and C and the details are given as under: 1-A:
On the packet marked “A” it was indicated that packet contains 7.200 kg opium
seized from Jaroopram, s/o Ganga Ram Bishnoi. On opening the packet, transparent
polythene bag was found, in which again two polythene packets were found. One
polythene indicated 4.000 kg and the second one 3.200 kg opium, respectively. A
composite sample of 30-30 gm each have been taken from the two packets and kept
in a small plastic polythene and marked A-3 and A-4 and sealed. The remaining
seized stuff and samples sealed as usual are handed over to the presenting officer Shri
Harvinder Singh, Inspector.

9. From the above proceedings, it is crystal clear that the remaining seized stuff was
not disposed of by the Executive Magistrate. The contraband stuff as also the samples

9

Mangilal vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 July, 2023

sealed as usual were handed over physically to the Investigating Officer Harvinder
Singh (PW 6). Also the trial court in its judgment specifically passed instructions to
preserve the seized property and record of the case in safe custody, as the co-accused
Bhanwarlal was absconding. The trial court more specifically instructed to put a note
with red ink on the front page of the record for its safe custody. In such a situation, it
assumes importance that there was nothing on record to show as to what happened
to the remaining bulk quantity of contraband. The absence of proper explanation
from the prosecution significantly undermines its case and reduces the evidentiary
value of the statements made by the witnesses.

10. Omission on the part of the prosecution to produce the bulk quantity of seized
opium would create a doubt in the mind of the Court on the genuineness of the
samples drawn and marked as A, B, C, D, E, F from the allegedly seized contraband.
However, the simple argument that the same had been destroyed, cannot be accepted
as it is not clear that on what authority it was done. Law requires that such an
authority must flow from an order passed by the Magistrate.

On a bare perusal of the record, it is apparent that at no point of time any prayer had been made by
the prosecution for destruction of the said opium or disposal thereof otherwise. The only course of
action the prosecution should have resorted to is for its disposal is to obtain an order from the
competent court of Magistrate as envisaged under Section 52-A of the Act. It is explicitly made
under the Act that as and when such an application is made, the Magistrate may, as soon as may be,
allow the application (see also Noor Aga v. State of Punjab, (2008) 16 SCC 417 : (2010) 3 SCC (Cri)
748).

11. There is no denial of the fact that the prosecution has not filed any such application for
disposal/destruction of the allegedly seized bulk quantity of contraband material nor was any such
order passed by the Magistrate. Even no notice has been given to the accused before such alleged
destruction/disposal. It is also pertinent here to mention that the trial court appears to have
believed the prosecution story in a haste and awarded conviction to the respondent without
warranting the production of bulk quantity of contraband. But, the High Court committed no error
in dealing with this aspect of the case and disbelieving the prosecution story by arriving at the
conclusion that at the trial, the bulk quantities of contraband were not exhibited to the witnesses at
the time of adducing evidence.

12. Turning to the other discrepancies in the prosecution case, PWs 1 and 2 the independent
witnesses portrayed by the prosecution have turned hostile and did not support its case. It is
manifest from the record that they had simply put their signatures on the papers at the whims of the
investigating agency. Another aspect that goes in favour of the accused is that, the version of
prosecution that the respondent voluntarily made the confessional statement cannot be believed in
the light of admission by Narcotics Officer (PW 5), a key prosecution witness, that the statement of
the respondent-accused under Section 67 of the Act was recorded while he was in his custody and
the time was not mentioned on the statements. This fact further gets corroborated with the
statement of PW 6 also that the statement of the accused was recorded after arrest and while in

10

Mangilal vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 July, 2023

custody. Thus, it cannot be said that the statement of the accused confessing the crime was
voluntarily made under the provisions of the Act.” (emphasis supplied)

13. There is a serious doubt with respect to the seizure. P.W.5 who was a police officer himself had
deposed on the existence of the very same seized materials even before the occurrence. This
testimony which destroys the very basis of the prosecution case has not even been challenged.

14. Both the Courts have mechanically placed reliance on the FSL Report while taking the statement
of P.W.11 as the gospel truth. The views expressed by him can at best be taken as opinion at least on
certain aspects. There are too many material irregularities which create a serious doubt on the very
case of the prosecution. On a proper analysis we have no hesitation in holding that the impugned
judgments are liable to be set aside and the appellant is to be acquitted by rendering the benefit of
doubt.

15. In the result, the conviction and sentence rendered by the Additional Sessions Judge, Special
Court NDPS, Jaora, District Ratlam, Madhya Pradesh in Special Sessions No. 19/2010 as confirmed
by the High Court of Madhya Pradesh in Criminal Appeal No. 6163 of 2017 stands set aside. The
appellant is acquitted of all the charges. Bond, if any, shall stand discharged. The appellant shall be
released forthwith if not required in any other case.

.……………………….J. (A.S. BOPANNA) .……………………….J. (M. M. SUNDRESH) New Delhi;

July 12, 2023

11